HOME RULE CHARTER AND CODE OF THE CITY OF CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE, COLORADO 
  
2003 
Beginning with Supp. No. 17,
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 

> 
OFFICIALS 
  
of the 
  
CITY OF 
  
CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE 
Mayor 
Russell Stewart 
Mayor Pro Tem 
Katy Brown 
City Council 
District 1 - Randy Weil 
District 2 - Afshin Safavi 
District 3 - Al Blum 
District 4 - Mike Gallagher 
District 5 - Dan Sheldon 
District 6 - Katy Brown 
City Manager 
Jim Thorsen 
Deputy City Manager/Public Works Director 
Jay Goldie 
City Clerk 
Laura Gillespie 
City Attorney 
Kathie Guckenberger 
SUPPLEMENTATION 
The Cherry Hills Village, Colorado Municipal Code, originally published by Colorado Code Publishing Company, will be kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
Supplements to this Code provide periodic updating through the removal and replacement of pages. This inter-leaf supplementation system requires that each page which is to be removed and replaced is identified so that the updating may be accurately accomplished and historically maintained. 
Instructions for supplementation are provided for each supplement, identified by Supplement number, date and inclusive ordinance numbers. The Instructions for posting the removal and replacement of pages must be followed and accomplished in sequence, with the most recent supplementation posted last. 
When supplementation is completed and the removal and replacement of all pages are accomplished, the Instructions should be placed behind the Supplementation tab, ahead of this page, with the most recent Instruction sheet on top. Previous Instructions should not be removed, so that the user may refer to this tab section to verify whether the code book is fully updated with all supplements included. 
The maintenance of a Municipal Code with all supplementation is an important activity which deserves close attention so that the value of the code is maintained as a fully comprehensive compilation of the legislative ordinances of the municipality. 
AMENDMENTS 
Amendments may be made to the Code by additions, revisions or deletions therefrom. Those changes may be made as follows: 
Additions: Additions may be made by ordinance to the Code as follows: 
The "Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code" is amended by the addition thereto of a new Section 2-2-90, which is to read as follows: 
(Set out full section number, title and contents) 
or if the location of the new section number or numbers is undetermined, the Code may be amended as follows: 
The "Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code" is amended by the addition of the following: 
(Set out section title and contents) 
Revisions: A revision of the Code may be accomplished as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code" is repealed in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the readopted code section) 
or as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code" is amended to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the amended code section) 
Repeal: Sections, articles and chapters may be repealed as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code" is repealed in its entirety. 

CITY OF CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE HOME RULE CHARTER 
1966 
Beginning with Supp. No. 17,
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 

> 
CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE HOME RULE CHARTER 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PREFATORY SYNOPSIS TO THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE 
    The Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village in Article I provides for the name and boundaries, powers, rights and liabilities of said City and continues the present ordinances in force as they conflict with the Charter. 
    Article II adopts the Colorado municipal election laws, provides for the registration of voters, judges and clerks thereof, and permits an election commission. It also provides for the election day, hours of voting, elective officers, their qualifications and their terms of office with overlapping terms for Councilmen, the filling of vacancies, divides the City into districts, provides for nominating petitions and the calling of special elections. 
    Article III creates the council-mayor form of government and vests certain powers in the Council, provides for a Mayor Pro Tem, prohibits financial interest, provides for the oath of office of Mayor and of Councilmen, calls for regular and special meetings of the Council, vests power in the Council over bridle paths, parks and recreation programs and requires at least an annual audit of the financial affairs of the City. 
    Article IV outlines the mode of action by the Council, particularizes the procedure of passage of ordinances and allows for enactment of codes by reference and the severability of ordinances. 
    Article V vests the administration of the City in the Mayor and defines his powers and duties, allows for delegation of authority to the various members of the Council, and further creates certain administrative departments. 
    Article VI provides for the appointment and defines the function and duties of the City Clerk, City Treasurer and City Attorney. 
    Article VII creates a Municipal Court, provides for the qualifications and appointment of judges, places limitations on the fines and imprisonment, and creates a department of police and defines the duties, functions and authority of the department and of the Chief of Police. 
    Article VIII allows for the creation of boards and commissions, specifically creates a board of adjustment and appeals and defines its functions, powers and duties and creates a planning and zoning commission and defines its functions, powers and duties. 
    Article IX sets the fiscal year, requires an annual budget after public hearing and defines what shall be included therein, provides for the certification of a tax levy, creates a general fund which may contain an item for contingencies, provides for special funds for special purposes, creates a public improvements fund, allows for the transfer of funds, allows for additional appropriations, provides that any unexpended funds revert to the general fund and requires the Clerk to keep a list of expenditures made for public inspection. 
    Article X provides for general obligation, revenue and refunding bonds and the terms of their sale. 
    Article XI provides the method and procedure and gives the power to construct improvements and create improvement districts, allows for a surplus and deficiency fund, provides that any action to review improvement district proceedings must be commenced within ninety (90) days after the performance of the act or the passage of the resolution or ordinance complained of. 
    Article XII continues all present franchise ordinances, allows for the extension of the franchises, fixes the term, compensation and restrictions on future franchises, allows for the issuance of revocable permits. 
    Article XIII prohibits disconnection without a vote of the people; allows the levying of all forms of taxes permitted by the Constitution of Colorado for municipal purposes, except that a use tax cannot be imposed without a vote of the taxpaying electors; requires a 60 day notice to the city regarding a claim for negligence and provides a two year statute of limitations on the legal action; provides for fidelity bonds for those who handle City funds; gives the City the right of eminent domain; allows for contracts with other governmental units; allows the City to receive bequests, gifts or donations; vests in the Council the right to set procedures for purchases, leases and construction contracts; allows for temporary zoning of annexed territory; provides for the annexation of or consolidation with another municipality; reserves the power of initiative and referendum to the voters; provides for the removal of offices; provides for the amendment of the Charter; continues existing retirement and pension plans; and states that the Statutes of Colorado shall govern unless otherwise provided by the Charter or by ordinance of the City. 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, and in order to exercise the rights, privileges and responsibilities of self-government granted to us by the said Constitution, do ordain and establish this Home Rule Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado. 
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1.1. - Name and Boundaries: 
    The municipal corporation heretofore existing as the Town of Cherry Hills Village in Arapahoe County, State of Colorado, shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate and under this Charter be known as the City of Cherry Hills Village, with boundaries the same as presently established, until changed in a manner authorized by law. 
Section 1.2. - Powers: 
    The City shall have all the power of local self-government and home rule and all power possible for a city to have under the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado. The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter is not exclusive of others. 
Section 1.3. - Rights and Liabilities: 
    By the name of the City of Cherry Hills Village, the municipal corporation shall have perpetual succession; shall own, possess and hold all property, real and personal heretofore owned, possessed and held by the town, and does assume and shall manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities of the town; shall acquire all benefits and does assume and shall pay all bonds, obligations, and indebtedness of the town; may sue and defend, purchase, lease, receive, hold and enjoy, or sell and dispose of real and personal property; may establish municipal water works, sewage disposal works, and water and sewer systems in the manner provided by statute; shall have a common seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
Section 1.4. - Present Ordinances in Force: 
    All ordinances of the town in force at the time this Charter becomes effective shall continue in force except insofar as they conflict with the provisions of this Charter, or shall be amended or repealed by ordinance enacted under authority of this Charter. 
(10-3-66) 
Section 1.5. - Gender References: 
    Whenever the wording of this Charter refers to either the masculine or feminine gender, it shall be interpreted to apply equally to persons of either gender and is used gender specifically only for administrative convenience. 
(4-5-94) 
ARTICLE II - ELECTIONS 

Section 2.1. - Colorado Municipal Election Laws Adopted: 
    City elections shall be governed by the Colorado municipal election laws as now existing or hereafter amended or modified, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, or by ordinance hereafter enacted. 
Section 2.2. - Registration, Judges, Clerks and Election Commission: 
    The Council may by ordinance establish the method for the registration of electors, the qualifications and compensation of election judges and clerks, and the boundaries of election precincts. The Council may by ordinance establish an election commission consisting of the Clerk, as chairman, and two additional members to be appointed by the Council, with such powers, duties, terms and qualifications as provided by such ordinance. 
Section 2.3. - Election Day: 
    A regular City election shall be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November commencing in the year 2014 and in each even numbered year thereafter. 
(Amd. 4-3-12) 
Section 2.4. - Hours of Voting: 
    Polling places for all City elections shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on election day. 
(10-3-66) 
Section 2.5. - Elective Officers: 
    The elective officers shall be a Mayor and six Councilmen, each of whom shall have resided in the area comprising the City at the time of his election or appointment for not less than one year. The Mayor shall be elected from the City at large. One Councilman shall be elected from each district by the voters of the whole City. Elections shall be non-partisan. 
(10-3-66; Amd. 4-2-74) 
Section 2.6. - Districts: 
    The City is hereby divided into six districts whose boundaries shall be the same as presently established. The Council shall within six months after each Federal decennial census commencing with that of the year 1970, and may at any other time by ordinance adopted by the Council at least 120 days prior to any regular City election, change the boundaries of districts so that districts shall be contiguous and compact wherever possible and shall have approximately the same number of voters. 
(10-3-66) 
Section 2.7. - Mayor and City Council Members' Terms of Office: 
    The Mayor and six Council members hold office on the basis of a two-year term for the Mayor and a four-year term for each City Council member. A Mayor is elected at each municipal election. The Council members are elected on a rotating basis of Districts 1, 3 and 5 on four-year intervals starting in 1968, and Districts 2, 4 and 6 on four-year intervals starting in 1966. This arrangement will provide for staggered terms of office that will have the Mayor and three members of the City Council elected at each municipal election. Elected City Council members and the Mayor-elect shall assume the duties of office at the first Council meeting in the month of January following each regular City election. 
(4-5-94; Amd. 4-3-12) 
Section 2.8. - Nominating Petitions-Required Signatures: 
    The nominating petition for each candidate for Mayor shall be signed by not fewer than 25 registered electors, and for each candidate for the Council to be elected from a district not fewer than 10 registered electors from such district. Petitions shall be filed in accordance with the deadlines for the filing of nominating petitions as provided by the applicable state municipal election laws. 
(11-5-02) 
Section 2.9. - Vacancies: 
    The Mayor's office and a Councilman's office shall become vacant whenever he resigns, dies, becomes a nonresident of the City or, as to Councilmen, the district from which he was elected or appointed. A vacancy which occurs shall be filled by a majority vote of the membership of the entire Council within 30 days after such vacancy occurs for the full then unexpired term of the office which has become vacant. 
Section 2.10. - Special Elections: 
    Any special City election may be called by resolution of the Council at least 30 days in advance of such election. The resolution calling a special City election shall set forth the purpose or purposes of such election. 
(10-3-66) 
ARTICLE III - CITY COUNCIL 

Section 3.1. - City Council: 
    All powers of the City not otherwise limited or conferred upon others by this Charter shall be vested in a Council consisting of six members. It shall have the power to enact and provide for the enforcement of all ordinances necessary to protect life, health and property; to declare, prevent and summarily abate and remove nuisances; to preserve and enforce good government, general welfare, order and security of the City and the inhabitants thereof; to enforce ordinances and regulations by ordaining fines or imprisonment within the limits established from time to time by State law, or both fine and imprisonment for each and every offense; to provide for the granting of probation and the conditional suspension of sentences by the Municipal Court; and to delegate to boards and commissions, within limitations of the Constitution and this Charter, such functions, powers and authority of the City as it deems proper and advisable. No enumeration of particular powers granted to the Council shall be construed to impair any general grant of power herein contained or granted by the State Constitution, nor to limit any such grant to powers of the same class or classes as those so enumerated. 
(10-3-66; Amd. 4-5-94) 
Section 3.2. - Qualifications of Councilmen: 
    Each Councilman when nominated and elected shall be a qualified elector of the City. Each Councilman elected from a district shall be a resident, at the date of nomination and during the tenure of his office, of the district from which he is elected. No Councilman shall be a salaried employee of the City during his tenure of office. The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own members, subject to judicial review. 
Section 3.3. - Mayor Pro Tem: 
    A Mayor Pro Tem shall be elected by the Council from its own membership at the organizational meeting following each biennial election or an adjournment thereof. The Mayor Pro Tem shall serve until the organizational meeting following the next regular City election, and shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor. In the event of absence or disability of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem, the Council shall designate another of its members to serve as acting Mayor during such absence or disability. Any Mayor Pro Tem or Acting Mayor, while serving as such, shall retain all powers granted herein to council members. 
( 9-2-14 ) 
Section 3.4. - Financial Interest Prohibited: 
    No member of the Council shall have any direct financial interest in any contract with the City. 
Section 3.5. - Oath of Office: 
    The Mayor and each Councilman shall take an oath or affirmation before entering upon the duties of his office, that he will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Colorado, and the Charter and ordinances of the City of Cherry Hills Village, and faithfully perform the duties of his office. 
Section 3.6. - Compensation of Councilmen: 
    Councilmen shall serve without compensation except that Councilmen may be reimbursed for authorized expenses incurred in the performance of City business. 
Section 3.7. - Council Meetings: 
    The Council shall meet regularly at least once each month at a day and hour and place to be fixed by the rules and proceedings of each Council. The Council shall prescribe the rules of procedure governing meetings. All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, and citizens and employees shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. An organizational meeting shall be held at the first Council meeting in January following each regular City election. Four members of the Council shall constitute a quorum. Written minutes of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept by the Clerk and signed by the Mayor. 
( 9-2-14 ) 
Section 3.8. - Special Meetings: 
    Special meetings of the Council shall be called by the Clerk on the oral request of the Mayor, or of any two members of the Council, on at least 24 hours notice to each member of the Council; but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Council are present or those absent waive notice thereof. 
Section 3.9. - Bridle Paths, Parks and Recreation Programs: 
    The Council may provide by ordinance for the planning, financing and supervision of community bridle paths, parks and recreation programs. The Council may provide for equipping, financing and maintaining City-owned or controlled bridle paths, parks, recreational areas and facilities, by ordinance, both in and outside the corporate limits of the City. The City may cooperate with other public authorities, special districts, organizations or individuals in or outside the City to implement the operation of these programs. All parks owned or hereafter acquired by the City shall be held, protected, and maintained in public trust for the use, benefit, and enjoyment of the public, and shall not be pledged or conveyed without a majority vote of registered electors voting on the question. 
(Amd. 4-3-12) 
Section 3.10. - Audit of Accounts: 
    An independent audit shall be made annually of all financial affairs of the City, and more frequent audits may be made if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant, experienced in municipal accounting, selected by the Council. 
ARTICLE IV - ORDINANCES 

Section 4.1. - Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions: 
    The Council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion. All legislative enactments shall be in the form of ordinances; all other actions, except as herein provided, may be in the form of resolutions or motions. All ordinances and resolutions shall be confined to one subject, except in case of repealing ordinances, and ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subject of appropriation. 
Section 4.2. - Voting: 
    The vote by "Yes" and "No" shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, resolutions and motions, and entered upon the minutes of the Council proceedings. Every ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of the majority of the membership of the entire Council for final passage. Resolutions and motions shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present. Every member, when present, shall vote upon ordinances, resolutions and motions unless he shall have a personal interest therein. 
Section 4.3. - Action by Ordinance Required: 
    In addition to such acts of the Council as are required by other provisions of this Charter to be by ordinance, every act making an appropriation, creating an indebtedness, authorizing borrowing of money, levying a tax, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property without the consent of the owner, shall be by ordinance. 
Section 4.4. - Form of Ordinance: 
    The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE, COLORADO, ORDAINS". 
Section 4.5. - Procedure of Passage: 
    The course that an ordinance shall take for passage shall be: 
(a)  Introduction at any regular or special meeting by any member of the Council by title only, or in full text. 
(b)  Passage or rejection by a roll call vote of the Council. 
(c)  If first passed, consideration a second time at a meeting not earlier than 6 days after first passage, such ordinance to be in completed written form and copy thereof provided for each Councilman prior to consideration. An ordinance may be amended before final passage by a roll call of the Council. 
(d)  After final passage by a roll call vote of the Council an ordinance shall be published, but publication of the title thereof, together with the statement that the full text is available for public inspection and acquisition in the office of the City Clerk, shall be sufficient publication. 
(e)  An ordinance when finally passed shall take effect and be enforced 10 days after publication. 
(f)  An ordinance necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety may be introduced and passed at any regular or special meeting, shall require only 1 reading and shall not require a public hearing or publication before final passage. Publication shall be as soon as reasonably possible after final passage. Such ordinance shall be effective immediately upon passage. A recitation in any such ordinance that the Council deems the passage of said ordinance to be for the immediate preservation of public peace, health or safety shall be conclusive. An emergency ordinance shall not be in effect longer than ninety (90) days after adoption unless the Council shall affirm the same by re-adoption of said ordinance on second reading and publication on a non-emergency basis in the manner prescribed in Section 4.5(c) through (e) within said ninety (90) day period. Upon such affirmation, the ordinance shall become a regular ordinance. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-2-74; amd. 4-3-12) 
Section 4.6. - Enactment of Codes and Amendments Thereof by Reference: 
    In accordance with statutes relative to adoption by reference now or hereafter in effect, the Council may enact any appropriate Colorado Statute or any standard code promulgated or enacted by any municipality, county, state or federal agency, or by recognized trade or professional organizations, by reference thereto in an enacting ordinance and without publishing such statutes or codes in full. In the event that any such statute or code, after being adopted by reference, is revised or amended by the agency or organization by whom it was enacted or promulgated, then any such revision or amended version may be adopted by reference by an ordinance passed in the usual manner without strict compliance with the statutory regulations relative to notices and public hearings. 
Section 4.7. - Severability of Ordinances: 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinance are declared to be severable. 
ARTICLE V - CITY ADMINISTRATION 

Section 5.1. - Mayor: 
    The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the Council and the recognized head of the City Government for all legal and ceremonial purposes. He shall have no vote upon any question except in the case of a tie-vote, when he shall be allowed to vote. All contracts in writing binding the City, all conveyances of interests in land by the City, and any other documents requiring his signature shall be signed by the Mayor (or person acting as Mayor as provided in Section 3.3) and attested by the Clerk under the seal of the City. 
Section 5.2. - Mayor as Chief Administrative Officer: 
    The Mayor shall be the chief administrative officer of the City and as such shall have the powers and duties prescribed in Section 5.4. 
Section 5.3. - Compensation of Mayor: 
    The Mayor shall serve without compensation except that the Mayor may be reimbursed for authorized expenses incurred in the performance of City business. 
Section 5.4. - Powers and Duties of Mayor: 
    The Mayor shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all affairs of the City placed in his charge, and to that end he shall have the power and duty to: 
(a)  Enforce the Laws and Ordinances of the City. 
(b)  Appoint, suspend, transfer and remove all employees of the City, except as otherwise provided herein, subject to the personnel regulations of the City, if any, adopted by the Council. 
(c)  Make appointments on the basis of executive and administrative ability, and of the training and experience of such appointees in the work which they are to perform. 
(d)  Prepare a proposed budget annually and submit to the Council, and be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption. 
(e)  Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year, and upon request of the Council make written or verbal reports at any time concerning the affairs of the City under his supervision. 
(f)  Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City, and make such recommendations to the Council as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(g)  Exercise supervision and control over all executive and administrative departments, and recommend to the Council any proposal he thinks advisable to establish, consolidate or abolish administrative departments. 
(h)  Enforce all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City of its inhabitants in any contract or public utility franchise, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof, report same to the Council for such action and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the same. 
(i)  Attend and preside at Council meetings and participate in discussions with the Council. 
(j)  Establish a system of accounting and auditing for the City. 
(k)  Act as a purchasing agent for the City. 
(1)  Obtain engineering, architectural, maintenance, construction and work equipment services required by the City. 
(m)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance, or by the Council. 
Section 5.5. - Delegation of Duties: 
    The Mayor with the consent of the Council by resolution may delegate to various of the members of the Council any of the powers and duties enumerated in Section 5.4. 
Section 5.6. - Departments Created: 
    The administrative functions of the City may be performed by the following departments: Water and Sanitation, Streets, Police, Fire, Finance, Executive, and such other departments as are or may be established by this Charter or by ordinances of the City. Upon recommendation of the Mayor, the Council may by ordinance consolidate or merge any of the said departments whether set forth in the Charter or created by ordinance in order to achieve more efficient operation or administration. All departments of the City, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall be under the supervision and control of the Mayor. 
(10-3-66) 
Section 5.7. - Appointment of City Manager by Council: 
    The Council may by majority vote with the express concurrence of the Mayor, or by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority vote of the entire Council without his concurrence, appoint a City Manager to serve at the pleasure of a majority of the Council at a salary to be fixed by the Council and may delegate to him any or all of the powers and duties of the Mayor enumerated in Section 5.4 except the power and duty to preside at Council meetings. The Council may by majority vote with the express concurrence of the Mayor, or by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority vote of the entire Council without his concurrence, remove from the City Manager any of such powers and duties previously delegated to him and reassign such to the Mayor. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-7-70) 
ARTICLE VI - APPOINTED OFFICIALS 

Section 6.1. - Time of Appointment: 
    At its organizational meeting after each regular City election, the Council shall appoint the officials hereinafter enumerated in this Article with the powers and duties herein specified. Such appointments shall be at the pleasure of the Council, at such compensation as the Council may by resolution from time to time establish. 
(10-3-66; amd. 9-2-14 ) 
Section 6.2. - City Clerk-Functions and Duties: 
(a)  The Clerk shall be the clerk of the Council and shall attend all meetings of the Council and shall keep a permanent journal of its proceedings. 
(b)  The Clerk shall be the custodian of the City seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal and shall attest the same. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents and records pertaining to the City, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. 
(c)  The Clerk shall certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Council. 
(d)  The Clerk shall provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this Charter or by ordinances enacted hereunder. 
(e)  The Clerk shall have power to administer oaths of office. 
(f)  The Clerk shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, by the Council or by the Mayor or City Manager. 
(g)  The Mayor or City Manager may combine the offices of City Clerk and City Treasurer and may further combine these functions with other positions such as Director of Finance or Director of Administration or a similar function. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-5-94) 
Section 6.3. - City Treasurer-Functions and Duties: 
(a)  The Treasurer shall have the custody of all monies of the City, all bonds pertaining to officials or employees, and all evidences of indebtedness belonging to the City or held in trust by the City. 
(b)  The Treasurer shall collect all monies for the City, the collection of which is not provided for elsewhere by Charter or ordinance. He shall receive from other officers and employees of the City all monies belonging to and receivable by the City and collected by such officers and employees, including fines, license fees, taxes, assessments, and all other charges. All monies shall be turned over to the Treasurer after collection or receipt. 
(c)  The Treasurer shall keep and deposit all monies or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine. 
(d)  The Treasurer shall disburse all City funds in accordance with the provisions of statute, this Charter and procedures established by the Council or by the Mayor. 
(e)  The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or by the Mayor or City Manager. 
(f)  The Mayor or City Manager may combine the offices of City Clerk and City Treasurer and may further combine these functions with other positions such as Director of Finance or Director of Administration or a similar function. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-5-94) 
Section 6.4. - City Attorney-Functions and Duties: 
(a)  The Attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and be attorney and counsel for, the Council and the Mayor. He shall advise any officer or department head of the City in matters relating to his official duties when so requested and shall file with the Clerk a copy of all written opinions given by him. 
(b)  The Attorney shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds and other written instruments which are submitted to him by the Council or by the Mayor and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legal consequences thereof. 
(c)  The Attorney shall prosecute ordinance violations and he shall conduct for the City cases in court and before other legally constituted tribunals. He shall file with the Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Council may direct. 
(d)  The Attorney shall call to the attention of the Council all matters of law, and changes or developments therein, affecting the City. 
(e)  The Attorney shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter or by the Council. 
(f)  Upon the recommendation of the Attorney or upon its own initiative, the Council may appoint one or more assistant attorneys to handle any matter in which the City has an interest or to assist and counsel with the Attorney therein. 
(10-3-66) 
ARTICLE VII - ENFORCEMENT OF LAWS AND ORDINANCES 

Section 7.1. - Municipal Court: 
(a)  There shall be a Municipal Court which shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases arising under this Charter or the ordinances of the City. The powers of and the procedure in such Municipal Court and the manner of enforcement of its orders and judgments, shall be such as is provided for under the Statutes of the State of Colorado, and the present ordinances of the City with respect to police magistrates, except as may be otherwise provided in this Charter or by ordinance hereafter enacted. The Council shall have the power to provide for juries for service in the Municipal Court. The Council shall provide a suitable place and all supplies and personnel necessary for the proper functioning of the Court. 
(b)  The Municipal Court shall be presided over and its functions exercised by one or more Municipal Judges, appointed by the Council for a term to be at the pleasure of the Council. A Municipal Judge shall receive a fixed salary or compensation not dependent upon the outcome of the matters to be decided by him, and to be fixed by the Council from time to time. If a Municipal Judge is absent or unable to act in any manner or case, the Mayor shall call any eligible person to act and serve temporarily, and if he fails to, or cannot call in a substitute, the Council shall appoint a substitute. Qualifications for Municipal Judges shall be established by ordinance. 
(c)  The Council shall provide for the enforcement of its ordinances by fine, or imprisonment, or both, within the limits established from time to time by State law. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-5-94) 
Section 7.2. - Department of Police: 
(a)  There is hereby created a Department of Police, the director of which shall be appointed by the Mayor or City Manager, as provided in Article V of this City Charter. 
(b)  The Chief of Police shall be in direct command of the Department of Police. He shall assign all members of the Department to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties. He shall make rules and regulations affecting his Department, in conformity with the ordinances and resolutions of the City, concerning the operation of the Department and conduct of all employees. He shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the Department and for the care and custody of all property used by the Department. 
(c)  The Department of Police shall be responsible for the public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights of persons and property, the enforcement of the laws of the State and of the ordinances of the City as provided by this Charter and all rules and regulations made in accordance therewith, and such other functions as the Mayor or City Manager may prescribe for public safety. All members of the Department shall have all powers with respect to the service of criminal process and the enforcement of criminal laws as are vested in police officers. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-5-94) 
ARTICLE VIII - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Section 8.1. - General Provisions for Boards and Commissions: 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, all boards and commissions shall be appointed by the Council and shall have such powers and perform such duties as are provided by this Charter or by ordinance; and members of such boards and commissions shall be appointed to serve without compensation, but shall be paid their authorized expenses actually incurred in the discharge of their official duties. Initial appointments by the Council shall specify the term of office of each individual in order to achieve overlapping tenure, and thereafter all appointments shall be for the full term specified. All members shall be subject to removal by a 3/4 majority vote of the entire Council. The Council shall make appointments to fill vacancies for the unexpired terms. Each board and commission shall choose its own chairman and vice-chairman, and shall adopt its own rules of procedures for the proper conduct of its business. 
Section 8.2. - Board of Adjustment and Appeals: 
    There is hereby created and established a Board of Adjustment and Appeals consisting of the number of members from time to time specified by the Council by ordinance. Such members shall be appointed by the Council for overlapping terms of three years. Each member shall be a taxpaying elector and in addition shall have resided in the area comprising the City at the time of his appointment for at least three years immediately preceding the date of his appointment. 
    The board shall have power to hear and determine appeals from refusals of building permits in violation of the zoning ordinance; to make exceptions to the terms of the zoning regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent; and to authorize variances from the strict application of zoning regulations in such situations subject to such limitations as may be set by ordinance. The findings and decisions of the board shall be final, subject only to judicial review. 
    The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, show the vote taken, keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every order, requirement, decision or determination of the board shall be filed in the office of the Clerk. 
    The board shall exercise the functions and powers and perform the duties assigned to it by this Charter and the ordinances of the City; and where not otherwise provided by ordinance or Charter, the board shall have the powers, perform the functions, and follow the procedures set forth in the Statutes of the State of Colorado. 
Section 8.3. - Planning and Zoning Commission: 
    There is hereby created and established a Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of the number of members from time to time specified by the Council by ordinance. Such members shall be appointed by the Council for overlapping terms of three years. Each member shall be a taxpaying elector and in addition shall have resided in the area comprising the City at the time of his appointment for at least three years immediately preceding the date of his appointment. 
(10-3-66) 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall exercise the functions and powers and perform the duties assigned to it by this Charter and the ordinances of the City. It may prepare and submit to the Council for its approval a master plan for the physical development of the City and areas adjacent thereto. All plats of proposed subdivisions shall be submitted to it for recommendations and approval before being presented to the Council for its approval; it may hold a hearing or hearings relative to zoning and changes in the zoning ordinance, and may make recommendations thereon to the Council. Where not otherwise provided by Charter or ordinance, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the powers, perform the functions, and follow the procedures set forth in the Statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-7-70) 
ARTICLE IX - CITY FINANCES 

Section 9.1. - Fiscal Year: 
    The fiscal year of the City, and all of its agencies, shall begin on the first day of January and end on the thirty-first day of December of each year. 
Section 9.2. - Annual Budget: 
    A proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be presented to the Council on or before the twentieth day of September of each year. 
(10-3-66) 
Section 9.3. - Budget Hearing: 
    The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget each year. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once five days prior to such hearing, and copies of the proposed budget shall be made available to the public by depositing them in the office of the Clerk. 
    The Council may at any time before final adoption increase, decrease, add or strike out any item in the budget. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-5-94) 
Section 9.4. - Scope of Annual Budget: 
    The budget adopted by the Council shall contain: (a) an estimate of anticipated revenue from all sources other than the tax levy for the ensuing year; (b) an estimate of the general fund cash surplus at the end of the current fiscal year, or of the deficit to be made up by appropriation; (c) the estimated expenditures necessary for the operation of the several departments, offices, and agencies of the City; (d) debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year; (e) an estimate of the sum required to be raised by the tax levy for the ensuing fiscal year, and the rate of levy necessary to produce such sum based on the percentage of current levy collection experience during the three preceding fiscal years; (f) a balance between the total estimated expenditures, including any deficit to be met, and monies set aside for public improvements and total anticipated revenue, plus any surplus. All estimates shall be in detail showing revenues by source, and expenditures by organizational units, activities, character and object. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-5-94) 
Section 9.5. - Adoption of Budget and Appropriation: 
    The Council shall adopt a budget calendar by resolution on or before the twentieth day of September of each year, and shall adopt an ordinance for the budget and an ordinance for the annual appropriations in accordance with said calendar. When finally adopted, the budget shall become a public record, and sufficient copies shall be deposited with the Clerk to insure adequate circulation. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-5-94) 
Section 9.6. - Certification of Tax Levy: 
    In accordance with the requirements of State law, the Council shall fix the amount of tax levy which shall be assessed upon each dollar of assessed valuation of all taxable property within the corporate limits of the City, and shall cause the same to be certified to the County as required by law. If the Council should fail in any year to make such levy as above provided, the rate last fixed shall be the rate for the ensuing fiscal year, which rate shall be levied as by law provided. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-5-94) 
Section 9.7. - General Fund: 
    There is hereby established a fund to be known as the general fund. All revenues not specifically allocated to any other fund shall be placed in the general fund. All general functions of the City shall be financed by expenditures from the general fund. 
Section 9.8. - Contingencies: 
    The general fund may contain an item for contingencies. 
Section 9.9. - Special Funds: 
    Additional funds which shall be known as special funds may be created by ordinance to provide for monies to be held or used for special purposes, such as: depreciation and obsolescence; debt service; equipment and building replacement; special services; local improvements; City-owned utilities; trust funds and endowments; and such other purposes as the Council may determine. 
(10-3-66) 
Section 9.10. - Additional Appropriations: 
    The Council may make additional appropriations by ordinance during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the City, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget, unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public peace, health or safety. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-5-94) 
Section 9.11. - Departmental Appropriations Revert: 
    Any annual departmental appropriation, or any portion thereof, remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of the fiscal year, shall revert to the general fund. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-5-94) 
Section 9.12. - Publication of Expenditures: 
    Expenditures authorized to be made need not be published, but the Clerk shall maintain a record on file of same, which shall at all times be available for public inspection. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-5-94) 
ARTICLE X - BONDED INDEBTEDNESS 
    The City may, subject to applicable limitations in the Colorado Constitution (including without limitation applicable provisions of Article X, Section 20 also known as the TABOR Amendment), borrow money or enter into other obligations and issue securities or other evidences of such obligations in such form and manner as determined by the Council to be in the best interests of the City. 
(4/6/04) 
ARTICLE XI - IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 

Section 11.1. - Power to Construct Improvements and Create Improvement Districts: 
    The City shall have the power to contract for, construct, or install special or local improvements of every character within designated districts of said City, and to assess the cost thereof wholly or in part upon the property especially benefited. The Council shall by ordinance prescribe the procedure for notice, the method and time for filing protest and disposition thereof, the method and manner of making such improvements, letting contracts therefor, assessing the cost thereof, and issuing and paying bonds for costs and expenses of the organization of said districts and of construction or installation of said improvements. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit the power of the Council to otherwise act in accordance with the Constitution and Statutes of Colorado in carrying out such purposes. 
(10-3-1966) 
Section 11.2. - Repealed (4/6/04). 
Section 11.3. - Improvement District Bonds-General Benefits: 
    In consideration of general benefits conferred on the City at large from the construction or installation of improvements in improvement districts, the Council may levy annual taxes on all taxable property within the City at a rate not exceeding two mills in any one year, to be disbursed as determined by the Council for the purpose of paying for such benefits, for the payment of any assessment levied against the City itself in connection with bonds issued for improvement districts, or for the purpose of advancing monies to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of bonds issued for any improvement district hereinafter created. The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a special fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified herein, provided that in lieu of such tax levies, the Council may annually transfer to such special fund any available monies of the City, but in no event shall the amount transferred in any one year exceed the amount which would result from a tax levied in such year as herein limited. 
(10-3-1966) 
Section 11.4. - Review of Improvement District Proceedings: 
    No action or proceeding, at law or in equity to review any acts or proceedings, or to question the validity or enjoin the performance of any act, or the issue or collection of any bonds, or the levy or collection of any assessments, authorized by this Article, or for any other relief against any acts or proceedings done or had under this Article, or of the City, with reference thereto, whether based upon irregularities or jurisdictional defects, shall be maintained, unless commenced within ninety days after the performance of the act or the passage of the resolution or ordinance complained of, or else be thereafter perpetually barred. 
(10-3-1966) 
ARTICLE XII - FRANCHISES 

Section 12.1. - Present Franchises: 
    All franchise ordinances of the City in effect at the time that this Charter is adopted shall remain in full force and effect, according to their provisions and terms, until the expiration date provided in such ordinances. 
(10-3-1966) 
Section 12.2. - Extension of Territory Covered by Franchise: 
    With respect to any franchise after negotiation or mutual agreement, the Council may by ordinance extend the area to include streets, alleys, or public places and property not embraced in such franchise, when public convenience and necessity requires, subject to all the terms and conditions of such original franchise, and co-extensive with the terms thereof, without a vote of the qualified taxpaying electors. 
(10-3-1966) 
Section 12.3. - Term, Compensation, Restriction: 
    No franchise, lease, or right to use the streets, or the public places or property of the City, shall be granted for longer than twenty years. Every grant of a franchise shall fix the amount and manner of payment of the compensation to be paid by the grantee for the use of the same, and no other compensation of any kind shall be exacted for such use during the life of the franchise. This provision shall not exempt the grantee from any lawful taxation upon his or its property, nor from any licenses, charges, or other impositions levied by the Council, not levied on account of the use granted by the franchise. 
(10-3-1966) 
Section 12.4. - Revocable Permits: 
    The Council may grant permits for the temporary use or occupation of any street, alley or public place, and establish conditions and compensation to be paid the City therefor. 
(10-3-1966) 
Section 12.5. - Condemnation or Purchase: 
    The right of the City to construct, purchase, or condemn any public utility, work or way, as provided by law, is expressly reserved. 
(10-3-1966) 
Section 12.6. - Assignment: 
    Assignment or leasing of a franchise shall be considered a forfeiture unless consent is given by the Council by ordinance. 
(10-3-1966) 
Section 12.7. - Common Use of Facilities: 
    The Council shall have the power to require any holder of a franchise from the City, or other public utility, to allow the use of its rights-of-way, poles and wires by any franchise holder, or the City itself, upon payment of a reasonable rental therefor; and the City may, under the terms prescribed by the Council, allow such franchise holders to use rights-of-way, poles and wires of City-owned utilities. 
ARTICLE XIII - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 13.1. - Disconnection: 
    Anything to the contrary notwithstanding under the Statutes of the State of Colorado now existing or as they may hereafter be amended, no territory may be disconnected from the City without first submitting the question of any such disconnection for approval of the taxpaying electors. 
Section 13.2. - Taxes for Municipal Purposes: 
    The Council shall have the power by ordinance to levy all forms of taxation for municipal purposes as are now or may hereafter be permitted to home rule cities under the Constitution of the State of Colorado, except that no use tax shall be imposed by the Council without having first been approved by a vote of the taxpaying electors of the City at a general or special election. 
Section 13.3. - Notice Required on Negligence Action: 
    No action for the recovery of compensation for personal injury, or death, or property damage, against the City on account of its negligence, shall be maintained unless written notice of the time, place, and cause of injury is given to the Clerk by the person injured, his agent or attorneys, within sixty days, and the action is commenced within two years of the occurrence or of the accident causing the injury or death or property damage. The notice given under the provisions of this Section shall not be deemed invalid or insufficient solely by reason of inaccuracy in stating the time, place or cause of injury, if it is shown that there was no intention to mislead and that the City was, in fact, not mislead thereby. 
Section 13.4. - Fidelity Bonds: 
    Before any officer or employee of the City who handles City funds shall be permitted to enter upon the duties of his office or employment, he shall obtain and file with the Clerk a fidelity bond from a bonding company authorized to do business in the State of Colorado, in any amount to be fixed by the Council. The cost of such bonds shall be borne by the City. 
Section 13.5. - Right of Eminent Domain: 
    The City shall have the right of eminent domain for all municipal purposes whatever either within or without the limits of the City as may be permitted to towns or cities by the Constitution and the Statutes of the State of Colorado. 
Section 13.6. - Contracts with Other Governmental Units: 
    The Council may, by resolution or by ordinance, enter into contracts or agreements with other governmental units or special districts for the use of buildings, equipment or facilities, and for furnishing or receiving commodities or services. 
Section 13.7. - Bequests, Gifts and Donations: 
    The Council, on behalf of the City, may receive bequests, gifts and donations of all kinds of property in fee simple, or in trust, for public, charitable or other purposes, and do all things and acts necessary to carry out the purposes of such bequests, gifts and donations, with the power to manage, sell, lease or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the terms of the bequest, gift or trust. 
Section 13.8. - Contracts for Purchases, Leases, and Construction of Public Works: 
    The Council may establish by ordinance procedure for entering into contracts for purchases, contracts for leases, and contracts for construction of public works. 
Section 13.9. - Temporary Zoning: 
    In all proceedings for the annexation of territory to the City, the Council may determine temporary zoning, and establish a temporary zoning district or districts for newly annexed territory at the time of the annexation of any territory to the City. Immediately upon annexation of any territory the Council shall comply with the statutory procedure for permanent zoning. 
Section 13.10. - Annexation of or Consolidation with Another Municipality: 
    Any plan of annexation of another municipality or consolidation with another municipality may be in accordance with Articles 8 and 9 of Chapter 139, Colorado Revised Statutes of 1963, as now existing or hereafter amended or modified. Upon any plan of annexation of another municipality or consolidation with another municipality in accordance with such statutes the Council may as a part of any plan submitted to the voters of the City propose changes in this Charter. If any such plan is approved by a majority of the voters at any general or special election called for such purpose, and such plan becomes otherwise operative, those portions of this Charter proposed to be amended will by such election be amended forthwith according to the terms contained in such plan, provided that the ballot title at such election includes notice of amendment of the Charter. 
Section 13.11. - Initiative and Referendum: 
    The power of initiative and referendum is reserved to the voters of the City in accordance with the provisions of Article V, Section 1 of the Constitution of the State of Colorado insofar as such provisions are applicable. 
Section 13.12. - Removal of Officers-Causes-Notice: 
    By a vote of 3/4 of the membership of the entire Council, the Mayor or any Councilman may be removed from office. No such removal shall be made without a charge in writing and an opportunity of hearing being given, unless the official against whom the charge is made shall have ceased to be a resident of the City. 
(10-3-66) 
Section 13.13. - Amendment: 
    In addition to the provisions of Section 13.10, this Charter may be amended in the manner provided by Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado at any general election or special election called for such purpose (1) upon questions which may be submitted to the electors by a majority of the Council or (2) upon questions which may be submitted by the electors. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-7-70) 
Section 13.14. - Retirement Plans: 
    This Charter shall not affect any contractual relationships existing on the effective date of this Charter between the City and any officer or employee by reason of any retirement and pension plans in effect. 
(10-3-66) 
Section 13.15. - Effect of State Statutes: 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinances adopted by the Council hereunder, the Statutes of the State of Colorado governing municipal cities now classified as cities shall be in effect. 
(10-3-66; amd. 4-7-70) 
Section 13.16. - Severability: 
    If any provision, article, section, sentence, clause or part of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the Charter as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so adjudged to be invalid, and to this end the provisions of this Charter are declared to be severable. 
APPROVAL OF COMMISSION 
    Signed and approved this 3rd day of October, 1966. 
ROBERT P. DAVISON, President 
ELIZABETH N. NOEL, Secretary 
WILLEMAIN O. CABLE, Member 
LEE DAILEY, Member 
ARTHUR W. DECKER, Member 
WILLIAM J. FAULKNER, Member 
JOHN L. FERGUSON, Member 
ROBERT L. FRINK, Member 
DWIGHT A. HAMILTON, Member 
NANCY E. MODESITT, Member 
PATRICIA P. NELSON, Member 
MIRIAM K. PICK, Member 
ELISABETH S. ROBINSON, Member 
DUANE E. SCOTT, Member 
THOMAS D. SMART, Member 
NED M. STEEL, Member 
GENE E. STEWART, Member 
JAY W. TRACEY, JR., Member 
EDWIN P. VAN CISE, Member 
EDWARD P. WASSON, Member 
    Signed and approved except as to Section 3.9 this 3rd day of October, 1966. 
  
HARRY J. BURNS, Member 
CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE - MUNICIPAL CODE 
          
2003 
          
          
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
              
of the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado 
              
A Home Rule Municipality 
    
            
          
          
Beginning with Supp. No. 17,
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 

PREFACE 
The City of Cherry Hills Village, a home rule city, has published its Municipal Code in a format which features the following: 
The Table of Contents is the table containing each chapter and article title, with reference to page location. Preceding each chapter is a chapter table of contents, also identifying each article by the subject name provided. 
The three-place section numbering system places the chapter number first, followed by the article number and section number, separated by hyphens. Each section may be cited by the chapter, article and section number which are in sequence within each chapter. 
The open chapter and page numbering system creates reserved chapter and page numbers for expansion or revision of the Code without undue complication when changes are made to the Code by supplementation. 
The Disposition of Ordinances Table identifies the source for the contents of the Code. This table provides ordinance numbers in chronological order and location by section number for the present code contents. Thus, if there is interest in determining whether an ordinance, or a portion thereof, is contained within the Code, the Disposition of Ordinances Table will provide that information. The Table of Up-to-Date Pages lists all of the current pages through the most recent supplementation. 
The Index provides references by common and legal terminology to the appropriate code sections. Cross-references are provided with the Index when appropriate. 
Supplements to the Code provide regular updating of the Code to maintain it as a current compilation of all the legislation which has general and continuing effect. Without regular supplementation, the Code would soon lose its usefulness as a complete source of the general law of the municipality. Supplementation is accomplished by the periodic publication of additions and amendments to the Code. 

> 
ORDINANCE NO. 9 
Series 2003 
    July 15, 2003: Introduced as Council Bill 09-03 by Councilmember Doug Tisdale, seconded by Councilmember Bonnie Blum, and considered by the title only on first reading. Passed unanimously. 
    August 19, 2003: Considered in full text on second reading. Passed unanimously. Designated as Ordinance No. 9, Series 2003. 
  
A BILL FOR AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING BY REFERENCE AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE TITLED "CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE"; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION OF SECONDARY CODES BY REFERENCE; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    WHEREAS, pursuant to its Home Rule Charter, the City Council of the City of Cherry Hills Village holds all powers of self-government and home rule power possible under the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado; and 
    WHEREAS, the City of Cherry Hills Village has adopted regulations and laws; and 
    WHEREAS, the City of Cherry Hills Village maintains a codification of ordinances approved by the City Council of the City of Cherry Hills Village; and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Cherry Hills Village desires to update, modify the numbering system, and change the form of their City Code and provide their Code in electronic form; and 
    WHEREAS, the City's updated code is titled "Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code"; and 
    WHEREAS, the City properly published notice of a hearing for the purpose of considering this Ordinance and such notice was published twice in "The Villager", a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Cherry Hills Village, once at least fifteen days preceding the hearing and once at least eight days preceding the hearing; and 
    WHEREAS, the published notice of the hearing stated the time and place of the hearing and also stated that copies of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code and all secondary codes referenced in the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code are on file with the clerk and are open to public inspection; and 
    WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Cherry Hills Village desires the effective date of this Ordinance to be ten (10) days after publication following approval on second reading in accordance with Section 4.5 of the Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village. 
    THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE, COLORADO, ORDAINS: 
    Section 1. The primary code entitled the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code, published by Colorado Code Publishing Company, consisting of Chapters 1 through 18, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before the adoption date of this Ordinance, which are inconsistent with the provisions of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code, to the extent of such inconsistency, are hereby repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal established in Section 2 of this Ordinance shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that had been previously repealed by any ordinance which is repealed by this Ordinance. 
    Section 4. The repeal established in Section 2 of this Ordinance shall not be construed to repeal "ordinances saved from repeal" as such ordinances are identified and listed in section 1-1-60 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
    Section 5. The following secondary codes were previously adopted by reference and incorporated in the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. One (1) copy is on file in the City Clerk's office: 
(1)  The Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities , 1995 edition, published by the Colorado Department of Transportation, as adopted and amended in Section 8-1-20 et seq.; 
(2)  The International Building Code , 2000 edition, published by the International Code Council Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-1-10 et seq.; 
(3)  The International Residential Code , 2000 edition, published by the International Code Council Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-2-10; 
(4)  The International Mechanical Code , 2000 edition, published by the International Code Council Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-3-10 et seq.; 
(5)  The International Plumbing Code , 2000 edition, published by the International Code Council Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-4-10 et seq.; 
(6)  The International Fuel Gas Code , 2000 edition, published by the International Code Council Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-5-10 et seq.; 
(7)  The International Energy Conservation Code , 2000 edition, published by the International Code Council Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-6-10 et seq.; 
(8)  The National Electrical Code , 2002 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted in Section 18-7-10. 
(9)  The International Fire Code , 2000 edition, published by the International Code Council Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-8-10 et seq.; 
    Section 6. The penalties provided by the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code are hereby adopted as follows: 
(1)  Sec. 1-4-20.  General penalty for violation. (Article IV, General Penalty) 
(a)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Code for which a different penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the City or County jail for a period of not more than one (1) year or by both such fine and imprisonment, except as provided in Section 1-4-30 below. In addition, such person shall pay all costs and expenses in the case, including attorney fees. Any voluntary plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all fines and/or penalties applicable to the original charge. 
(b)  Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(2)  Sec. 1-4-30.  Application of penalties to juveniles. (Article IV, General Penalty) 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, any person who is at least ten (10) years of age but under the age of eighteen (18) years of age as of the date of the violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or count and shall not be subject to imprisonment in a jail, lock-up or other place used for the confinement of adult offenders, but may be held in a juvenile detention facility operated or contracted by the Department of Institutions or a temporary holding facility operated by or under contract with the City, which shall receive and provide care for such child, unless such imprisonment is for failure to comply with the lawful order of the court or for contempt of court. 
(b)  Any voluntary plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all fines and/or penalties applicable to the original charge. 
(c)  In no event shall the confinement of the person under eighteen (18) years of age for failure to comply with the lawful order of the court or for contempt of court exceed forty-eight (48) hours. 
(3)  Sec. 1-4-40.  Altering or tampering with Code; penalty. (Article IV, General Penalty) 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. The Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the office of the City Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council. 
(b)  Any person who shall alter, change or amend this Code, except in the manner prescribed in this Article, or who shall alter or tamper with this Code in any manner so as to cause the ordinances of the City to be misrepresented thereby, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided by Section 1-4-20 hereof. 
(4)  Sec. 1-4-50.  Penalty for violations of ordinances adopted after adoption of Code. (Article IV, General Penalty) 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of any ordinance of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted after adoption of this Code, either before or after it has been inserted in this Code by a supplement, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided by Section 1-4-20 unless another penalty is specifically provided for the violation. 
(5)  Sec. 2-4-100.  Contempt power. (Article IV, Municipal Court) 
(a)  When the Court finds any person to be in contempt, the Court may vindicate its dignity by imposing on the contemnor a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment not to exceed a term of ninety (90) days. 
(b)  In cases of indirect contempt, the alleged contemnor shall have all the rights, privileges, safeguards and protections of a defendant in a petty offense case, including but not limited to a formal written complaint, arraignment and trial by jury. (Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
(6)  Sec. 4-4-390.  Notice of deficiency, recovery, penalty, interest. (Article IV, Retail Sales Tax) 
(a)  All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the vendor as taxes imposed by this Article shall be and remain public money, the property of the City, in the hands of such vendor, and he shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the City until paid to the City. For failure to so pay to the City, such vendor shall be punished as provided by Subsection 4-4-380(b). 
(b)  If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the tax as required by this Chapter, the City shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent; and shall add thereto a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate of one percent (1%) per month from the date when due. Promptly thereafter, the City shall send to the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty and interest, which notice shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such estimate shall thereupon become a notice of deficiency. 
(c)  The City may treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the City from the taxpayer. In case of failure to pay the tax or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest thereon when due, the City may recover at law the amount of such taxes and interest, in such County or District Court of the County having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected. The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the City, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. 
(d)  The Finance Director is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed as provided in this Article, and, for this purpose only, interest imposed in excess of eight percent (8%) per annum shall be deemed a penalty. 
(7)  Sec. 4-4-410.  Penalties for certain underpayment, nonpayment or extensions of time for payment of taxes. (Article IV, Retail Sales Tax) 
    If any part of the deficiency in payment of the sales tax is due to negligence or intentional disregard of this Code, or of authorized rules and regulations of the City with knowledge, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the deficiency as a penalty; and interest on such penalty in such case shall be collected at the rate imposed under Section 4-4-400, in addition to the interest provided by Section 4-4-430 on the amount of such deficiency from the time the return was due from the person required to file the return, which interest and penalty shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the City Treasurer. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added one hundred percent (100%) of the total amount of the deficiency as a penalty; and, in such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the penalty, shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the City. 
(8)  Sec. 4-5-120.  Interest for neglect or refusal to pay. (Article V, Use Tax) 
    If a person neglects or refuses to pay any use tax as required, the City Treasurer shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent and shall add thereto a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under Section 4-5-140 below, plus one-half of one percent (.5%) per month from the date when due. 
(9)  Sec. 5-3-40.  Failure to pay tax. (Article III, Telephone Occupation Tax) 
    If any person required to pay the tax levied by this Article shall fail to pay such tax as herein provided, the full amount thereof shall become immediately due from and payable by such person, together with any interest thereon at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, or fraction thereof, from the date when due and payable, and a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount of taxes due and payable. The total amount of such tax, penalty and interest is further declared to be a debt due and owing from such person to the City. The City Attorney, upon direction of the City Council, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect such debt in the name of the City. 
(10)  Sec. 6-2-140.  Violations; penalty. (Article II, Nuisances) 
(a)  Penalties for violations of this Article shall be as provided for in Section 1-4-20 of this Code and shall be in addition to any special penalty provided for in this Article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other penalty that may be levied, any licensee, or his manager or agent, who violates the terms of this Article shall be subject to suspension or revocation of his liquor license pursuant to Section 12-47-110, C.R.S. (Prior code 3-8-13; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
(11)  Sec. 7-4-50.  Assessment of costs; notice. (Article IV, Weeds, Brush and Rubbish) 
    The costs of removing the weeds, brush or rubbish from the property shall be chargeable against the delinquent owner and against the property. In addition to the actual out-of-pocket costs incurred by the City, the costs shall include an additional amount equal to five percent (5%) or twenty-five dollars ($25.00), whichever is more, or the out-of-pocket costs to cover inspection and other incidental costs to the City. The City may either remove the weeds, brush or rubbish or hire an independent contractor for that purpose. (Ord. 9, 1968; 1980 Code; prior code 4-2-5) 
(12)  Sec. 7-6-610.  Prosecution for violations. (Article VI, Animals) 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this Article to: 
(1)  Fail to comply with any provision of this Article; 
(2)  Fail to comply with any lawful order of an animal control officer or police officer unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed; 
(3)  Intentionally interfere with, hinder, harass, molest, injure or obstruct any animal control officer or police officer in the discharge of his official duties under this Article or other applicable law; 
(4)  Fail to comply with any special sanctions imposed pursuant to Subsection (e) below, or pay any fines, civil penalties or costs imposed by the Municipal Court or any fees and charges imposed by the animal shelter or impoundment facility arising from impoundment of an animal. 
(b)  Penalty. The owner of an animal shall be subject to escalating penalties, as provided below, for each violation of this Article, whether the subject animal is the same animal, a different animal or various animals belonging to the said owner. The maximum fine shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any one (1) offense, each day constituting a separate offense. Except as otherwise provided herein, any violation of this Article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first violation, not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second violation, and a mandatory court appearance and fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the third and each subsequent violation for the same offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation for an aggressive dog (Section 7-6-340(b)); vicious dog (Section 7-6-340(c)); prohibited animal (Section 7-6-50(a)); restricted animal (guard dog) (Section 7-650(b)); cruelty (Section 7-6-110(a)); neglect (Section 7-6-110(b)); or poisoning (Section 7-6-110(e)) shall require a court appearance and shall be punishable by imprisonment not exceeding the limit established in Section 1-4-20(A) of the Code and/or a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation, not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second violation, and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third and each subsequent violation for the same offense. As part of any penalty for a third violation of a vicious dog offense, where each offense concerns the same dog, the Court shall order destruction of the dog in addition to, and not in lieu of, any fine imposed. No portion of any minimum fine may be suspended or held in abeyance by the Municipal Court. The Municipal Court is authorized to adopt a fine schedule in accordance with this Section. 
(c)  Strict liability. For the purpose of prosecution for violations of any Section of this Article, it shall not be necessary in order to obtain a conviction to prove notice on the part of the owner or keeper of the animal in question that said animal was violating any provision of this Article at the time and place charged, it being the purpose of this Section to impose strict liability upon the owner or keeper of any animal. 
(d)  Separate offense. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which a violation of this Article occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(e)  Special sanctions. The animal control officer, or the City Attorney or his designee, may recommend that one (1) or more special sanctions be levied against any animal owner or keeper convicted of any violation of this Article or pursuant to a deferred judgment or deferred prosecution. This recommendation may be presented to the Municipal Court as a proposed condition of sentencing upon conviction or as a condition of deferred judgment or deferred prosecution, and may be in lieu of or in addition to the penalties specified herein. The Municipal Court may take into consideration the severity of the incident, the prior history or the owner or keeper, and the recommendation of the animal control officer or City Attorney. Special sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Confinement of an animal in a secure enclosure in compliance with the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Spaying or neutering of the animal; 
(3)  Obedience training/behavior modification for the animal; 
(4)  Responsible pet ownership class for the owner or keeper; 
(5)  Community service work for the owner or keeper; 
(6)  Microchipping of the animal; 
(7)  Euthanasia of the animal; 
(8)  Ban on owning or maintaining other animals in the City for a specified period; 
(9)  Use of humane training devices for behavior modification of the animal; 
(10)  Inspections of premises where the animal is kept in cases of neglect or cruelty; 
(11)  Restitution for costs of care rendered or shelter given at the City's designated animal shelter, costs of veterinary care and costs of medical treatment; and 
(12)  Treatment or counseling programs for the animal or owner. 
The provisions of this Section shall not in any way limit the power of the Municipal Court, on its own motion, to impose any other sanction or measure, as it deems appropriate. (Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
(13)  Sec. 8-1-20.  Amendments. (Article I, Model Traffic Code) 
    The Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length subject to the modifications and additions provided in the following subsections: 
(8)  "613. Designation of Highway Maintenance, Repair or Construction Zones - Signs - Increase in Penalties for Speeding Violations. 
"(1)  If maintenance, repair, or construction activities are occurring or will be occurring within four hours on a state highway or municipal street, the department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may designate such portion of the highway or street as a highway or street maintenance, repair, or construction zone. Any person who commits a speeding violation in a maintenance, repair, or construction zone that is designated pursuant to the provisions of this section is subject to doubled penalties and charges. 
"(2)  The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall designate by appropriate signs that a maintenance, repair, or construction activity is taking place within four hours. Such sign shall notify the public that increased penalties for speeding violations are in effect in such zone. The department of transportation or local authorities shall erect or place a second sign after such zone indicating that the increased penalties for speeding violations are no longer in effect. A maintenance, repair, or construction zone begins at the location of the sign indicating that increased penalties are in effect and ends at the location of the sign indicating that the increased penalties are no longer in effect. 
"(3)  Signs used for designating the beginning and end of a maintenance, construction, or repair zone shall conform to department of transportation requirements. The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may display such signs on any fixed, variable, or moveable stand. The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may place such a sign on a moving vehicle if required for certain activities, including, but not limited to, highway painting work." 
(9)  "614. Designation of School Zones - Signs - Increase in Penalties for Speeding Violations. 
"(1)  Any person who commits a speeding violation on a portion of the state highway or municipal street designated as a school zone pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter is subject to doubled penalties and charges. 
"(2)  The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall designate a school zone by appropriate signs. Such sign shall notify the public that increased penalties for speeding violations are in effect in such zone. The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall erect or place a second sign after such school zone indicating that the increased penalties for speeding violations are no longer in effect. A school zone begins at the location of the sign indicating that increased penalties are in effect and ends at the location of the sign indicating that the increased penalties are no longer in effect. 
"(3)  Signs used for designating the beginning and end of a school zone shall conform to department of transportation requirements. The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may display such signs on any fixed, variable, or moveable stand." 
(18)  " 1701. Traffic Offenses and Infractions Classified - Penalties. 
"(1)  Except as set forth herein, it is a traffic infraction for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this Chapter. Such a traffic infraction shall constitute a civil matter. The Colorado Rules of Municipal Procedure shall apply to traffic infraction proceedings, except that no bench warrant for arrest shall be issued for a defendant's failure to appear when the only violation charged is a non-criminal traffic infraction. Instead, the court may enter judgment of liability by default against the defendant for failure to appear, assess any penalty and costs established by law and report the judgment to the Colorado Department of Revenue, Motor Vehicle Division, or to the motor vehicle department of any other state which participates in the Interstate Non-resident Violator Compact, as codified at C.R.S.  24-60-2101, which may assess points against the defendant's driver's license and may take appropriate action to ensure that the judgment is satisfied. There is no right to trial by jury for any non-criminal traffic infraction. 
"(3)  Traffic infractions shall be subject to the following penalties: 
"Minimum Penalty Maximum Penalty "Fine of $10.00 Fine of $1,000.00  
"Court costs as authorized by state law shall be added to the fine. 
"(4)  Criminal traffic offenses shall be subject to the following sentences upon conviction: 
"Minimum Sentence Maximum Sentence "1 day imprisonment, or a fine of 
$10.00, or both. 1 year imprisonment, or a fine 
of $1,000.00, or both  
"Court costs as authorized by state law shall be added to the fine." 
(20)  " 1707. Summons and Complaint for Traffic Violations. 
"(3)  (a)  The City of Cherry Hills Village may offer or extend to a defendant the opportunity for the defendant to pay a penalty assessment for a non-criminal traffic infraction prior to the date and time scheduled for the defendant's appearance in the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Court, or Arapahoe County Court. Whenever a penalty assessment is made available for a traffic infraction, the defendant shall be required to execute a signed acknowledgment of guilt and shall pay the penalty prescribed by the City within a specified period of time as well as provide such other information as may be required by the City. Payment of a penalty assessment notice by the person to whom the notice is tendered shall constitute an acknowledgement of guilt by such person of his or her violation of the offense stated in such notice and shall be deemed a complete satisfaction for the violation, and the City, upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging payment thereof, if requested." 
(22)  "1710. Failure to Pay Penalty for Traffic Offenses Procedures. 
"(4)  If judgment is entered against a violator, the violator shall be assessed an appropriate penalty and surcharge thereon. If the violator is provided an opportunity to pay a penalty assessment, the penalty shall be assessed pursuant to Section 1701." 
(14)  Sec. 18-9-20.  Violations. (Article IX, Violations and Enforcement) 
    Persons who violate a provision of this Chapter or any provision of any code adopted within this Chapter, or who erect, install, alter or repair a structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Misdemeanors are punishable by: 
(1)  A fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any one (1) offense, each day after a ticket is given constituting a separate offense, or 
(2)  By imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
    Section 7. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 8. Ordinances adopted after this Ordinance that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to those provisions of the Code. 
    Section 9. This Ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days after publication on second reading in accordance with Section 4.5 of the Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village. 
Adopted as Ordinance No. 09, Series 2003, by the City Council of the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, and signed and approved by its Mayor and Presiding Officer this 19 th day of August, 2003. 
By: 
/s/   
      Douglas C. Scott, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Jennifer Pettinger 
      City Clerk   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/ Robert C. Widner 
      City Attorney   (SEAL) 
Published in The Villager 
Published on August 28,2003 
Legal # 5498 
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions 
ARTICLE I - Code 

Sec. 1-1-10. - Adoption of Code. 
    The published code known as the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code, published by Colorado Code Publishing Company, of which one (1) copy is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours, is enacted and adopted by reference as a primary code and incorporated herein as if set out at length. This primary code has been promulgated by the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, as a codification of all the ordinances of the City of Cherry Hills Village of a general and permanent nature through Ordinance No. 9, 2003, for the purpose of providing an up-to-date code of ordinances, properly organized and indexed, in published form for the use of the citizens and officers of the City. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-1-20. - Title and scope. 
    Upon adoption by the City Council, this Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official Code of the City of Cherry Hills Village. This Code constitutes a compilation, revision and codification of all the ordinances of the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, of a general and permanent nature, and shall be known and cited as the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. (Prior code 1-1-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-1-30. - Code supersedes prior ordinances. 
    This Code shall supersede all other municipal codes consisting of compilations of general and permanent ordinances and parts of ordinances passed by the City Council. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-1-40. - Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code. 
    All existing ordinances and portions of ordinances of a general and permanent nature which are inconsistent with any ordinance included in the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed to the extent of any inconsistency therein as of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-1-50. - Matters not affected by repeal. 
    The repeal of ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature by Section 1-1-40 of this Code shall not affect any offense committed or act done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract, right or obligation established prior to the time said ordinances and parts of ordinances are repealed. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-1-60. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
(a)  All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal and except the ordinances listed in this Section. The continuance in effect of temporary and/or special ordinances and parts of ordinances, although omitted from this Code, shall not be affected by such omission therefrom, and the adoption of this Code shall not repeal or amend any such ordinance or part of any such ordinance. 
(b)  Among the ordinances not repealed or amended by the adoption of this Code are ordinances: 
(1)  Creating, opening, dedicating, vacating or closing specific streets, alleys and other public ways. 
(2)  Establishing, naming or changing the names of specific streets and other public ways. 
(3)  Authorizing or relating to specific issuances of general obligation bonds. 
(4)  Creating specific sewer and paving districts and other local improvement districts. 
(5)  Authorizing the issuance of specific local improvement district bonds. 
(6)  Making special assessments for local improvement districts and authorizing refunds from specific local improvement district bond proceeds. 
(7)  Annexing territory to or excluding territory from the City. 
(8)  Dedicating or accepting any specific plat or subdivision. 
(9)  Relating to elections including calling or providing for a specific election. 
(10)  Authorizing specific contracts for purchase of beneficial use of water by the City. 
(11)  Approving or authorizing specific contracts with the State, with other governmental bodies or with others. 
(12)  Authorizing a specific lease, sale or purchase of property by or from the City. 
(13)  Granting rights-of-way or other rights and privileges to specific railroad companies or other public carriers. 
(14)  Granting a specific gas company or other public utility the right or privilege of constructing lines in the streets and alleys or of otherwise using the streets and alleys. 
(15)  Granting a franchise to a specific public utility company or establishing rights for or otherwise regulating a specific public utility company. 
(16)  Appropriating money. 
(17)  Levying taxes or fixing tax rates. 
(18)  Relating to salaries. 
(19)  Amending the Official Zoning Map. (Prior code 1-2-1, 1-2-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-1-70. - Changes in previously adopted ordinances. 
    In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the City for adoption and revision as part of this Code, certain grammatical changes and other changes were made in one (1) or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of this Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-1-80. - Fee schedule. 
    The fees, costs, deposits, occupation taxes and other charges as required by this Code shall be set forth in the text of the Code and in Appendix A - Fee Schedule to the Code. In the event of a conflict between the fees, costs, deposits, occupation taxes and other charges listed in the text of any individual section of the Code and Appendix A, the provisions of the applicable section of the Code shall control. 
(Ord. 7 36, 2004) 
ARTICLE II - Definitions and Usage 

Sec. 1-2-10. - Definitions. 
    Whenever the following words or terms are used in the ordinances of the City of Cherry Hills Village and/or this Code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless a different meaning is intended from the context or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
    Agent means a person acting on behalf of another. 
    City means the City of Cherry Hills Village, County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado. 
    City Council means the City Council of the City of Cherry Hills Village. 
    City Manager means the chief administrative officer of the City as designated by the City Charter or as further delegated by City ordinance. 
    Code means the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code as published and subsequently amended, unless the context requires otherwise. 
    County means the County of Arapahoe, Colorado. 
    C.R.S. means the Colorado Revised Statutes, including all amendments thereto. 
    Fee means a sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation. 
    Law denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado, the ordinances of the City and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    License means the permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation. 
    May is permissive. 
    Misdemeanor means any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other than the state penitentiary for not more than ninety (90) days may be imposed. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
    Nuisance means anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the City; or any act or thing repugnant to, creating a hazard to or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community. 
    Oath shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. 
    Occupant, applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Offense means any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code. 
    Operator means the person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession. 
    Ordinance means a law of the City; provided that a temporary or special law, administrative action, order or directive may be in the form of a resolution. 
    Owner, applied to a building, land, motorized vehicle, animal or other real or personal property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, lessee or any other person with a possessory interest in the whole or a part of such building, land, motor vehicle, animal or other real or personal property. 
    Person means a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government, club, company, business, trust, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
    Personal property includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein. 
    Preceding and following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property includes real and personal property. 
    Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Retailer , unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities directly to the consumer. 
    Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property. 
    Shall and must are both mandatory. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State means the State of Colorado. 
    Street includes all streets, highways, avenues, alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, ways, squares, places, sidewalks, curbs or other public ways in the City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this State. 
    Tenant or occupant, applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Wholesaler and wholesale dealer, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale. 
    Written or in writing may include printing and any other mode of representing or reproducing words and letters in permanent visible form; however, when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. 
    Year means a calendar year. (Prior code 1-3-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-2-20. - Computation of time. 
    The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; but if the time for an act to be done shall fall on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, the act shall be done upon the next regular business day following such Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-2-30. - Title of office. 
    Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City, or his designated representative. (Prior code 1-3-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-2-40. - Usage of terms. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-2-50. - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply to this Code and to City ordinances: 
(1)  Any gender includes the other genders. 
(2)  The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(4)  Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
(5)  The word ordinance contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed in the content of this Code to Chapter, Article, Section and/or Subsection, or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (Prior code 1-3-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE III - General 

Sec. 1-3-10. - Titles and headings not part of Code. 
    Chapter and Article titles, headings, numbers and titles of sections and other divisions in this Code or in supplements made to this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the Section, are inserted in this Code, may be inserted in supplements to this Code for the convenience of persons using this Code, and are not part of this Code (1980 Code; prior code 1-3-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-3-20. - Authorized acts. 
    When this Code requires an act to be done which may as well be done by an agent or representative as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed when done by an authorized agent or representative. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-3-30. - Prohibited acts. 
    Whenever in this Code or any City ordinance any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-3-40. - Repeal of ordinances. 
    Unless the context clearly appears to the contrary, the repeal of any ordinance or provision thereof shall not affect any right which has accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred or any action or proceedings commenced under or by virtue of the provisions repealed or during the tenure of office of any person holding office at the time when such repeal shall take effect. The repeal of any ordinance or provision thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any provision or any ordinance theretofore repealed or superseded. (Prior code 1-2-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-3-50. - Amendments to Code. 
    Any ordinance amending this Code shall set forth the chapter, article and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Code. All such ordinances and parts of ordinances shall be deemed amendments to this Code, and all of the substantive, permanent and general parts of said ordinances and changes made thereby shall be inserted and made in this Code as provided in Section 1-3-60 hereof. (Prior code 1-1-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-3-60. - Supplementation of Code. 
    All amendments or revisions by ordinance to this Code shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and said material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the City Code. (Prior code 1-1-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-3-70. - Examination of Code. 
    The Mayor and City Clerk shall carefully examine at least one (1) copy of the Code adopted by this ordinance to see that it is a true and correct copy of this Code. Similarly, after each supplement has been prepared, printed and inserted in this Code, the Mayor and City Clerk shall carefully examine at least one (1) copy of this Code as supplemented. The copy of this Code as originally adopted or amended shall constitute the permanent and general ordinances of the City and shall be so accepted by the courts of law, administrative tribunals and all others concerned. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-3-80. - Copy of Code on file; accepted by courts. 
(a)  At least one (1) copy of this Code so certified and sealed most recently shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk at all times, and such Code may be inspected by any interested person at any time during regular office hours, but may not be removed from the City Clerk's office except upon proper order of a court of law. 
(b)  This Code shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of the State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-1-60 of this Chapter. (Prior code 1-1-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-3-90. - Severability. 
(a)  The provisions of this Code are declared to be severable, and if any section, provision or part thereof shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this Code shall continue in full force and effect, it being the legislative intent that this Code would have been adopted even if such unconstitutional matter had not been included therein. It is further declared that, if any provision or part of this Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application thereof to other persons shall not be affected thereby. 
(b)  Pursuant to Section 4.7 of the City Charter, unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of any ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided that such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable; and to this end each ordinance is declared to be severable. Severability shall so apply to each ordinance in the same manner as if a separate severability clause were contained in each ordinance. 
(Ord. 20, 1968; prior code 1-2-4; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE IV - General Penalty 

Sec. 1-4-10. - Violations. 
    It is a violation of this Code for any person to do any act which is forbidden or declared to be unlawful or to fail to do or perform any act required in this Code. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-4-20. - General penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Code for which a different penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00), as shall be adjusted for inflation on January 1, 2014, and on January 1 of each year thereafter based on the annual percentage change in the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index for Denver-Boulder, All Items, All Urban Consumers, or its successor index, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment, except as provided by Section 1-4-30 below. 
(b)  Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (1980 Code; prior code 1-4-1; Ord. 5, 1996; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 10 1, 2013) 
Sec. 1-4-30. - Application of penalties to juveniles. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, any person who is at least ten (10) years of age but under the age of eighteen (18) years of age as of the date of the violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the maximum fine authorized in Section 1-4-20 of this Code per violation or count and shall not be subject to imprisonment in a jail, lock-up or other place used for the confinement of adult offenders, but may be held in a juvenile detention facility operated or contracted by the Division of Youth Corrections or a temporary holding facility operated by or under contract with the City, which shall receive and provide care for such child, unless such imprisonment is for failure to comply with the lawful order of the court or for contempt of court. 
(b)  Any voluntary plea of guilty or nolo contendere to the original charge or to a lesser or substituted charge shall subject the person so pleading to all fines and/or penalties applicable to the original charge. 
(c)  In no event shall the confinement of the person under eighteen (18) years of age for failure to comply with the lawful order of the court or for contempt of court exceed forty-eight (48) hours. (Prior code 1-4-1; Ord. 7, 1990; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 10 2, 2013) 
Sec. 1-4-40. - Altering or tampering with Code; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. The Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the office of the City Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council. 
(b)  Any person who shall alter, change or amend this Code, except in the manner prescribed in this Article, or who shall alter or tamper with this Code in any manner so as to cause the ordinances of the City to be misrepresented thereby, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided by Section 1-4-20 hereof. (1980 Code; prior code 1-1-4; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-4-50. - Penalty for violations of ordinances adopted after adoption of Code. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of any ordinance of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted after adoption of this Code, either before or after it has been inserted in this Code by a supplement, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided by Section 1-4-20 unless another penalty is specifically provided for the violation. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-4-60. - Interpretation of unlawful acts. 
    Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it is also unlawful to cause, allow, permit, aid, abet or suffer such unlawful act or omission. Concealing or in any manner aiding in the concealing of any unlawful act or omission is similarly unlawful. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-4-70. - Application of provisions. 
(a)  The penalty provided in this Article shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section unless otherwise indicated. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where a duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code. 
(b)  In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one (1) recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. 
(c)  Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this Article shall apply. (1980 Code; prior code 1-4-2) 
Sec. 1-4-80. - Liability of officers. 
    No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1980 Code; prior code 1-4-3) 
ARTICLE V - Inspections 

Sec. 1-5-10. - Entry. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this Code or any ordinance, or whenever there is probable cause to believe that there exists an ordinance violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the City, any public inspector of the City may, upon presentation of proper credentials and upon obtaining permission of the occupant or if unoccupied, the owner, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by ordinance. In the event the occupant, or if unoccupied, the owner, refuses entry to such building or premises, or the public inspector is unable to obtain permission of such occupant or owner to enter such building or premises, the public inspector is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-5-20. - Authority to enter premises under emergency. 
    Law enforcement officers certified with the State, members of the Fire Department, other fire departments operating under a mutual assistance agreement or automatic aid agreement with the City, certified emergency medical technicians and paramedics during the course of employment with a governmental agency are hereby granted the authority to enter private residences within the City without invitation from the occupant of the residence at any time such person has reasonable grounds to believe a medical emergency is in progress within the subject premises and the occupant of such premises is incapable of consenting to the entry because of such medical emergency. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-5-30. - Announcement of purpose and authority to enter premises. 
    Unauthorized entry pursuant to Section 1-5-20 shall be permissible only after the individuals seeking entry have announced both their purpose and authority in a loud and conspicuous voice and have waited a reasonable period of time for the occupant to respond before making entry. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE VI - City Records and Seal 

Sec. 1-6-10. - Location of City offices, records. 
    The office of the City shall be located in the Cherry Hills Village Center at 2450 East Quincy Avenue, Cherry Hills Village, Arapahoe County, Colorado. All books and records of the City shall be kept in said office or, in the discretion of the City Manager or his designee, at a separate location from which the City's books and records are easily retrievable. 
(Ord. 20, 1968; prior code 1-5-5; Ord. 17 1, 2010) 
Sec. 1-6-20. - Corporate seal. 
    A seal, the impression of which is as follows: in the center the words "Corporate Seal" and around the outer edge the words "Cherry Hills Village, Colorado," shall be and hereby is declared to be the corporate seal of the City. (Prior code 1-5-4) 
ARTICLE VII - Disposition of Unclaimed Property 

Sec. 1-7-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to provide for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property which is in the possession of or under the control of the City. (Prior code 1-11-1; Ord. 10, 1992; Ord. 10, 2002) 
Sec. 1-7-20. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise required by context or use, words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Chief means the Chief of Police of the City or designee thereof. 
    Intangible property means the following: 
a.  Monies, checks, drafts, deposits, interest, dividends and income. 
b.  Credit balances, customer overpayments, gift certificates, refunds, credit memos and unidentified remittances. 
c.  Stocks and other intangible ownership interests in business associations. 
d.  Monies deposited to redeem stocks, bonds, coupons and other securities or to make distributions. 
e.  Security deposits, unpaid wages and unused airline tickets. 
f.  Amounts distributable from a trust or custodial fund established under a plan to provide health, welfare, pension, vacation, severance, retirement, death, stock purchase, profit sharing, employee savings, supplemental unemployment insurance or similar benefits. 
g.  Amounts due and payable under the terms of insurance policies. 
h.  On and after October 1, 2002, any amount due and payable as a refund of Colorado income tax. 
i.  Deposits or collateral for any City service or program, such as Municipal Court cash bonds, refundable developer deposit accounts and similar funds. 
    Intangible property does not include unclaimed capital credit payments held by cooperative electric associations and telephone cooperatives. 
    Owner means a person or governmental entity other than the City, or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of the same, which owns unclaimed property held by the City. 
    Unclaimed property means any lost, stolen, confiscated or abandoned tangible or intangible property which has been in possession of the City for a period of time as set forth in this Article. (Prior code 1-11-2; Ord. 10, 1992; Ord. 10, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 1-7-30. - Custodian of property. 
    The Chief is designated the official custodian of all unclaimed property coming into possession of the police or the City. Nothing in this Article shall be held to require the Chief to take possession of or make a disposition of any property, the disposition or possession of which is otherwise provided for in this Article. 
(Ord. 10, 2002) 
Sec. 1-7-40. - Disposition generally. 
    All unclaimed tangible property that has been delivered to the Chief for care, custody and control, not being held pending disposition of charges pursuant to Section 1-7-120 of this Article, shall be subject to disposition according to the provisions of this Article, unless otherwise ordered by any court or otherwise provided for in this Article. 
(Ord. 10, 2002) 
Sec. 1-7-50. - Notification of owner. 
    The Chief shall examine any unclaimed tangible property, and if the identity of the owner appears from such examination or if the identity of the owner is readily available to the custodian from public records available to him, or otherwise known to him, the Chief shall notify the apparent owner by letter, mailed by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of such apparent owner, within a reasonable time after identification of the apparent owner, describing the property and stating that the same is held by the City and may be sold or otherwise disposed of unless claimed within thirty (30) days of mailing of such notice. 
(Ord. 10, 2002) 
Sec. 1-7-60. - Disposal of unclaimed property. 
    If any unclaimed tangible property remains unclaimed sixty (60) days after the same is no longer required to be held as evidence pursuant to Section 1-7-110 below, sixty (60) days after the same has come into the possession of the Chief or thirty (30) days after the mailing of any letter of notice provided for in Section 1-7-50 above, such property shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  The Chief shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a public notice describing generally by category or classification those articles of property of an estimated current retail value of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Those articles of property of an estimated current retail value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more shall be described specifically. Such public notice shall state that any person who claims to be an owner of or claims any interest in any such property may appear at a location designated by the Chief and reclaim such property upon presentation of satisfactory proof of identity and ownership. 
(2)  Any such property may be sold at public sale, provided that the Chief shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a public notice setting forth the time, date and place of sale. 
(3)  Bicycles, tricycles, articles made for use by children or clothing may be sold at public sale or may, in the alternative, be given to poor, needy or institutionalized persons, as the Chief may order, by making the same available for distribution to religious, charitable, civic or other organizations or institutions. 
(4)  Such property that consists of jewelry, gems, watches, precious metals or other property having a unique value or that, in the judgment of the Chief, may bring a higher price if sold on sealed bids, may, in the discretion of the Chief, be sold either at a public sale as herein provided or to the highest bidder after solicitation of sealed bids from at least three (3) regular dealers in the particular type of property. Any person desiring to submit a sealed bid may do so. Such bids shall be opened and the property sold to the highest bidder at the time and place specified in such notice; provided, however, that the right to reject any and all bids shall be reserved, and any and all bids may be rejected if deemed too low or for any other reason. 
(5)  The City may retain for its own use and benefit that property not claimed. Property of little or no apparent value may be destroyed by the sales agent. When any property is retained by the City as provided for in this Section, it shall be added to the City's capital assets inventory in accordance with adopted City policies. (Prior code 1-11-3; Ord. 10, 1992; Ord. 10, 2002) 
Sec. 1-7-70. - Proceeds of sale. 
    All proceeds of sale shall be paid to the City Treasurer, who shall deposit the same in the general fund of the City. 
(Ord. 10, 2002) 
Sec. 1-7-80. - Failure to claim property. 
    Failure to make claim of ownership within the time limits prescribed in this Article and before the sale or donation of any article shall forever bar the owner or any person claiming ownership by, through or under the owner from making any subsequent claim of ownership. 
(Ord. 10, 2002) 
Sec. 1-7-90. - Rights of finder. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, whenever any item of tangible or intangible property has been found and delivered to the Chief for care, custody and control, such property shall be returned to the original finder whenever claim has been made by the finder and the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The claimant is a person who originally found the lost or abandoned property. 
(2)  The claimant, after surrendering the property to the custodian, has served written notice to the Chief of his intention to make a claim on that item within sixty (60) days of surrender of the item; 
(3)  Lost or abandoned property has remained unclaimed by the owner or person having a right to the tangible property for sixty (60) days after surrender of the same to the Chief or, in the case of intangible property, has remained unclaimed for one (1) year; 
(4)  The lost or abandoned property is not stolen or confiscated property, or property held under the exceptions outlined in Sections 1-7-100 through 1-7-120; and 
(5)  Any tangible or intangible property found within the City by a City employee during his working hours shall be delivered to the Chief and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this Article. Any such employee shall have no rights of a finder under this Section. 
(Ord. 10, 2002) 
Sec. 1-7-100. - Exceptions generally. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Article, objects and articles of property as described in Section 1-7-120 may be kept, held or disposed of as provided for in this Article. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to the sale of abandoned automobiles; the disposition of lost or stray animals; or the disposition of any property which is governed by the terms of any specific ordinance or applicable state statute. 
(Ord. 10, 2002) 
Sec. 1-7-110. - Property held as evidence. 
    The Chief shall keep in his custody all articles of tangible or intangible property seized or held as evidence, which property has been delivered for use in any pending or prospective court proceeding, unless otherwise ordered by a court having jurisdiction or, upon proper authorization of a prosecuting attorney, until final disposition of any pending charges, including appeals or the lapse of time for filing an appeal. Thereafter, unless ordered to the contrary by the court having jurisdiction, the Chief shall dispose of such property in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 10, 2002) 
Sec. 1-7-120. - Disposition of weapons and contraband. 
(a)  Unless ordered to the contrary by a court of competent jurisdiction or otherwise required by state or national law, firearms and other weapons which may not lawfully be kept, possessed or retained by the owner or person otherwise entitled to possession thereof, which may not otherwise lawfully be returned to the owner thereof, which are unclaimed after notice to the owner or the owner of which is not known, may be kept and retained by the Police Department for use in its training programs or otherwise disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this Section, except that antique or unique firearms, as determined by the Chief, may be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this Article. 
(b)  The Chief may destroy each and every article of the following described property: burglary tools; firearms; cartridges; explosives; armor or bulletproof clothing; dangerous weapons; gambling apparatus; medicines; beer, wine, spirituous liquors or fermented malt beverages; soiled, bloody or unsanitary clothing; solids or liquids of unknown or uncertain composition; drugs or hallucinogenic substances, hypodermic syringes and needles; obscene pictures, prints, effigies or statues; any poisonous or noxious solids or liquids; or any other property which reasonably might result in injury to the health or safety of the public or be the subject of unlawful use. 
(Ord. 10, 2002) 
Sec. 1-7-130. - Intangible property. 
(a)  The Chief is the custodian of intangible unclaimed property, except for intangible property which is being held pursuant to the provisions of Section 1-7-110, and shall keep a record of such property. 
(b)  All intangible unclaimed property in the custody and control of the Chief shall be deemed abandoned one (1) year after the date upon which it became payable or distributable. The Chief shall examine any such intangible property which has been deemed to be abandoned and, if the owner is readily ascertainable from public records available to him or otherwise known to him, the Chief shall notify the apparent owner by letter, mailed by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of such apparent owner, within a reasonable time after identification of the apparent owner, describing the intangible property and stating that the same is being held by the Chief and may be disposed of unless claimed within thirty (30) days of mailing of such notice. 
(c)  All intangible unclaimed property presumed abandoned in the custody of the Chief shall be disposed of or shall escheat to the City in the same manner and under the same procedures as tangible property under the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 10, 2002) 
CHAPTER 2 - Administration and Personnel 
ARTICLE I - Elections 

Sec. 2-1-10. - Conduct of elections. 
(a)  All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provisions contained in the City Charter. 
(b)  The City shall utilize the requirements and procedures of the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965, Section 31-10-101 et seq., C.R.S., with respect to any noncoordinated election, and the Uniform Election Code of 1992, Articles 1 to 13 of Title 1, C.R.S. with respect to any coordinated election, except to the extent that a conflict with the provisions of this Article exists, in which case the provisions of this Article shall prevail. 
(c)  The City is authorized to conduct mail ballot municipal elections and to participate in elections coordinated by Arapahoe County. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 6 1, 2004; Ord. 16 1, 2010; Ord. 4 1, 2014; Ord. 4, 1, 2016) 
Sec. 2-1-20. - Designation and description of districts. 
    The City shall be divided into six (6) Council districts; each of said districts shall consist of all the territory within the following described boundaries: 
(1)  District No. 1. Beginning at a point along the City's southern corporate boundary at the centerline of South Franklin Street, thence east along the southern corporate limits in East Belleview Avenue to the eastern line of the Cherry Hills Farm Subdivision, thence north to the southern line of the Cherryridge Subdivision, thence east to the eastern line of the Cherryridge Subdivision, thence north to the southwestern corner of the Petry-Garnsey Resubdivision, thence west to the centerline of South University Boulevard, thence north to the centerline of East Quincy Avenue, thence west along the centerline of East Quincy Avenue to South Franklin Street, thence south along the centerline of South Franklin Street to the point of beginning. 
(2)  District No. 2. Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of South University Boulevard and East Quincy Avenue, thence west along the centerline of East Quincy Avenue to the southwestern most corner of the Cherry Hills Country Club, thence following the western boundary of the Cherry Hills Country Club generally north to the northwestern most corner of the Cherry Hills Country Club, thence north along the line of Downing Street extended, to Downing Street at East Kenyon Avenue and north to the corporate boundary in State Highway 285 (East Hampden Avenue), thence east along the corporate boundary line to the corner of South Lafayette Street and East Jefferson Avenue, thence north along the centerline of South Lafayette Street to East Hampden Avenue, thence east along the corporate limit in East Hampden Avenue and State Highway 285, thence south along the High Line Canal east and north property line to the centerline of South Colorado Boulevard, thence south to the centerline of East Quincy Avenue, thence west along the centerline of East Quincy Avenue to the northwest corner of the Polichio Subdivision, thence south along the eastern boundary of the Polichio Subdivision to the southwest corner of the Polichio Subdivision, thence west along the southern boundaries of the Polichio Subdivision, Petry-Garnesy Resubdivision, Meade Subdivision, and Hutchison-Seglke Park Minor Lot Adjustment Subdivision to the centerline of South University Boulevard, thence north along the centerline of South University Boulevard to the point of beginning. 
(3)  District No. 3. Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of East Quincy Avenue and South Colorado Boulevard, thence north along the centerline of South Colorado Boulevard to the north and east property line of the High Line Canal, thence north along the north and east property line of the High Line Canal to the intersection of the centerline of East Mansfield Avenue extended, thence east to and along the centerline of East Mansfield Avenue to the centerline of South Bellaire Street, thence south along the centerline of South Bellaire Street, around the curve to join the centerline of East Oxford Place, thence east along the centerline of East Oxford Place to the centerline of East Oxford Avenue, thence east along the centerline of East Oxford Avenue to the centerline of South Dahlia Street, thence east to the southwest corner of the Cherry Hills North Subdivision, thence east along the southern border of the Cherry Hills North Subdivision to the centerline of South Holly Street, thence south along the centerline of South Holly Street and South Holly Street extended to Union Avenue, thence west to the northwest corner of the SE 1/4, Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, thence south along the quarter-section line of the SE 1/4, Township 5 South, Range 67 West (South Dahlia Street) to the corporate boundary in East Belleview Avenue, thence west along the corporate boundary in East Belleview Avenue to the western edge of the Glenmoor Subdivision, thence north to the southern line of the Cherryridge Subdivision, thence east to the southeast corner of the Cherryridge Subdivision, thence north to the southwestern corner of the Petry-Garnsey Resubdivision, thence east to the southeastern corner of the Polichio Subdivision, thence north along the centerline of South Monroe Street to the centerline of East Quincy Avenue, thence east along the centerline of East Quincy Avenue to the point of beginning. 
(4)  District No. 4. Beginning at the centerline intersection of South Franklin Street and East Quincy Avenue, thence east along the centerline to the southwestern most corner of the Cherry Hills Country Club, thence following the boundary of the Cherry Hills Country Club generally north to the northwestern most corner of the Cherry Hills Country Club, thence north corner of the City, thence east along the corporate boundary in East Belleview Avenue to the along the line of Downing Street extended, to Downing Street at East Kenyon Avenue and north to the corporate boundary in State Highway 285 (East Hampden Avenue), thence west along the corporate boundary to the northern and western most corner of the City at South Clarkson Street and East Hampden Avenue, thence south along the corporate boundary in South Clarkson Street to the southwest intersection of the centerline of South Franklin Street and the corporate boundary in East Belleview Avenue, thence north along the centerline of South Franklin Street to the point of beginning. 
(5)  District No. 5. Beginning at the intersection of the southern corporate boundary and the western quarter-section line for the SE 1/4, Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, at the intersection of East Belleview Avenue and South Dahlia Street, thence east along the southern corporate boundary in East Belleview Avenue to the southeast corner of the City, thence north to the intersection of the eastern corporate boundary and the corporate boundary in Happy Canyon Drive, thence north and west along the corporate boundary in Happy Canyon Drive to the intersection of the corporate boundary on the north side of the Cherry Hills North Subdivision, thence south along South Holly Street extended to Union Avenue, thence west to the northwest corner of the SE 1/4, Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, thence south along the quarter-section line of the SE 1/4, Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West to the point of beginning. 
(6)  District No. 6. Beginning at the intersection of the northern corporate boundary and the eastern property line (extended) of the High Line Canal, thence south and east along the High Line Canal property line to the centerline of East Mansfield Avenue, thence east along the centerline of East Mansfield Avenue to the centerline of South Bellaire Street, thence south along the centerline of South Bellaire Street, around the curve to join the centerline of East Oxford Place, thence east along the centerline of East Oxford Place to the centerline of East Oxford Avenue, thence east along the centerline of East Oxford Avenue to the intersection of South Dahlia Street, thence east to the southwest corner of the Cherry Hills North Subdivision, thence east along the southern border of the Cherry Hills North Subdivision to the southeast corner of the Cherry Hills North Subdivision and then to the centerline of South Holly Street, thence north along South Holly Street extended to the north line of the Cherry Hills North Subdivision, thence west along the northern boundary of the Cherry Hills North Subdivision to the intersection of the corporate boundary in the East Mansfield Avenue and South Dahlia Street intersection, thence north along the corporate boundary in South Dahlia Street to the intersection of the corporate boundary in the South Dahlia Street/East Hampden Avenue/Happy Canyon Road intersection, thence west along the corporate boundary in Hampden Avenue to the point of beginning. (Ord. 11 1, 2012) 
Sec. 2-1-30. - Annexed lands; district boundaries. 
    In the event that one (1) or more of several contemplated or pending annexations to the City are consummated, the annexed territory or territories shall fall within the applicable Council districts as above described. (Prior code 1-8-2; Ord. 7, 1981) 
Sec. 2-1-40. - Write-in candidate affidavit. 
    No write-in vote for any City elective office shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the City Clerk by the person whose name is written in as specified in the Municipal Election Code or Uniform Election Code as applicable, indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of the office, if elected. 
(Prior code 1-8-3; Ord. 6, 1996; Ord. 16 2, 2010; Ord. 4 2, 2014; Ord. 4 2, 2016) 
Sec. 2-1-50. - Cancellation of election. 
(a)  A regular or special municipal election may be cancelled when the ballot contains no questions for the electorate to determine the passage or defeat thereof and there is not more than one (1) candidate per seat to be filled at such election, including candidates filing affidavits of intent as set forth in Section 2-1-40. The City Council may by resolution delegate to the City Clerk the authority to cancel said elections as specified in the Municipal Election Code or Uniform Election Code as applicable, and to declare the candidates elected. Upon such declaration, the candidates shall be deemed elected. 
(b)  Notice of such cancellation of the municipal election shall be published forthwith in the legal newspaper of the City and posted at the Village Center in order to inform the electorates. 
(Prior code 1-8-4; Ord. 6, 1996; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 16 3, 2010; Ord. 4 3, 2014; Ord. 4 3, 2016) 
ARTICLE II - Mayor and City Council 

Sec. 2-2-10. - Rules of procedure. 
    The City Council shall prescribe from time to time, by resolution or motion, rules of procedure governing its meetings and other activities. 
(Prior code 1-5-1) 
Sec. 2-2-20. - Boards and commissions. 
    The City Council shall create and appoint members to such boards and commissions as may now or hereafter exist, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Board of Adjustment and Appeals; and 
(2)  Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE III - Officers and Employees 

Sec. 2-3-10. - Appointed officers. 
(a)  The following officers of the City shall be appointed by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of the City Charter: 
(1)  City Manager; 
(2)  City Attorney; 
(3)  City Clerk; 
(4)  City Treasurer; and 
(5)  Municipal Judge. 
(b)  Said officers shall hold their respective offices until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the City Council. (Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-3-20. - Powers and duties of officers. 
    Appointed officers of the City shall have such power and perform such duties as are now or hereafter may be prescribed by the City Charter and state law, shall further perform any additional duties required by the City Council, and shall be subject to the control and orders of the City Council. (Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-3-30. - Oath of office; bond. 
(a)  When required by the City Council, every appointed official, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation before entering upon the duties of his office, that he will support the Constitutions and laws of the United States and the State and the City Charter and ordinances of the City, and faithfully perform the duties of his office. 
(b)  The Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk shall have authority to administer oaths and affirmations. 
(c)  Pursuant to Section 13.4 of the City Charter, prior to entering upon the duties of his office or employment, any officer or employee other than the Municipal Judge who handles City funds shall obtain and file with the Clerk a fidelity bond from a bonding company authorized to do business in the State in the amount of not less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) nor more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), as specified from time to time by the City Council. (Prior code 1-5-2, 1-5-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-3-40. - City Manager. 
(a)  Appointment. The City Council may, by majority vote with the express concurrence of the Mayor, or by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority vote of the entire City Council without his concurrence, appoint a City Manager who shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the City. Such appointment shall be without definite term and at a salary to be fixed by the City Council. The City Manager shall be chosen by the Mayor and the Council on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with particular emphasis on actual experience and knowledge of the accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. No Mayor or Council member shall be appointed City Manager during or within one (1) year after the termination of his term as Mayor or Council member. 
(b)  General powers and duties: As authorized by Section 5.7 of the Charter. the City Manager shall have all of the duties and powers enumerated in Section 5.4 of the Charter. except as set forth in Sections 5.4(i) and 5.4(m). The City Manager shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City placed in his charge, and to that end he shall have the power and duty and be required to: 
(1)  Be responsible for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances of the City. 
(2)  Appoint, suspend, discipline and remove all employees of the City, except as otherwise provided herein, subject to the personnel rules and regulations of the City adopted by the City Council. 
(3)  Make appointments on the basis of executive and administrative ability and the training and experience of such appointees in the work which they are to perform. 
(4)  Prepare a proposed budget annually and submit it to the City Council, and be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption. 
(5)  Upon request of the City Council, make written or verbal reports at any time concerning the affairs of the City under his supervision. 
(6)  Keep the City Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the City Council for adoption as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(7)  Exercise supervision and control over all executive and administrative departments and recommend to the City Council any proposal he thinks advisable to establish, consolidate or abolish administrative departments. 
(8)  Be responsible for the enforcement of all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City in any contract of public utility franchise, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof, report the same to the City Council for such action and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the same. 
(9)  Attend Council meetings and participate in discussions with the City Council in an advisory capacity. 
(10)  Inform the public concerning plans and activities of the City. 
(11)  Establish a system of accounting and auditing for the City which shall reflect the financial condition and financial operation of the City. 
(12)  Provide for engineering, architectural, maintenance, construction, work, equipment and services required by the City. 
(13)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance, required by the City Council, and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section. 
(c)  Power to appoint and remove officers and employees. The City Council shall retain the power as set forth in the City Charter to appoint and remove the City Attorney, the Municipal Judge, the members of City boards and commissions and the City Manager. The City Manager shall be delegated the power to appoint and remove the City Clerk, City Treasurer and Public Works Director, subject only to a majority concurrence of the Mayor and City Council. The City Manager shall also be delegated the exclusive power to appoint and remove all employees of the City other than those previously listed in this Section. This exclusive power of the City Manager to appoint and remove other City employees may be delegated by the City Manager and is subject to the provisions of the personnel rules and regulations adopted by the City Council. 
(d)  Relationship with City Council. The Mayor and members of the City Council shall deal with that portion of the administration for which the City Manager is responsible through the City Manager. Directives issued by the Mayor or individual members of the City Council affecting the area of responsibility of the City Manager and the administration of any such departments shall be made so as to direct the City Manager to accomplish the necessary orders. Should such individual directives not be in conformance with the general policies of the City Council, the City Manager shall seek clarification by the City Council as a whole. 
(e)  Absence of City Manager. To perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability, the City Manager shall designate, by letter filed with the City Clerk, a qualified administrative City employee. In the event of failure of the City Manager to make such a designation, the City Council may by resolution appoint a qualified administrative City employee to perform the duties of the City Manager until he returns or the disability shall cease. 
(f)  Removal from office. The City Council may, at its pleasure, at a regular meeting or properly called special meeting, by majority vote with the express concurrence of the Mayor, or by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority vote of the entire Council without the concurrence of the Mayor, remove the City Manager from office and any such powers and duties previously delegated to him. 
(Ord. 11, 1978; prior code 1-6-1-1-6-6; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 3 1, 2015 ) 
Sec. 2-3-50. - Code enforcement. 
(a)  Definitions. Unless otherwise required by context or use, words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Code enforcement means the act of carrying out and implementing the laws and regulations contained in this Code. 
    Code Enforcement Officer means a City employee who is a designated specialist to enforce Chapters 7, 10, 11, 13, 16, 18 and 19 of this Code. 
(b)  Authority. Code Enforcement Officers are appointed as limited and restricted peace officers with authority only for the purpose of investigating, issuing and serving summonses and complaints for offenses committed in violation of the particular Chapters they are empowered to enforce and such traffic regulations as they may be assigned to enforce under the provisions of Section 8-1-30(1) of this Code. 
(c)  Restrictions. The aforementioned limited appointments do not permit the designated appointees to carry firearms, make arrests or exercise any other duties of law enforcement officers, except as herein provided; however, the appointees shall be included in the definition of peace officers or firemen engaged in the performance of their duties within the meaning of Section 18-3-201, C.R.S., and Sections 10-2-50 and 10-2-70 of this Code, even though such employees, by their limited appointments as specified in Subsection (b) above, are not subject to certification requirements of Part 93, Article 31, Title 24, C.R.S. (Prior code 1-14-1-1-14-3; Ord. 6, 1991; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 02 1, 2008) 
Sec. 2-3-60. - Social Security. 
(a)  It is hereby considered the opinion of this body that the extension of the Social Security System to employees and officers of the City will be of great benefit, not only to the employees of the City by providing that said employees and officers may participate in the provisions of the Old-Age and Survivors' Disability and Health Insurance System, but will also be of great benefit to the City by enabling it to attract and retain in employment the best personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its government. 
(b)  The 38th General Assembly of the State of Colorado, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as House Bill No. 291, which is the enabling act provided for in Section 218 of Public Law 734, 81st Congress, which designated the Department of Employment Security, State of Colorado, to act as the Department to implement the coverage of employees and officers under the Old-Age Survivors' Insurance System. The City is hereby authorized to execute and deliver to the Department of Employment Security, State of Colorado, a plan or plans and agreement, required under Section 5 of said enabling Act and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and officers of the City and do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the Old-Age and Survivors' Insurance System. 
(c)  The City Clerk is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll deductions to be matched by payments by the City to be paid into the Contribution Fund of the State through the Department of Employment Security, and to make charges of this tax to the funds from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the City. Such payments are to be made in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1400 and 1410 of the Federal Insurance Contribution Act on all services which constitute employment within the meaning of the Act. Payments made to the Department of Employment Security, State of Colorado, shall be due and payable on or before the 15th day of the month immediately following the completed calendar quarter, and such payments which are delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of one-half of one percent (.5%) per month until such time as payments are made. 
(d)  Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the City in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution fund as provided in Section 5(c)(1) of the enabling Act and in accordance with the plan or plans and agreement. 
(e)  Authority is given to the Mayor and the City Clerk to enter into an agreement with the Department of Employment Security, State of Colorado, which agreement shall be in accordance with House Bill No. 291, and with Paragraph 218 of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that the participation of this City shall be in effect as of January 1, 1965. (Ord. 11, 1964; prior code 1-12-1) 
ARTICLE IV - Municipal Court 

Sec. 2-4-10. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
    Court means the Municipal Court. 
    Judge means the Municipal Judge. 
    Nonviolent municipal ordinance or Code offense means a municipal ordinance or Code offense which does not involve the use or threat of physical force on or to a person in the commission of an offense. (Prior code 1-9-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-4-20. - Creation of Municipal Court. 
    A qualified Municipal Court of record in and for the City is hereby created and established pursuant to and governed by the provisions of state law. The Court shall set a policy and fee schedule for the transcriptions of such records and procedures for appeals. (Prior code 1-9-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-4-30. - Original jurisdiction. 
    The Municipal Court shall have original jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases arising under the provisions of the City Charter, this Code or ordinances of the City, with full power to carry the same into effect and to punish violations thereof by imposition of such fines and penalties as are prescribed in this Code or by ordinance. (Prior code 1-9-5; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-4-40. - Appointment and qualifications of Municipal Judge. 
(a)  The Municipal Court shall be presided over by a Municipal Judge, appointed by the City Council, for a term to be at the pleasure of the City Council. If the Judge is absent or unable to act in any manner or case, the City Council shall appoint one (1) or more alternate judges with the same qualifications as required for the Municipal Judge. Every appointment of a judge or alternate judge shall be in writing. The Municipal Judge shall supervise and direct the Court's operation. 
(b)  The Municipal Judge (including alternate judges) shall be a citizen of the United States, over the age of thirty (30) years, a person duly licensed to practice law in the State with at least five (5) years' experience as a practicing attorney or judge, a resident of the County and, in the opinion of the City Council, an individual of good moral character with judicial temperament. (Prior code 1-9-3) 
Sec. 2-4-50. - Oath of office and bond. 
(a)  Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Municipal Judge shall take, subscribe and file with the City Council an oath or affirmation that he will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution and laws of the State and the City Charter and ordinances of the City, and will faithfully perform the duties of his office. 
(b)  The Municipal Judge shall be bonded for faithful performance and fiduciary responsibilities by the City through its normal insurance coverages. (Prior code 1-9-3) 
Sec. 2-4-60. - Court Clerk. 
(a)  The Municipal Court Clerk and Deputy Clerks shall be appointed by the City Manager with the assent of the Municipal Judge. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of their offices, the Municipal Court Clerk and Deputy Clerks shall take and subscribe before the City Clerk and file with him an oath or affirmation that they will support the Constitutions of the United States and of the State and the City Charter and ordinances of the City, and will faithfully perform the duties of their offices. 
(c)  The Municipal Court Clerk and Deputy Clerks shall be bonded for faithful performance and fiduciary responsibilities by the City through its normal insurance coverages. 
(d)  The Municipal Court Clerk shall collect and receive all fines, fees, penalties, costs and other sums receivable by or payable to the Municipal Court or any of the Municipal Judges thereof in their official capacity, and shall give receipt for the same. The Municipal Court Clerk shall prepare all writs, notices and other papers pertaining to the business of the Court. Deputy Clerks of the Court may be appointed and shall have such authority to exercise such of the functions, powers and duties of the Municipal Court Clerk as shall be prescribed. The Municipal Court Clerk shall also keep a register of the actions in the Municipal Court, including all fees and monies collected, and an index thereof. The Municipal Court Clerk shall also prepare and keep dockets for the Municipal Court in which the judgments in each case shall be recorded, together with such other entries and memoranda of proceedings as are required by law. 
(e)  It is the duty of the Municipal Court Clerk to make and file monthly with the City Manager and the Municipal Judge a report of the preceding month, a copy of which shall also be filed with the City Clerk. This report shall be designed by the Municipal Court Clerk with consent of the City Manager and the Municipal Judge, and must include at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  The total number of complaints filed and processed; 
(2)  The total number of convictions, acquittals and dismissals; 
(3)  The total number of jury trials and trials to the Court; and 
(4)  The total monies collected. (Prior code 1-9-4; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-4-70. - Sessions generally. 
(a)  Sessions of Court. There shall be regular sessions of the Municipal Court for trial of cases as may be fixed by the Municipal Judge. The Municipal Judge shall hear and determine complaints for the violation of any ordinance or this Code where there is probable cause to believe that an offense has been committed. It shall be lawful for the Municipal Judge to hold a special session of Court at any time, including Sundays, holidays and evenings, if in the discretion of the Municipal Judge a special session is deemed advisable. The hours of Municipal Court shall be set by the Municipal Judge, subject to approval of the City Council. All sessions in Court shall be open to the public. 
(b)  Where the nature of the case is such that it would be in the best interest of justice to exclude persons not directly connected with the proceedings, the Municipal Judge may order that the courtroom be cleared. (Prior code 1-9-6; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-4-80. - Powers of Court. 
    The Municipal Court shall have power to compel attendance of witnesses and to punish for contempt of such Court as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code, and shall have all powers incident to a court of record and as permitted by state law in relation to same. The Municipal Court shall have the additional power and authority as listed below: 
(1)  Stay. In the discretion of the Municipal Judge, a stay of execution may be granted to enable the defendant to pay the fine or penalty at a later date or in installments, or to delay incarceration temporarily. In case the defendant shall not have met the terms of the stay of execution, execution shall issue and the defendant shall be placed in jail until said sentence is satisfied. 
(2)  Sentence suspended. Unless otherwise provided, the Municipal Judge is authorized to suspend the payment of any fine, or any part thereof, assessed for a violation of this Code, and he may suspend all or any part of any jail sentence and place the violator on probation for a period not to exceed one (1) year. 
(3)  Court costs. The Municipal Judge is empowered in his discretion to assess costs against any defendant who, after trial, is found guilty of a violation of this Code. Such costs shall be set at up to fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a trial to the Court and up to forty-five dollars ($45.00) for a trial by jury. 
(4)  Jury fee. Any defendant who requests a jury trial shall be assessed a jury fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If the defendant is found not guilty at trial, this jury fee shall be returned. If the defendant is found guilty, the jury fee shall be retained by the Court and credited toward any court costs or jury expenses imposed by the Court. 
(5)  A gasoline surcharge of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be imposed for all violations of the City Charter, the City Code or any ordinances of the City resulting in a conviction, a deferred prosecution, a deferred judgment and sentence or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere. Whenever a fine is doubled as specified in the City Code, the surcharge shall also be double the amount specified in this Subsection. This gasoline surcharge shall be mandatory and be in addition to any other surcharge, fine or cost imposed by this Code or the Court. The surcharge levied by this Subsection may not be suspended or waived by the Court unless the Court determines that the defendant is indigent. As gasoline prices may change over time, the City Council may modify the amount of the surcharge specified in this Subsection by resolution. 
(6)  Witnesses. The defendant and the City shall be entitled to compel the attendance of any witnesses subject to the jurisdiction of the Court. Subpoenas shall be issued and served pursuant to Court rule. All witnesses under subpoena shall be entitled to a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day, but not mileage, and such witness fees shall be paid by the party requesting the attendance of the witness and taxed as costs of the suit. Failure to obey a subpoena without adequate excuse shall constitute contempt of court punishable as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(7)  Detention. Every person against whom any fine or penalty is assessed who refuses or neglects to pay the same when demanded may be committed in default thereof to the County jail or such other enclosure as may from time to time be designated by the City Council as a lawful place for the detention of prisoners, under the direction of the proper officers, until said fine or penalty is fully paid. Satisfaction shall be allowed at a rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per day of twenty-four (24) hours. Any such person may be required to do any reasonable work; provided, however, that no single term of imprisonment for any one (1) violation shall exceed ninety (90) days. The Court shall discharge such person from further imprisonment for such fine when it is satisfactorily shown that such person has no means to pay such fine. 
(8)  Collection of fine imposed. The Municipal Court may, in order to guarantee payment of any fine imposed for the commission of a nonviolent or Code offense, where the person who committed the offense is unable to pay the fine at the time of hearing or fails to pay such fine, compel collection of the fine in the manner provided in Section 18-1-110, C.R.S. (Prior code 1-9-5; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 1, 2004; Ord. 16 1, 2008) 
Sec. 2-4-90. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  Rules. In addition to other powers, the Municipal Judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and regulations for conducting the business of the Municipal Court, not inconsistent with any uniform rules and regulations hereafter adopted by the Colorado Supreme Court. Any rules that conflict with the Rules of Procedure for Municipal Courts hereafter promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court shall be null and void to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  Examine complaints. The Municipal Judge shall receive and examine affidavits and complaints, at all times, for the violation of any ordinance or this Code, and shall issue a summons or warrant in every case where there is probable cause to believe an offense has been committed. 
(c)  Commencement of action. An action for the violation of any ordinance or this Code shall be brought in the name of the People of the State of Colorado, ex rel. the City of Cherry Hills Village, against the person who is alleged to have violated the ordinances as defendant, and shall be commenced by: 
(1)  Issuance of a summons and complaint; 
(2)  Issuance of a summons following the filing of a complaint; 
(3)  Filing of a complaint following an arrest; or 
(4)  Filing of a summons and complaint following arrest. 
Each act or series of related acts committed by the same person constituting a violation of any ordinances may be consolidated for the purpose of filing a complaint, issuing and serving summonses and subpoenas, trial and appeal, but the Municipal Judge shall impose a separate fine or penalty for each offense of which the defendant is convicted. 
(d)  Content and use of complaint, summons, warrant and subpoenas. The content, form and use of the complaint, summons, warrant and subpoena shall be provided by rule of the Municipal Court. 
(e)  Bail. The general terms, requirements and conditions of bail, including posting of bond, shall be provided by Municipal Court rule. Pursuant to said rules, the terms and conditions of bail and bond shall be vested in the discretion of the Municipal Court in light of the circumstances of each case. (Prior code 1-9-6; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-4-100. - Contempt power. 
(a)  When the Court finds any person to be in contempt, the Court may vindicate its dignity by imposing on the contemnor a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and imprisonment not to exceed a term of ninety (90) days. 
(b)  In cases of indirect contempt, the alleged contemnor shall have all the rights, privileges, safeguards and protections of a defendant in a petty offense case, including but not limited to a formal written complaint, arraignment and trial by jury. (Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-4-110. - General Violations Bureau. 
(a)  Created, duties. The Municipal Judge shall establish within the Municipal Court a General Violations Bureau to assist the Court with the clerical work and handling and expediting routine cases of alleged violations of the City ordinances and this Code. 
(b)  Designation of offenses for which bureau may receive payments of fines. The Municipal Judge, from time to time, shall designate those offenses under the City ordinances and this Code in respect to which payments or fines may be accepted by the General Violations Bureau in satisfaction thereof, shall specify schedules setting out the amounts of such fines for first, second or subsequent offenses, provided that such fines are within the limit declared by this Code, and shall further specify what number of such offenses shall require appearance before the Municipal Court. 
(c)  Option to appear before Judge and pay fine or upon plea of not guilty be entitled to trial. Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine may be made to the General Violations Bureau shall have the option of paying such fine within the time specified within the notice or the summons and complaint at the General Violations Bureau upon entering a plea of guilty in writing and upon waiving appearance in Court; or, upon a plea of not guilty, shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by law. (Prior code 1-9-7; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-4-120. - Appeals; bond. 
(a)  When any defendant is appealing from any judgment of the Municipal Court and desires to stay the judgment of the Municipal Court, the defendant shall execute a bond to the City in the amount of double the judgment but not less than a total of fifty dollars ($50.00), and not more than two dollars ($2.00) per day of the sentence. 
(b)  The form of the bond shall be as follows: 
IN THE MUNICIPAL COURT 
FOR THE CITY OF CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE 
AND THE STATE OF COLORADO 
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF 
COLORADO, ex rel. THE CITY OF 
CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE, 
APPEAL BOND 
vs. 
MUNICIPAL CASE NO. _____ 
      DEFENDANT   KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that we, ___________________, as principal and _________________ as suret(y)(ies), are held and firmly bound unto the City of Cherry Hills Village in the penal sum of $_________ Dollars, lawful money of the United States, for the payment of which sum well and truly to be made, we and each of us bind ourselves, our heirs, executors and administrators, and our successors and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents. Witness our hands and seals this _____ day of ______________, 20__. 
    THE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE OBLIGATION IS SUCH that, whereas, the said ________________, Defendant, on the _____ day of _____________, 20__, before ________________, Judge of Municipal Court, in and for the City of Cherry Hills Village and State of Colorado, was fined in the sum of $__________, and/or was sentenced to _____ days in the County Jail, and costs in the amount of $_________ in which case bond has been set at the sum of $______ from which judgment the said Defendant has taken an Appeal to the District Court in the County of Arapahoe and the State of Colorado. 
    NOW THEREFORE, IF SAID _______________, Defendant, shall prosecute said appeal with effect and shall pay whatever fine or serve whatever jail sentence ordered by the Court upon said Appeal, or upon the acquittal of said Defendant, the above obligation to be void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
    APPROVED BY ME AT MY OFFICE THIS _____ day of _____________, 20___. 
      MUNICIPAL JUDGE         (Date)   
      CLERK OF MUNICIPAL COURT         (Date)   (c)  The bond shall be executed by the defendant-appellant as principal and by two (2) sureties, or by one (1) if such surety is a surety company or association authorized by law to execute such bond, to be approved by the Court. 
(d)  The necessity for sureties may be dispensed with by the Municipal Court if the defendant-appellant executes such bond as principal and deposits with the Court the amount of the bond in cash or certified funds. (Prior code 1-9-8; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 2, 2004) 
Sec. 2-4-130. - Trial by jury. 
(a)  Trial by Court. If any defendant pleads guilty or waives his right to a jury trial or fails to demand a jury trial, the Municipal Judge shall hear the evidence and render a judgment thereon. 
(b)  Jury trial. Cases shall be tried to the Municipal Court unless the defendant demands trial by jury and is so entitled under the Constitution or general laws of the State. The number and qualifications of jurors, together with the provisions for challenging jurors or the array, shall be as provided by Court rule. 
(1)  Method of summoning jurors. Upon demand of the defendant for trial by jury, the Municipal Judge shall cause the Court Clerk, who shall serve ex officio as Jury Commissioner, to obtain a jury panel for the date and time of jury trial. The Jury Commissioner shall randomly select the names of at least four (4) times the number of jurors needed for trial. The Jury Commissioner, at least ten (10) days prior to trial, shall mail a jury summons in the form set forth below to each named individual. The Jury Commissioner also is authorized to require completion by residents of jury questionnaire forms. 
JUROR'S SUMMONS 
STATE OF COLORADO             ) 
) ss. 
CITY OF CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE ) 
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF COLORADO, ex rel . THE CITY OF CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE, 
    To _________________ greetings: You are hereby summoned to be and appear before the Municipal Court of the City of Cherry Hills Village at the Village Center, 2450 East Quincy Avenue, in the City of Cherry Hills Village, on ________________ at _______ o'clock ___.m., to serve therein as a Petit Juror, and herein fall not under penalty of the law. 
    Dated at Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, ____________________, 
      Jury Commissioner   (2)  Juror failing to appear; penalty. If any person summoned as a juror shall fail, neglect or refuse to appear without reasonable excuse, he shall be deemed guilty of contempt and punished as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. The Municipal Court shall have authority to issue a citation directed to the Chief of Police commanding him forthwith to bring before such Court the body of any juror failing to attend and for such juror to show cause why he should not be punished for contempt. On appearance of such juror on such citation, it shall be lawful for the Court to punish him for contempt or wholly discharge him if a satisfactory excuse is made. 
(3)  Jury fees. Persons summoned to jury duty pursuant to this Article shall be entitled to a juror's fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day during the jury selection process; those persons selected for jury service shall be entitled to a juror's fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per day of such service in lieu of the five-dollar fee. 
(4)  Discharge of jurors. The term of jury service shall be indicated in the juror's summons, and a person who has actually been in attendance as a juror in the Court as ordered for the period of time ordered shall be discharged by the Court. No juror shall be discharged until the close of the trial in which he may be serving, and if the selection of a jury in any case has begun, the Court shall have authority to retain the panel until such jury is selected and sworn. (Prior code 1-9-9; Ord. 1, 1990; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 3, 2004; Ord. 04 1, 2008) 
ARTICLE V - Police Department 

Sec. 2-5-10. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Police Department for the City, which shall consist of one (1) Chief of Police and as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the City. (Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-5-20. - Departmental regulations. 
    The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-5-30. - Chief of Police; appointment and duties. 
(a)  The City Manager shall appoint a Chief of Police who shall be the head of the Police Department. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to: 
(1)  See that the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State are duly enforced and the rules and regulations of the Police Department obeyed, and perform such duties as may be required by the City Council. 
(2)  Direct the operations of the Police Department, subject to the rules and regulations thereof. 
(3)  Arrest any person violating any of the City ordinances and take such violator before the Municipal Court for trial. 
(4)  Render such accounts of the Police Department, his duties and receipts as may be required by the City Council, and keep the records of his office open to inspection by the City Council at any time. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of such office, the Chief of Police shall take and subscribe to an oath that he will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution and laws of the State and ordinances of the City, and that he will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he is about to enter. (Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-5-40. - Duties of police officers. 
    All members of the Police Department shall have power and duties as follows: 
(1)  They shall perform all duties required by the Chief of Police. 
(2)  They shall be the enforcement officers of the City and shall see that the provisions of the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State are complied with. 
(3)  They shall execute and return all writs and processes to them directed by the Municipal Judge in any case arising under a City ordinance, and they may serve the same in any part of the County. (Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 2-5-50. - Oath of officers. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, each police officer shall take and subscribe an oath that he will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution and laws of the State and the ordinances of the City, and that he will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he is about to enter. (Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE VI - Planning and Zoning Commission 

Sec. 2-6-10. - Powers and duties 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission, created by Section 8.3 of the City Charter, shall have all of the powers and perform all of the duties specified in the Charter and this Code, including the following: 
(1)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall maintain a Master Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the Master Plan as often as it deems appropriate but no less frequently than once every ten (10) years. In addition to reviews initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission, City Council may at any time direct the Planning and Zoning Commission to review one or more provisions of the Master Plan. Following any review of the Master Plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall submit to City Council findings, recommendations, and amendments, if any, which Council may adopt, modify, or reject. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall implement the provisions of Chapters 16 and 17 of this Code and shall perform all functions and powers referred to in said chapters where reference is made. 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall study and recommend to the City Council amendments to the Zoning Map of the City. 
(4)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall study and recommend appropriate zoning classifications for all annexations to the City. 
(5)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall exchange information with the various governmental agencies charged with planning and zoning responsibilities and with the Board of Adjustment. 
(6)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have all other duties and powers incidental to the above and any and all powers and duties set out by state statute, except that nothing herein shall: 
a.  Limit the City Council's authority to approve, modify or reject the Master Plan; or 
b.  Permit the Planning and Zoning Commission to make amendments or changes in the zoning of the City, such powers expressly being reserved by the City Council. 
(7)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have such other duties as assigned by the City Council, by motion, from time to time, except that nothing herein shall permit the Planning and Zoning Commission to assume powers expressly reserved for the City Council. 
(8)  Except as superseded or modified by this Chapter, the provisions of Parts 2 and 3, Article 23, Title 31, C.R.S., shall apply to the Planning and Zoning Commission.(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 4 1, 2009; Ord. 4, 1, 2019) 
Sec. 2-6-20. - Members; appointment. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members who reside in the City, none of whom shall be ex officio members by reason of any elective office held with the City. (Ord. 4, 1973; prior code 2-1-1; Ord. 2, 1981; Ord. 4, 1987) 
Sec. 2-6-30. - Terms of office; organization. 
(a)  The terms of office of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be for overlapping terms of three (3) years as provided by the City Charter. Each member shall therefore be appointed for a three-year term with terms expiring the third Tuesday in September of each year. 
(b)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect its chairman from among the appointed members and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt rules for transaction of its business and keep record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. (Prior code 2-1-2; Ord. 4, 1987; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 07 1, 2008) 
Sec. 2-6-40. - Meetings. 
    Meetings shall be held as the business of the Planning and Zoning Commission requires. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide in its rules for the time and place of its regular meetings and the manner of calling special meetings. (Ord. 8, 1966; prior code 2-1-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE VII - Reserved 
ARTICLE VIII - Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 

Sec. 2-8-10. - Purpose. 
(a)  The Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission has been established to advise City Council on matters related to parks, trails, recreation and open space within the community. The Commission shall meet at the direction of City Council for the following specific reasons: 
(1)  To make recommendations with the purpose of improving and maintaining the City's park and open space system consistent with the provisions of Chapter 11, Article III of this Code; 
(2)  To evaluate and make recommendations concerning the acquisition of additional trails, trail connections, pocket parks, wildlife refuge areas, protected view areas, open space parks and recreational parks; 
(3)  To make recommendations with the purpose of protecting and maintaining the streams and water features that exist in the City; 
(4)  To review and make recommendations on the Recreation Reimbursement Program to meet the recreation needs of the community; 
(5)  To make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission concerning the adoption of that portion of a Master Plan concerning park and trail development; 
(6)  To recommend annual budget priorities to the City Council for capital projects related to parks, trails, open space and recreation; 
(7)  To develop and recommend an annual recreation and event program and budget to the City Council; and 
(8)  To recommend long-range financing plans for open space acquisition; 
(b)  The Commission shall meet in accordance with the provisions of this Code to provide recommendations to the City Council on: 
(1)  To review and make comments and recommendations on preliminary plat subdivision development applications concerning the dedication of land, in accordance with Chapter 17 of this Code; and 
(2)  To act in accordance with any other duties as required by other provisions of this Code as enacted by the City Council from time to time. 
(c)  In addition, the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission shall have such other duties as assigned by the City Council, by motion, from time to time, except that nothing herein shall permit the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission to assume powers expressly reserved for the City Council. (Ord. 02 1, 2006) 
Sec. 2-8-20. - Members; appointment. 
    The Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission shall consist of seven (7) members: one (1) from each Council district; and one (1) member appointed by the City Council on an at-large basis; provided, however, that if the City Council is not reasonably able to appoint one (1) member from each Council district, the City Council may appoint one (1) or more members of the Commission on an at-large basis. Each member shall have one (1) vote. (Ord. 02 1, 2006; Ord. 10 1, 2008) 
Sec. 2-8-30. - Terms of office; organization. 
(a)  District Members: On the date of appointment, each member shall be a registered elector of the City for at least three (3) years immediately preceding the date of appointment. Each member shall be a resident of the district on the date of appointment and throughout his or her term of office. Each member shall be appointed by the City Council. The term of each member shall be three (3) years, and the terms shall be staggered. Initial appointments shall be as follows: 
(1)  Districts 1 and 2 shall be appointed for one-year terms. 
(2)  Districts 3 and 4 shall be appointed for two-year terms. 
(3)  Districts 5 and 6 shall be appointed for three-year terms. 
(b)  Terms: Terms of office shall expire on the third Tuesday of May in each respective year. 
(c)  Rules of Procedure: The Commission shall operate in accordance with Rules of Procedure adopted by the City Council. (Ord. 02 1, 2006; Ord. 10 2, 2008) 
Sec. 2-8-40. - Meetings. 
    Meetings shall be held at the direction of the City Council or in accordance with provisions of this Code. The City Council shall provide in the Commission's Rules of Procedure for the time and place of its regular meetings. (Ord. 02 1, 2006) 
ARTICLE IX - Code of Ethics 

Sec. 2-9-10. - Applicability. 
    This Article shall constitute the code of ethics for City personnel. It applies to all full-time and part-time elected or appointed officials and employees, whether compensated or not, including those of any separate board, commission, committee, authority, corporation or other instrumentality appointed or created by the City. The word City in this Article shall include these separate entities. (Ord. 02 1, 2007) 
Sec. 2-9-20. - Definition of personal interest. 
    For the purposes of Sections 2-9-30 and 2-9-40 below, personal interest means a direct financial interest of the official or employee, or a direct financial interest of the official's or employee's spouse or child living in the same household, in the matter to be voted upon, regulated, supervised or otherwise acted upon in an official capacity. Personal interest shall not include proposing or voting on matters affecting one (1) or more residential districts, or on other ordinances, regulations or policies of general applicability. (Ord. 03 1, 2009) 
Sec. 2-9-30. - Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote. 
    An official with the responsibility to vote on a measure shall disclose during the meeting at which the vote takes place, before the vote and so it appears in the minutes, any personal interest that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the official's vote on the measure. In addition, the official shall recuse himself from voting on the measure and refrain from influencing other members, except if necessary for a quorum and as permitted by law. (Ord. 02 1, 2007) 
Sec. 2-9-40. - Disclosure of personal interest in nonvoting matters. 
    An official or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any matter, other than casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the matter that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the exercise of the discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of the discretion when possible, the interest on a form provided by and filed with the City Clerk. In addition, the official or employee may, to the extent allowed by law, charter, ordinance or policy, recuse himself from the exercise of discretion in the matter. (Ord. 02 1, 2007) 
Sec. 2-9-50. - Acceptance of gratuities, etc. 
    An official or employee may not accept, directly or indirectly, any money, gift, gratuity or other consideration or favor of any kind from anyone other than the City: 
(1)  For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of an act, that he would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing, in the regular course of his duties; or 
(2)  That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence his action, or reward him for past action, in executing City business. (Ord. 02 1, 2007) 
Sec. 2-9-60. - Use of information. 
(a)  An official or employee may not disclose, except as authorized by law, any information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment that is made confidential by the City code, state or federal law. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or disclose information obtained in his official capacity or position of employment with the intent to result in financial gain for himself or any other person or entity. (Ord. 02 1, 2007) 
Sec. 2-9-70. - Use of City time, facilities, etc. 
(a)  An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of City time, facilities, equipment or supplies for private gain or advantage to himself. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of City time, facilities, equipment or supplies for private gain or advantage to any private person or entity, except as authorized by a legitimate contract or lease that is determined by the governing body to be in the best interests of the City. (Ord. 02 1, 2007) 
Sec. 2-9-80. - Use of position or authority. 
(a)  An official or employee may not make or attempt to make private purchases, for cash or otherwise, in the name of the City. 
(b)  An official or employee may not use or attempt to use his position to secure any privilege or exemption for himself or others that is not authorized by the Charter, general law, ordinance or City policy. (Ord. 02 1, 2007) 
Sec. 2-9-90. - Outside employment. 
    A compensated official or compensated employee may not accept or continue any outside employment if the work unreasonably inhibits the performance of any affirmative duty of the City position or conflicts with any provision of the City's Charter, Code, ordinance or policy. (Ord. 02 1, 2007) 
Sec. 2-9-100. - Ethics complaints. 
(a)  The City Attorney is designated as the ethics officer of the City. Upon the written request of an official or employee potentially affected by a provision of this Article, the City Attorney may render an oral or written advisory ethics opinion based upon this Article and other applicable law. 
(b)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection, the City Attorney shall investigate any credible complaint against an appointed official or employee charging any violation of this Article, or may undertake an investigation on his own initiative when he acquires information indicating a possible violation and make recommendations for action to end or seek retribution for any activity that, in the City Attorney's judgment, constitutes a violation of this code of ethics. The City Attorney may request that the City Council hire another attorney, individual or entity to act as ethics officer when he has or will have a conflict of interests in a particular matter. 
(2)  When a complaint of a violation of any provision of this Article is lodged against a member of the City Council, the City Council shall either determine that the complaint has merit, determine that the complaint does not have merit or determine that the complaint has sufficient merit to warrant further investigation. If the City Council determines that a complaint warrants further investigation, it shall authorize an investigation by the City Attorney or another individual or entity chosen by the City Council. 
(c)  The interpretation that a reasonable person in the circumstances would apply shall be used in interpreting and enforcing this code of ethics. 
(d)  When a violation of this code of ethics also constitutes a violation of a personnel policy, rule or regulation, the violation shall be dealt with as a violation of only the personnel provisions and not as a violation of this Article. (Ord. 02 1, 2007) 
Sec. 2-9-110. - Violations. 
    An elected official or appointed member of a separate City board, commission, committee, authority, corporation or other instrumentality who violates any provision of this Article is subject to punishment as provided by the City Charter, Code or other applicable law and, in addition, is subject to censure by City Council. An appointed official or an employee who violates any provision of this Article is subject to disciplinary action. (Ord. 02 1, 2007) 
CHAPTER 4 - Revenue and Finance 
ARTICLE I - General and Special Funds 

Sec. 4-1-10. - Custody and management of funds. 
    Monies in the funds created in this Chapter shall be in the custody of and managed by the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall maintain accounting records and account for all of said monies as provided by law. All funds or monies belonging to or in custody of the City shall be invested or deposited by the City Treasurer in such manner and in such places as the City Council may determine from time to time, by motion or resolution. All income from the assets of any fund shall become a part of the fund from which derived and shall be used for the purpose for which such fund was created; provided that, except as otherwise provided in this Code or by other ordinances or laws, the City Council may transfer out of any fund any amount at any time to be used for such purpose as the City Council may direct. 
(Ord. 15, 1968; prior code 1-10-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-1-20. - General fund. 
    The General Fund, created under the City Charter, shall consist of the following: 
(1)  All cash balances of the City not specifically belonging to any existing special fund of the City. 
(2)  All fixed assets of the City (to be separately designated in an account known as the General Fund Fixed Assets) not specifically belonging to any existing special fund of the City. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-1-30. - Conservation Trust Fund created. 
    There is hereby created a special fund, to be known as the Conservation Trust Fund, and the funds therein shall be used only for the purposes allowed by law. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-1-40. - Parks and Recreation Fund. 
    A fund is hereby created for the purpose of accounting for parks and recreation activities and shall be called the Parks and Recreation Fund. 
(Ord. 2 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-1-50. - Capital Fund. 
(a)  Revenues for the Capital Fund shall be derived from one (1) mill levy of property tax revenue as well as specific ownership tax, which may from time to time be adjusted by the City Council. 
(b)  Expenditures from the Capital Fund shall be for the purpose of paying the cost of capital assets for the City. A capital asset is defined as any public facility, piece of equipment or vehicle that costs in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), and has a useful life greater than one (1) year. Items such as police cars, public works vehicles, parks and recreation equipment, major streets and storm drainage improvements and building improvements are included in this fund. 
(Ord. 15, 1978; prior code 1-10-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003, Ord. 28 2, 2010) 
ARTICLE II - Delinquent Taxes, Fees, Assessments or Fines 

Sec. 4-2-10. - Delinquent taxes, notice, interest, penalty, lien. 
    If any tax, fee, fine, penalty or assessment imposed or assessed pursuant to a provision of this Code has not been paid in full within thirty (30) days after written notice was sent to the obligor of such imposition or assessment, the City Clerk shall issue a notice, setting forth the name of the obligor, the amount of the tax, fee, assessment, fine or penalty and the date of the accrual thereof, and that such tax, fee, assessment, fine or penalty shall be deemed to bear interest at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) from the date of accrual, and that the City claims a first and prior lien therefor on any real or tangible personal property of the obligor situated within the boundaries of the City, except as to preexisting claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filing of the notice as herein provided on property of the obligor, other than on the goods, stocks in trade and business fixtures of such obligor. Said notice shall be on forms prescribed by the City Clerk and may be filed in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder, and the filing of such notice shall create such lien on such property and constitute notice thereof. Any such lien as shown on the records of the County Clerk and Recorder, upon payment of all of the tax, fee, assessment, fine or penalty covered thereby, shall be released by the City Clerk in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released. 
(Prior code 1-13-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-2-20. - Debt to City, action taken. 
    The City Clerk may also treat any tax, fee, assessment, fine or penalty due and unpaid as a debt due the City from the obligor. In case of failure to pay such monies, or any portion thereof, and any interest thereon, when due, the City Clerk may direct the City Attorney to bring an action at law to recover the amount of such tax, fee, assessment, fine or penalty, and interest thereon, in the county or district court having jurisdiction. 
(Prior code 1-13-2) 
Sec. 4-2-30. - Writs of action, bond. 
    Such actions may be brought in attachment and writs of action may be issued by the sheriff. In any such proceeding, no bond shall be required of the City, nor shall any sheriff require of the City an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings; and the City may prosecute appeals or writs of error in such cases without providing bond therefor. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney, when instructed by the City Clerk, to commence action for the recovery of any tax, fee, assessment, fine or penalty, or interest thereon, and reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred in such action, under this Article, and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies or remedies provided by law. 
(Prior code 1-13-3) 
Sec. 4-2-40. - Nonpayment, sale of property. 
    In any case where there has been a refusal or a neglect to pay any tax, fee, assessment, fine or penalty, or interest thereon, due to the City, and notice has been filed which, under law, creates a lien upon any real property for such monies, the City Clerk may cause a civil action to be filed in the District Court of Arapahoe County to enforce the lien of the City. The Court shall decree a sale of such real property and distribute the proceeds of such sale according to the findings of such Court in respect to the interest of the parties and the City. The proceedings of such action and the manner of sale, the period for and manner of redemption from such sale and the execution of deeds of conveyance shall be in accordance with the law and practice relating to foreclosures of mortgages upon real property. In any such action, the Court may appoint a receiver of the real property involved in such action if equity so requires. 
(Prior code 1-13-4) 
Sec. 4-2-50. - Court summons. 
    The City may, at its discretion, summon to court any person who may be in violation of this Article. 
(Prior code 1-13-5; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-2-60. - Violations, false statements. 
    It shall be a violation of this Article for any person subject to a tax, fee, assessment, fine or penalty, or interest thereon, to refuse to make any return provided to be made, to make any false or fraudulent return or false statements in any return, to fail or refuse to make payment to the City of any tax, fee, assessment, fine or penalty, or interest thereon, due to the City, in any manner to evade the payment of such monies, or any part thereof; or for any person to fail or refuse to pay such monies or evade the payment thereof or to aid or abate another in any attempt to evade the payment thereof. Any person making a false return or a return containing a false statement shall have violated this Chapter and shall be subject to prosecution and the imposition of penalties as provided by law. Any person in violation of any section of this Chapter shall be subject to these same penalties. 
(Prior code 1-13-6; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-2-70. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a violation hereof and shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Prior code 1-13-7; Ord. 17, 1985; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE III - Public Works Contracting 

Sec. 4-3-10. - Definitions. 
    When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following words and phrases used in this Article shall have the following meanings: 
    Competitive bid or bidding means and includes any process or system requiring the submission of an offer, bid, proposal, statement of qualification or other information specified by the City to permit a comparative evaluation of goods or services offered to the City. 
    Construction means the process of building, altering, repairing, improving, remodeling, replacing or demolishing any land, structure or building, or other physical improvement to real property. 
    Public works or public work means any construction activity directed, undertaken or otherwise carried out by the City designed to serve some purpose of public necessity, use, convenience, health, safety or welfare, such as, but not limited to, the grading of public land or the construction of a building, structure, facility, street, trail or other public real property improvement. Public works or public work does not include maintenance, operation or repair of a public property or public improvement that is not definable by a stop or start time or by geographical limits. 
(Prior code 1-15-1; Ord. 10, 2001) 
Sec. 4-3-20. - Competitive bidding required; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this Article, all contracts for the construction of public works shall be subject to a competitive bid process in accordance with this Article. 
(b)  The following contracts are exempted from competitive bidding: 
(1)  Contracts for public work in an amount of less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(2)  Contracts for public work made available through or in cooperation with the State, its agencies and departments, or other governmental or quasi-governmental agencies, which contracts permit the City to obtain goods or services at reasonable cost or under advantageous terms and conditions. 
(3)  Contracts related to public work for services of individuals or entities possessing a high degree of professional skill, including, but not limited to, architects, engineers and attorneys. 
(4)  Contracts related to public work for goods or services that are reasonably obtainable, in the opinion of the City Manager or the City Council, only from a single or sole source due to one (1) or more factors such as, but not limited to, specialized skills, unique and relevant experience or exceptional qualifications. 
(5)  Contracts available to the City by operation of a provision of an existing contract that authorizes one (1) or more terms of renewal or extension, whether such renewal or extension includes the modification, amendment or renegotiation of price, terms or conditions. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any exemption from competitive bidding stated in Subsection (b) above, the City Council may at its discretion establish and impose a process for the submission of bids where the City Council determines that the public work is reasonably capable of satisfactory and timely completion by several prospective contractors and a competitive selection process will best serve the interests of the City. 
(Prior code 1-15-2; Ord. 10, 2001) 
Sec. 4-3-30. - Competitive bidding procedures. 
(a)  Any competitive bid process required by this Article shall include, at a minimum, a procedure for the notification or advertisement of the City's request for bids; a detailed description of the public works project subject to competitive bid; the designation of one (1) or more consultants, officials or employees responsible for coordinating the competitive bid process; procedures to be employed in the submission and the evaluation of bids; deadlines for the submission of bids; and criteria to evaluate the submitted bids. The City Manager is authorized to prepare administrative procedures consistent with this Article to implement a standardized competitive bidding procedure. 
(b)  Competitive bidding may include prequalification of a product, service, contractor or bidder based upon stated specifications or experience prior to the submission of a competitive bid. After prequalification, only bids offering the prequalified product, service or contractor or submitted by the prequalified bidder will be accepted by the City in response to a request for competitive bidding. 
(c)  Unless a different standard for the evaluation of competitive bids is expressly stated in the request for bids, the applicable standard for the evaluation for all competitive bids shall be the lowest responsive, responsible and qualified bidder. Such standard may include, but not be limited to, a comparative evaluation of the completeness and sufficiency of the bid; the qualifications and experience of the bidder and any subcontractors; quality, availability, delivery, warranty or guarantee of work; and the reasonableness of the price or cost of the offered goods and services. Price or cost alone shall not be the sole criteria for any evaluation of any competitive bid unless specifically stated in the request for bids. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of any competitive bid or competitive proposal process, the City may reject any one (1) or more bids as nonresponsive; reject all bids for any reason; modify or extend any deadline; revoke, rescind, amend or modify a request for bids; or terminate the bid process at any time. 
(Prior code 1-15-3; Ord. 10, 2001) 
Sec. 4-3-40. - Emergency contracting. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article to the contrary, when by reason of emergency or immediate public necessity it is not feasible or practicable to follow the procedures set forth in this Article or to obtain City Council approval, the City Manager is authorized on behalf of the City Council to grant authority or contract for the performance of public work made necessary by an emergency or immediate public necessity as declared by the City Manager. As soon as practical after authorizing the performance of such public work, the City Manager shall notify each member of the City Council of the emergency or immediate public necessity and of the public work authorized by the City Manager. The City Manager shall cause any authorization issued or contract made in accordance with this Section to be presented to the City Council for ratification at the City Council's next available meeting. Wherever possible, the City Manager shall solicit informal bids for public work required by emergency or immediate public necessity and shall endeavor to select the lowest responsive, responsible and qualified bidder for such public work. 
(Prior code 1-15-4; Ord. 10, 2001) 
Sec. 4-3-50. - Bonding requirements. 
(a)  When a contract for public work is awarded in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) pursuant to the competitive bidding requirements of this Article, the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the City and shall become binding on the parties upon execution of the contract: 
(1)  A performance bond satisfactory to the City, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the City, in an amount not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the price specified in the contract; and 
(2)  A payment bond satisfactory to the City, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the City, for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the price specified in the contract. 
(b)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the authority of the City to require a performance bond or other security in addition to those bonds or in circumstances other than those specified in Subsection (a) above. 
(Prior code 1-15-5; Ord. 10, 2001) 
Sec. 4-3-60. - Construction management - general contractor contracts. 
    Notwithstanding anything in this Article to the contrary, the City may negotiate construction management-general contractor (CMGC) contracts and design, build and construction, management contracts through the following procedure: 
(1)  The City shall informally contact and seek, at a minimum, two (2) requests for proposal to complete the contract project from individuals or firms with experience in the construction of public works; and 
(2)  The contract is awarded to the most qualified, responsible and responsive contractor, considering the purpose and nature of the contract. 
(Prior code 1-15-6; Ord. 10, 2001) 
Sec. 4-3-70. - Applicability. 
    This Article shall not apply where federal or state law requires a different or specific competitive selection process or procedure prior to the awarding of a contract for public works. 
(Prior code 1-15-7; Ord. 10, 2001) 
ARTICLE IV - Retail Sales Tax 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 4-4-10. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases as used in this Article shall have the following meanings: 
    Automotive vehicle means any vehicle or device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, or any device used or designed for aviation or flight in the air. Automotive vehicle includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers or mobile homes. Automotive vehicle shall not include devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Business means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, direct or indirect. 
    Charitable organization means any entity which: a) has been certified as a nonprofit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; and b) is an organization which exclusively, and in a manner consistent with existing laws and for the benefit of any indefinite number of persons or animals, freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental or spiritual needs of persons or animals, and thereby lessens the burden of government. 
    Consumer means any person in the City who purchases, uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes tangible personal property or taxable services purchased from sources inside or outside the City. 
    Engaged in business in the City means performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption within the City. Engaged in business in the City includes, but is not limited to, any one (1) of the following activities by a person: 
a.  Directly, indirectly or by a subsidiary maintains a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction; 
b.  Sends one (1) or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other reasons; 
c.  Maintains one (1) or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction; 
d.  Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or 
e.  Makes more than one (1) delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a twelve (12) month period by any means other than a common carrier. 
    Finance Director means the Finance Director of the City or such other person designated by the City; Finance Director shall also include such person's designee. 
    Gross sales means the total amount received in money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all sales, leases or rentals of tangible personal property or services. 
    License means a City sales and/or use tax license. 
    Lodging services means the furnishing of rooms or accommodations by any person, partnership, association, corporation, estate, representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel, inn, bed and breakfast residence, apartment, hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guest house, guest ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp or trailer court and park, or similar establishment, for a period of less than thirty (30) days under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
    Medical supplies means drugs dispensed in accordance with a prescription; insulin in all its forms dispensed pursuant to the direction of a licensed physician; glucose usable for treatment of insulin reactions; urine- and blood-testing kits and materials, insulin measuring and injecting devices, including hypodermic syringes and needles; prosthetic devices; wheelchairs and hospital beds; drugs or materials when furnished by a doctor as part of professional services provided to a patient; and corrective eyeglasses, contact lenses or hearing aids. 
    Prescription drugs for humans means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. Sect. 301, et. Seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "Rx Only", and is dispensed in accordance with any written or electronic order dated and signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner, and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and any required information of the patient for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered, and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Prosthetic devices for humans means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental or orthopedic devices or appliances, oxygen concentrators and oxygen with related accessories. 
    Price or purchase price means the aggregate value measured in currency paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered in consummation of a sale, without any discount from the price on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, and exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal government or by this Article, and, in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the same time and place of the exchange, if: 
a.  Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
b.  Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration or certification under the laws of this State, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft and aircraft. Any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax. 
    Price or purchase price includes: 
1.  The amount of money received or due in cash and credits. 
2.  Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
3.  Any consideration valued in money, whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the purchase price and other medium of exchange. 
4.  The total price charged on credit sales, including finance charges which are not separately stated at the time of sale. An amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and separately stated at the time of sale is not part of the purchase price. 
5.  Installation, applying, remodeling or repairing the property, delivery and wheeling-in charges included in the purchase price and not separately stated. 
6.  Transportation and other charges to [affect] delivery of tangible personal property to the purchaser. 
7.  Indirect federal manufacturers' excise taxes, such as taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock. 
8.  The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon. 
    Price or purchase price shall not include: 
1.  Any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Colorado or by any political subdivision thereof. 
2.  The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is to be sold thereafter in the retailer's usual course of business. This is not limited to exchanges in Colorado. Out-of-state trade-ins are an allowable adjustment to the purchase price. 
3.  Discounts from the original price, if such discount and the corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the purchaser, and the seller is not reimbursed for the discount by the manufacturer or someone else. An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales. 
    Purchase or sale means the acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property, other taxable products or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, sold. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales, and property and services acquired by: 
a.  Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
b.  A lease, lease-purchase agreement rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property, other taxable products or taxable services; 
c.  Performance of taxable services; or 
d.  Barter or exchange for other tangible personal property, other taxable products, or services. 
    The terms purchase and sale do not include: 
a.  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership; 
b.  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
c.  The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its stockholders, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
d.  A transfer of a partnership or limited liability company interest; 
e.  The transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership or limited liability company, if not consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
f.  The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder; 
g.  The transfer of assets from a parent company to a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary company; 
h.  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent company to a parent company or to another subsidiary which is owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets; 
i.  The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary companies, or between subsidiary companies closely held by the same parent company, or between companies which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by this article was paid by the transferor company at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor company. To such an extent any transfer referred to in this paragraph shall constitute a sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, a closely held subsidiary corporation is one (1) in which the parent company owns stock possessing or membership interest at least eighty percent (80%) of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least eight percent (80%) of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
    Retail sales means all sales except wholesale sales. 
    Return means any form prescribed by the city administration for computing and reporting a total tax liability. 
    Sales tax means the tax that is collected or required to be collected and remitted by a retailer on sales taxed under this Code. 
    Tangible personal property means personal property that can be one (1) or more of the following: seen, weighed, measured, felt, touched, stored, transported, exchanged, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
    Tax means the use tax due from a consumer or the sales tax due from a retailer or the sum of both due from a retailer who also consumes. 
    Tax deficiency or deficiency means any amount of tax, penalty, interest, or other fee that is not reported and/or not paid on or before the due date that any return or payment of the tax is required under the terms of this Code. 
    Taxable sales means gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in this Code. 
    Taxable services means services subject to tax pursuant to this Code. 
    Taxpayer means any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of this Code. 
    Therapeutic device means devices, appliances or related accessories that correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically created abnormality. 
    Vendor means any person selling, leasing, renting tangible personal property or services at retail. Vendor shall include any: 
a.  Auctioneer; 
b.  Salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales as a direct, or indirect, agent of or obtains such property or services sold from a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer; 
c.  Charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes. 
    Wholesale sales means a sale by wholesalers to retailers, jobbers, dealers or wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to users or consumers not for resale; latter types of sales shall be deemed to be retail sales and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Wholesaler means any person doing an organized wholesale or jobbing business and selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for the purpose of resale, and not for storage, use, consumption or distribution. 
(Prior code 3-1-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 8, 2010; Ord. 5 1, 2018) 
Sec. 4-4-20. - Administration; duties and powers of Finance Director. 
    The administration of the provisions of this Article is vested in the Finance Director, who shall prescribe forms and reasonable rules and regulations for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the taxes imposed hereunder, and for the proper administration and enforcement hereof. 
(Prior code 3-1-2) 
Sec. 4-4-30. - License required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any business with a retail storefront to engage in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail without first having obtained a license therefor. Such license shall be granted and issued by the City and shall be in force and effect until December 31 of the year for which it is issued, unless sooner revoked. 
(b)  Such license shall be granted and renewed only upon application stating the name and address of the person desiring such a license, the name and location of such business, and such other facts as the City may require. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of each licensee, before January 1 of each year during which this Article remains in effect, to obtain a renewal thereof if the licensee remains in the retail business or liable to account for the tax herein provided, but nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower the Finance Director to refuse such renewal except revocation for cause of the licensee's prior license, or except for failure to provide the necessary information. 
(d)  In case business is transacted at one (1) or more separate premises by one (1) person, a single license setting forth the licensee's places of business within the City shall be sufficient. 
(e)  The license imposed by this Section shall be required of every vendor having a place of business within the City, unless the vendor is engaged exclusively in the business of selling commodities which are exempt from taxation under this Chapter. 
(f)  Any person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the City, without having secured a license therefor, except as specifically provided herein, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(g)  Each license shall be numbered and shall show the name, residence, place and character of business of the licensee and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. No license shall be transferable. 
(h)  The City may, after giving reasonable notice and after hearing, revoke the license of any person found by the City to have violated any provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code 3-1-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 8, 2010) 
Sec. 4-4-40. - Map of municipal boundaries. 
    The City shall make available to any requesting vendor a map showing the boundaries of the City. For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the requesting taxpayer may rely on such map and any update available to determine whether to collect a sales tax. No penalty shall be imposed or action for deficiency maintained against such a vendor who complies in good faith with the most recent map available. 
(Prior code 3-1-4) 
Sec. 4-4-50. - Place of consummation of sale. 
    For the purpose of this Article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the vendor unless the tangible personal property sold was delivered by the vendor or his agent to a destination outside the limits of the City or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the City. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Prior code 3-1-5) 
Division 2 - Tax Imposed 

Sec. 4-4-110. - Imposition of tax. 
    A tax is hereby imposed for the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail upon every vendor having a place of business within the City and who sells such property within the City. 
(Prior code 3-1-6-1) 
Sec. 4-4-120. - Property taxed. 
    There is hereby levied, and there shall be collected and paid, a tax in the amount stated in Section 4-4-130 on property as follows: 
(1)  On the purchase price paid or charged upon all sales and purchases of tangible personal property at retail. 
(2)  In the case of retail sales involving the exchange of property, on the purchase price paid or charged, including the fair market value of the property exchanged at the time and place of the exchange, excluding, however, from the consideration or purchase price the fair market value of the exchanged property, provided that such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the vendor's business. 
(3)  Upon the amount paid for all meals and beverages and cover charges, if any, furnished in any restaurant, eating house, hotel, drugstore, club, resort or other place at which meals or food are regularly sold to the public. 
(Prior code 3-1-6-2; Ord. 8, 2010) 
Sec. 4-4-130. - Schedule of sales tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon sale of commodities specified in Section 4-4-120 above a tax in accordance with the following schedule: 
Amount of Sale Tax $ .01 including $ .14 no tax .15 including .42 $.01 .43 including .71 .02 .72 including .99 .03 1.00 including 1.28 .04 1.29 including 1.57 .05 1.58 including 1.85 .06 1.86 including 2.00 .07  
On sales in excess of two dollars ($2.00), the tax shall be seven cents ($0.07) on each full two-dollar increment of the sale price; plus the tax shown in the above schedule for the applicable fractional part of a two-dollar increment of each such sales price. 
(b)  Restrictions. 
(1)  Except as provided in Paragraph (2) below, vendors shall add the tax imposed hereby, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sale price or charge, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item. When added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge and shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the vendor until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. The vendor shall be entitled, as collecting agent of the City, to apply and credit the amount of his collections against the three and one-half percent (31/2%) rate to be paid by him under the provision of Section 4-4-310, remitting any excess of collections over said three and one-half percent (31/2%) less the two and one-half percent (21/2%) collection expense allowance, up to a maximum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), to the City in the vendor's next monthly sales tax return. 
(2)  Any vendor selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink may include in his sales price the tax levied under this Chapter; provided, however, that no such vendor shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that such tax is not included as a part of the sales price to the consumer. The schedule set forth in Subsection (a) above shall be used by such vendor in determining amounts to be included in such sales price. No such vendor shall gain any benefit from the collection or payment of such tax, except as permitted in Section 4-4-310, nor shall the use of the schedule set forth in Paragraph (1) above relieve such vendor from liability for payment of the full amount of the tax levied by this Article. 
(Prior code 3-1-6-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 8, 2010; Ord. 11 1, 2011) 
Division 3 - Exemptions From Taxation 

Sec. 4-4-210. - Exemptions. 
(a)  There shall be exempt from taxation under the provisions of this Article the following: 
(1)  All sales to the United States government, to the State, its departments and institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof in their governmental capacities only. 
(2)  All sales made to religious, charitable and eleemosynary corporations, in the conduct of the regular religious, charitable or eleemosynary functions and activities. 
(3)  All sales which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States or the State. 
(4)  All sales of cigarettes. 
(5)  All sales of drugs disbursed in accordance with a prescription and all sales of prosthetic and therapeutic devices. 
(6)  All commodities which are taxed under the provisions of Sections 39-27-101 to 39-27-121, C.R.S., relating to motor fuels. 
(b)  All sales and purchases of neat cattle, sheep, lamb, swine and goats; all sales and purchases of mares and stallions for breeding purposes; and all farm close-out sales shall be exempt from taxation. 
(c)  All sales and purchases of feed for livestock or poultry, all sales and purchases of seeds, and all sales and purchases of orchard trees shall be exempt from taxation. 
(d)  All sales and purchases of straw and other bedding for use in the care of livestock shall be exempt from taxation. 
(e)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the City's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of construction and building materials, as the term is used in Section 29-2-109, C.R.S., if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and the purchaser presents to the vendor a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the City evidencing that a local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid. 
(f)  All sales of services. 
(Prior code 3-1-7-1; Ord. 8, 2010) 
Sec. 4-4-220. - Burden of proof. 
    The burden of proving that sales, services and commodities, on which tax refunds are claimed, are exempt from taxation under this Chapter, or were not at retail, shall be on the one making such claim under such reasonable requirements of proof as the City may prescribe. 
(Prior code 3-1-7-2) 
Sec. 4-4-230. - Disputes. 
    Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not any sale, service or commodity is exempt from taxation under this Section, the seller shall, nevertheless, collect and the purchaser shall pay the tax and the seller shall thereupon issue to the purchaser a receipt or certificate, on forms prescribed by the City, showing the names of the seller and the purchaser, the items purchased, the date, price, amount of tax paid and a brief statement of the claim of exemption. The purchaser thereafter may apply to the City for a refund of such taxes, and it shall then be the duty of the Finance Director to determine the question of exemption. 
(Prior code 3-1-7-3) 
Sec. 4-4-240. - Refunds. 
    A refund shall be made, or a credit allowed, for the tax so paid under dispute by any purchaser who has an exemption as provided in this Article. Such refund shall be made by the City after compliance with the following conditions precedent: applications for refund must be made within sixty (60) days after the purchase of the goods whereon an exemption is claimed; and must be supported by the affidavit of the purchaser accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and certificate issued by the seller; and be made upon such forms as shall be prescribed and furnished by the City, which forms shall contain such information as the City shall prescribe. Any person who makes any false statement in connection with an application for refund shall be guilty of an offense. The right to a refund is not assignable. 
(Prior code 3-1-7-4) 
Sec. 4-4-250. - Appeal of denial of refund. 
    An appeal of a denial of a refund shall be submitted in writing to the City within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the denial of the refund and shall identify the amount of the refund requested and the basis for the appeal. The time period set forth in this Section may, in the absolute discretion of the City, be waived for good cause on written application of a vendor or taxpayer. 
(Prior code 3-1-7-5) 
Sec. 4-4-260. - Claims for taxes erroneously paid. 
    Claims for tax monies paid in error or by mistake may be processed for refund; provided that the proceeds of any such claim for refund shall first be applied by the City to any tax deficiencies or liabilities existing against the claimant before allowance of such claim by the City; and provided further that if such excess payment of tax monies in any period is discovered as a result of audit by the City and deficiencies are discovered and assessed against the taxpayer as a result of such audit, such excess monies shall be first applied against any deficiencies outstanding to the date of the assessment, but shall not be applied to any future tax liabilities. For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, an application for refund of tax monies paid in error or by mistake shall be made within three (3) years after the date of purchase, storage, use or consumption of the goods for which the refund is claimed. 
(Prior code 3-1-7-6) 
Division 4 - Collection, Payment of Tax 

Sec. 4-4-310. - Vendor liable for tax. 
(a)  Every vendor shall, irrespective of the provisions of Division 2 above, be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equivalent to three and one-half percent (31/2%) of all sales made by him of commodities as specified in Section 4-4-130 above, and shall, before the twentieth day of each month, make a return to the City for the preceding calendar month and remit an amount equivalent to said three and one-half percent (31/2%) on such sales to the City, less two and one-half percent (21/2%) of the sum so remitted to cover the vendor's expense in the collection and remittance of said tax, up to a maximum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Such returns of the taxpayer shall contain such information and be made in such manner and upon such forms as the City may prescribe. 
(b)  The burden of proving that any vendor is exempt from collecting the tax on any goods sold and paying the same to the City, or from making such returns, shall be on the vendor or vendor under such reasonable requirements of proof as the City may prescribe. 
(c)  Every vendor conducting a business in which the transaction between the vendor and the consumer consists of the supplying of tangible personal property and services in connection with the maintenance or serving of same shall be required to pay the taxes levied under this Article upon the full contract price unless application is made to the City for permission to use a percentage basis of reporting the tangible personal property sold and the services supplied under such contract. The Finance Director is hereby authorized to determine the percentage based upon the ratio of the tangible personal property included in the consideration as it bears to the total of the consideration paid under said combination contract or sale which shall be subject to the sales tax levied pursuant to the provisions of this Article. This Section shall not be construed to include items upon which the sales tax is imposed on the full purchase price as defined in Section 4-4-10. 
(Prior code 3-1-8; Ord. 8, 2010; Ord. 11 2, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-320. - Standard reporting form. 
    The City shall use the standard municipal sales and use tax reporting form and any subsequent revisions adopted by the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue. The use of such form shall commence by the first full month, one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the regulation adopting or revising such standard form. 
(Prior code 3-1-9) 
Sec. 4-4-330. - Record of sales period. 
    It shall be the duty of every person engaging or continuing in business in the City, for the transaction of which a license is required under this Article, to keep and preserve suitable records of all sales made by him and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for the collection of which he is liable under this Article. It shall be the duty of every such person to keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years all invoices of goods and merchandise purchased for resale and all such books, invoices and other records shall be open for examination at any time by the Finance Director or his duly authorized agent. 
(Prior code 3-1-10) 
Sec. 4-4-340. - Tax not to be absorbed. 
    It is unlawful for any vendor to advertise, hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by this Article will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold, or if added, that it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Prior code 3-1-11; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-4-350. - Reporting periods other than monthly. 
    If the accounting methods regularly employed by the vendor in the transaction of his business, or other conditions, are such that reports of sales made on a calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the Finance Director, upon written request of the vendor, may accept reports at such intervals as will, in his opinion, better suit the convenience of the taxpayer and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax; provided that the Finance Director may by rule permit taxpayers whose monthly tax collected is less than sixty dollars ($60.00) to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than every three (3) months. 
(Prior code 3-1-12) 
Sec. 4-4-360. - Credit sales. 
    In case of a sale upon credit, a contract for sale wherein it is provided that the price shall be paid in installments and title does not pass until a future date, chattel mortgage or a conditional sale, there shall be paid upon each payment upon the account of purchase price that portion of the total tax which the amount paid bears to the total purchase price. The City may authorize a vendor doing business, wholly or partly on a credit basis, to make returns on the basis of cash actually received. Thereafter, the vendor shall make return and pay taxes on that basis until further order of the City Clerk. This Article shall not operate to relieve from the tax installment or credit business done during the operations of this Article, but realized upon thereafter. 
(Prior code 3-1-13) 
Sec. 4-4-370. - Excess tax; remittance required. 
    If any vendor, during any reporting period, shall collect as a tax an amount in excess of three and one-half percent (31/2%) of his total taxable sales, he shall remit to the City the full net amount of the tax herein imposed and also such excess. The retention by the vendor of any excess of tax collections over the three and one-half percent (31/2%) of the total taxable sales of such vendor, or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the City the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this Article, is declared to be unlawful. 
(Prior code 3-1-14) 
Sec. 4-4-380. - Intercity claims for recovery. 
    The intent of this Section is to streamline and standardize procedures related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer or vendor to correctly pay, collect and remit sales and use taxes to the City. 
(1)  As used herein, claim for recovery means a claim for reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
(2)  When it is determined by the City that sales and use tax owed to the City has been reported and paid to another municipality, the City shall promptly notify the vendor that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted, and that as of the date of the notice, the vendor must cease improper tax collections and remittances. 
(3)  The City may make a written claim for recovery directly to the municipality that received tax and/or penalty and interest owed to the City or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection of the tax from the taxpayer or vendor. The decision to make a claim for a recovery lies in the sole discretion of the City. Any claim for recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer and/or vendor releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to substantiate the claim and a request that the municipality approve or deny, in whole or in part, the claim within ninety (90) days of its receipt. The municipality to which the City submits a claim for recovery may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and approval of such extension by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(4)  Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a claim for recovery, the City shall verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the municipality submitting the claim in writing that the claim is either approved or denied in whole or in part, including the reasons for the decision. If the claim is approved in whole or in part, the City shall remit the undisputed amount to the municipality submitting the claim within thirty (30) days of approval. If a claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a vendor or taxpayer, the check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a claim for recovery may only be made for good cause. 
(5)  The City may deny a claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer. 
(6)  The period subject to a claim for recovery shall be limited to the thirty-six-month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery. 
(Prior code 3-1-15) 
Sec. 4-4-390. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Violation. 
(1)  It shall be an offense for any vendor to refuse to make any return provided to be made in this Article, to make any false or fraudulent return or false statement on any return, to fail or refuse to make payment to the City of any taxes collected or due the City, or in any manner to evade the collection and payment of the tax or any part thereof; or for any person or purchaser to fail or refuse to pay such tax or evade the payment thereof or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax. 
(2)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section or of any section of this Article shall be guilty of an offense. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this Section. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. This Section shall in no way be construed to limit or negate other provisions of this Chapter providing for any late payment penalty or interest on delinquent taxes. 
(Prior code 3-1-16) 
Sec. 4-4-400. - Notice of deficiency, recovery, penalty, interest. 
(a)  All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the vendor as taxes imposed by this Article shall be and remain public money, the property of the City, in the hands of such vendor, and he shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the City until paid to the City. For failure to so pay to the City, such vendor shall be punished as provided by Subsection 4-4-390(b). 
(b)  If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the tax as required by this Chapter, the City shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent; and shall add thereto a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate of one percent (1%) per month from the date when due. Promptly thereafter, the City shall send to the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty and interest, which notice shall be served personally or by certified mail. Such estimate shall thereupon become a notice of deficiency. 
(c)  The City may treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the City from the taxpayer. In case of failure to pay the tax or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest thereon when due, the City may recover at law the amount of such taxes and interest, in such County or District Court of the County having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected. The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the City, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. 
(d)  The Finance Director is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed as provided in this Article, and, for this purpose only, interest imposed in excess of eight percent (8%) per annum shall be deemed a penalty. 
(Prior code 3-1-17) 
Sec. 4-4-410. - Interest on underpayment, nonpayment or extensions of time for payment of taxes. 
(a)  If any amount of sales tax is not paid on or before the last date prescribed for payment, interest on such amount at the rate imposed under Section 4-4-440 of this Article shall be paid for the period from such last date to the date paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without regard to any extension of time for payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. In the case of a tax in which the last date for payment is not otherwise prescribed, the last date for payment shall be deemed to be the date the liability for the tax arises, and in no event shall it be later than the date notice and demand for the tax is made by the City Treasurer. 
(b)  Interest prescribed in this Article shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as the tax to which it is applicable. 
(c)  If any portion of a tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed under this Section on the portion of the tax so satisfied for any period during which, if the credit had not been made, interest would have been allowed with respect to such overpayment. 
(d)  Interest prescribed in this Article on any sales tax may be assessed and collected at any time during the period within which the tax to which such interest relates may be assessed and collected. 
(Prior code 3-1-18) 
Sec. 4-4-420. - Penalties for certain underpayment, nonpayment or extensions of time for payment of taxes. 
    If any part of the deficiency in payment of the sales tax is due to negligence or intentional disregard of this Code, or of authorized rules and regulations of the City with knowledge, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the deficiency as a penalty; and interest on such penalty in such case shall be collected at the rate imposed under Section 4-4-410, in addition to the interest provided by Section 4-4-440 on the amount of such deficiency from the time the return was due from the person required to file the return, which interest and penalty shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the City Treasurer. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added one hundred percent (100%) of the total amount of the deficiency as a penalty; and, in such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the penalty, shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the City. 
(Prior code 3-1-19) 
Sec. 4-4-430. - Investigations and hearings. 
    For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any return, or for the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, the City may hold investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered by this Article, may examine any relevant books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person, may require the attendance of such person or any officer or employee of such person or of any person having knowledge of such sales, and may take testimony and require proof for its information. The Finance Director and his authorized deputies shall have power to administer oath to such persons. 
(Prior code 3-1-20) 
Sec. 4-4-440. - Rate of interest. 
    When interest is required or permitted to be charged under any provision of this Article, the annual rate of interest shall be that established by the State Commissioner of Banking pursuant to Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 3-1-21) 
Sec. 4-4-450. - Appeal of notice or assessment. 
    An appeal of a notice of assessment issued to a vendor or taxpayer for failure to file a return, underpayment of tax owed or as a result of an audit, shall be submitted in writing to the City within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the notice of assessment. Any such appeal shall identify the amount of tax disputed and the basis for the appeal. The time period set forth in this Section may, in the absolute discretion of the City, be waived for good cause on written application of a vendor or taxpayer. 
(Prior code 3-1-22; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-4-460. - Appeal of hearing decision. 
    An appeal of a final decision of the City in a hearing held pursuant to Sections 4-4-250 and 4-4-450 shall be commenced within thirty (30) days of such decision. 
(Prior code 3-1-23) 
Sec. 4-4-470. - Alternative dispute resolution procedure. 
    For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the taxpayer may elect a state hearing on the City Council's final decision on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant to the procedure set forth in this Section: 
(1)  As used in this Section, state hearing means a hearing before the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue or delegate thereof as provided in Section 29-2-106.1(3), C.R.S. 
(2)  When the City asserts that sales taxes are due in an amount greater than the amount paid by a taxpayer, the City shall mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer by certified mail. The deficiency notice shall state the additional sales taxes due. The deficiency notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, that the taxpayer has the right to elect a state hearing on the deficiency pursuant to Section 29-2-106(3), C.R.S. The taxpayer shall also have the right to elect a state hearing on the City's denial for a refund of sales tax paid. 
(3)  The taxpayer shall request the state hearing within thirty (30) days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. The taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if he has not exhausted local remedies or if he fails to request such hearing within the time period provided for in this Subsection. Exhaustion of local remedies means: 
a.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the City Council and a hearing has been held and a final decision issued. A hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence or filing of briefs shall be required. The taxpayer may, however, elect to submit a brief, in which case the City may submit a brief. The City Council shall hold a hearing and issue a final decision within ninety (90) days after receipt of a taxpayer's written request, except that the City Council may extend such period if the delay in holding a hearing or issuing a decision was occasioned by the taxpayer. In any event, the City Council shall hold a hearing and issue a decision within one hundred eighty (180) days of the taxpayer's written request; or 
b.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the City Council and the City Council has failed to hold a hearing or has failed to issue a final decision within the time periods prescribed in Subparagraph a above. 
(4)  If a taxpayer has exhausted his local remedies as provided in Paragraph (3) above, the taxpayer may request a state hearing on such deficiency notice or claim for refund. Such request shall be made and such hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as set forth in Section 29-2-106.1(3) through (7), C.R.S. 
(5)  If the deficiency notice or claim for refund involves only the City, in lieu of requesting a state hearing, the taxpayer may appeal such deficiency notice or denial of a claim for refund to the District Court as provided in Section 29-2-106.1(8), C.R.S., provided that the taxpayer complies with the procedures set forth in Paragraph (3) above. 
(6)  Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the taxpayer from pursuing judicial review of a final decision of the City. 
(7)  If the City reasonably finds that the collection of sales or use tax will be jeopardized by delay, the City may utilize the procedures set forth in Section 39-21-111, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 3-1-24; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-4-480. - Coordinated audit procedure. 
(a)  Any taxpayer licensed in the City pursuant to Section 4-4-30, and holding a similar sales tax license in at least four (4) other Colorado municipalities that administer their own sales tax collection, may request a coordinated audit as provided herein. 
(b)  Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice of an intended audit by any municipality that administers its own sales tax collection, the taxpayer may provide to the Finance Director of the City, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written request for a coordinated audit indicating the municipality from which the notice of intended audit was received and the name of the official who issued such notice. Such request shall include a list of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local collection of their sales tax in which the taxpayer holds a current sales tax license and a declaration that the taxpayer will sign a waiver of any passage-of-time-based limitation upon the City's right to recover tax owed by the vendor for the audit period. 
(c)  Except as provided in Subsection (g) below, any taxpayer who submits a complete request for a coordinated audit and promptly signs a waiver of Section 4-4-490 may be audited by the City during the twelve (12) months after such request is submitted only through a coordinated audit involving all municipalities electing to participate in such an audit. 
(d)  If the City desires to participate in the audit of a taxpayer who submits a complete request for a coordinated audit pursuant to Subsection (c), the Finance Director shall so notify the Finance Director of the municipality whose notice of audit prompted the taxpayer's request within ten (10) days after receipt of the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit. The Finance Director shall then cooperate with other participating municipalities in the development of arrangements for the coordinated audit, including arrangement of the time during which the coordinated audit will be conducted, the period of time to be covered by the audit, and a coordinated notice to the taxpayer of those records most likely to be required for completion of the coordinated audit. 
(e)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by the City, the City's Finance Director shall facilitate arrangements between the City and other municipalities participating in the coordinated audit unless and until an official from some other participating municipality agrees to assume this responsibility. The Finance Director shall cooperate with other participating municipalities to, whenever practicable, minimize the number of auditors that will be present on the taxpayer's premises to conduct the coordinated audit on behalf of the participating municipalities. Information obtained by or on behalf of those municipalities participating in the coordinated audit may be shared only among such participating municipalities. 
(f)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by the City, the City's Finance Director shall, once arrangements for the coordinated audit between the City and other participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to the taxpayer of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be audited and the records most likely to be required by participating municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The Finance Director shall also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit. 
(g)  The coordinated audit procedure set forth in this Section shall not apply: 
(1)  When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit; 
(2)  To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to the effective date of this Section; 
(3)  When a taxpayer refuses to promptly sign a waiver of (cite ordinance that could limit, based upon passage of time, the City's right to recover for a portion of the audit period), or 
(4)  When a taxpayer fails to provide a timely and complete request for a coordinated audit as provided in Subsection (b) above. 
(Prior code 3-1-25) 
Sec. 4-4-490. - Limitation of actions on collection of sales tax. 
    For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986: 
(1)  No sales tax, or interest thereon or penalties with respect thereto, shall be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, distraint warrant issued or suit for collection be instituted, nor any other action to collect the same be commenced, more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable. No lien shall continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which case such lien shall continue only for one (1) year after the filing of notice thereof. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the City Treasurer may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(2)  In the case of failure to file a return, the sales tax may be assessed and collected at any time. 
(Prior code 3-1-26) 
Division 5 - Miscellaneous Provisions 

Sec. 4-4-610. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing in this Article shall preclude the City from utilizing any other applicable penalties or remedies for the collection or enforcement of sales or use taxes. 
(Prior code 3-1-27) 
Sec. 4-4-620. - No implied authorization. 
    No reference in this Article to activities not specifically authorized in other articles or chapters of this Code shall be construed as authorizing such activities. 
(Prior code 3-1-28) 
Sec. 4-4-630. - Notice of sales tax amendment. 
(a)  In order to initiate a central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the City shall file with the Colorado Municipal League, prior to the effective date of this Article, a copy of the City sales and use tax ordinance reflecting all provisions in effect on the effective date of the initial ordinance codified herein. 
(b)  In order to keep current the current register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the City shall file with the Colorado Municipal League, prior to the effective date of any amendment, a copy of each sales and use tax ordinance amendment enacted by the City. 
(c)  Failure of the City to file such ordinance or ordinance amendment pursuant to this Section shall not invalidate any provision of the sales and use tax ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
(Prior code 3-1-29; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-4-640. - Participation in simplification meetings. 
    The Finance Director shall cooperate with and participate on an as-needed basis with a permanent statewide sales and use tax committee convened by the Colorado Municipal League which is composed of state and municipal sales and use tax officials and business officials. Said committee will meet for the purpose of discussing and seeking resolution to sales and use tax problems which may arise. 
(Prior code 3-1-30; Ord. 10, 1991) 
ARTICLE V - Use Tax 

Sec. 4-5-10. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases as used in this Article shall have the following meanings: 
    City resident , for the purpose of establishing liability for use tax on motor vehicles, shall be made by considering any of the following factors: 
a.  Voting registration; 
b.  Address where vehicle is normally parked or stored as shown on the related automobile insurance policy or application for automobile insurance; or 
c.  The location where the motor vehicle is customarily or usually parked, stored or garaged. 
    City Treasurer means the City Clerk/Treasurer of the City. 
    Monthly lease payment means that amount paid periodically by the lessee to the lessor for the use of its motor vehicle. 
    Motor vehicle means motor or other vehicles for which Colorado State registration or titling is required, including but not limited to, any motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer vehicle, trailer coach or mobile home which is primarily designed to be operated or drawn upon any road or highway. This definition shall not apply to vehicles owned and operated by any department of the federal government or state government or any other agency or political subdivision thereof, firefighting vehicles, City vehicles or farm equipment. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity. The term person includes the plural as well as the singular number. 
    Purchase price means the aggregate value in money of anything or things paid or delivered by a purchaser to a seller or any person in the consummation of a sale. Purchase price does not include any direct tax imposed by the federal government, by the State or by this Article. 
    Taxpayer means the person obligated to pay the use tax imposed by this Article. 
(Prior code 3-9-1; Ord. 17, 1989; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-5-20. - Use tax on motor vehicles. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed and shall be collected from every person in the City a use tax on motor vehicles purchased outside the City by City residents for use or storage within the City. Said tax shall be payable to the City by any person who purchases a motor vehicle for use or storage in the City. Said tax shall be in the amount equal to three percent (3%) of the purchase price paid for the motor vehicle. 
(Prior code 3-9-2) 
Sec. 4-5-30. - Collection of use tax on motor vehicles. 
(a)  The use tax relating to motor vehicles shall be collected in the amount of three percent (3%) of the purchase price of said motor vehicle. Said tax shall be applicable to every motor vehicle for which registration is required by the laws of the State. 
(b)  No registration or titling shall be made of any motor or other vehicle for which registration is required, and no certificate of title shall be issued to such vehicle by the Department of Revenue or authorized agent, until the use tax imposed by Section 4-5-20 above has been paid. 
(c)  The use tax imposed by this Section shall be collected by the authorized agent of the County Clerk in Arapahoe County pursuant to an agreement between the City and the County Clerk. The proceeds of said use tax shall be paid to the City Treasurer periodically in accordance with said agreement. If the authorized agent of the County Clerk fails to collect any use tax imposed by Section 4-5-20 above, then the City Treasurer shall collect such use tax. 
(d)  The Mayor and City Treasurer are hereby authorized to enter into and execute on behalf of the City any agreement or agreements necessary for the administration and enforcement of this Section, and said agreement or agreements shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 29-2-101 to 112, C.R.S., and the City Charter. 
(e)  When the right to possession or use of any motor vehicle is granted under a lease or contract, and such transfer of possession would be taxable under this Article if an outright sale or purchase were made, then such lease or contract shall be considered the sale or purchase of such motor vehicle for purposes of this Chapter, and the tax shall be computed and imposed on the total of all the monthly lease payments under the lease contract as if such total were the purchase price for the vehicle. 
(Prior code 3-9-3; Ord. 23, 1985; Ord. 17, 1989) 
Sec. 4-5-40. - Procedural rules and regulations. 
    The City Manager and City Treasurer may promulgate reasonable procedural rules and regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Article, provided that said rules and regulations are not in conflict with Section 24-35-110, C.R.S., or any other provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code 3-9-4) 
Sec. 4-5-50. - Repeal and amendments. 
(a)  This Article may be repealed or amended at any time by the City Council through the adoption of any ordinance, except as provided in Subsection (b) below. 
(b)  This Article shall not be amended so as to impose a tax on anything other than motor vehicles purchased for use or storage by City residents. 
(Prior code 3-9-5) 
Sec. 4-5-60. - Credit for sales or use taxes previously paid to another municipality. 
    The City's use tax shall not apply to the storage, use or consumption of any article of tangible personal property whose sale or use has already been subjected to a legally imposed sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in excess of three percent (3%). A credit shall be granted against the City's use tax equal to the tax paid by a purchaser by reason of a prior sales or use tax imposed by a statutory or home rule municipality. The amount of the credit shall not exceed three percent (3%). 
(Prior code 3-9-6; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 4-5-70. - Nonapplicability to use or consumption occurring more than three years after most recent sale. 
    The City's use tax shall not be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of tangible personal property within the City that occurs more than three (3) years after the most recent sale of the property if, within the three (3) years following such sale, the property has been significantly used within the State for the principal purpose for which it was purchased. 
(Prior code 3-9-7) 
Sec. 4-5-80. - Limitation of actions on collection of use tax. 
(a)  No use tax, interest or penalties shall be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, distraint warrant issued or suit for collection be instituted, nor shall any other action to collect the same be commenced, more than three (3) years after the date the tax is payable. No lien shall continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period where a notice of lien has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which case such lien shall continue for one (1) year after the filing of notice. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the tax, together with interest and penalties, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the City Treasurer may agree in writing to an extension, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(b)  In the case of failure to file a return, the use tax may be assessed and collected at any time. 
(Prior code 3-9-8) 
Sec. 4-5-90. - Limitation of actions for refund of use tax. 
(a)  An application for refund of use tax paid under dispute by a user who claims to be exempt from this Article shall be made within sixty (60) days after the storage, use or consumption of the goods or services whereon an exemption is claimed. 
(b)  An application for refund of tax monies paid in error or by mistake shall be made within three (3) years after the date of storage, use or consumption of the goods for which the refund is claimed. 
(Prior code 3-9-9) 
Sec. 4-5-100. - Interest on underpayment, nonpayment or extensions of time for payment. 
(a)  If any amount of use tax is not paid on or before the last date prescribed for payment, interest on such amount at the rate imposed under Section 4-5-140 below shall be paid for the period from the last date to the date paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without regard to any notice to extension of time for payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. In the case of a tax in which the last date for payment is not otherwise prescribed, the last date for payment shall be deemed to be the date the liability for the tax arises, and in no event shall it be later than the date notice and demand for the tax is made by the City Treasurer. 
(b)  Interest prescribed under Sections 4-5-100 through 4-5-130 of this Article shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as the tax to which it is applicable. 
(c)  If any portion of a tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, no interest shall be imposed under this Section on the portion of the tax so satisfied for any period during which, if the credit had not been made, interest would have been allowed with respect to such overpayment. 
(d)  Interest prescribed under Sections 4-5-100 through 4-5-130 of this Article on any use tax may be assessed and collected at any time during the period within which the tax to which such interest relates may be assessed and collected. 
(Prior code 3-9-10) 
Sec. 4-5-110. - Deficiency due to negligence. 
    If any part of the deficiency in payment of use tax is due to negligence or intentional disregard of this Code, the ordinances or authorized rules and regulations of the City with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the deficiency, and interest in such case shall be collected at the rate imposed under Section 4-5-140 below, in addition to the interest provided by Section 4-5-100, on the amount of such deficiency from the time when due. Such interest and addition shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the City Treasurer. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, there shall be added one hundred percent (100%) of the total amount of the deficiency. In such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the City Treasurer and an additional three percent (3%) per month on said amount shall be added from the date payment was due until paid. 
(Prior code 3-9-11) 
Sec. 4-5-120. - Interest for neglect or refusal to pay. 
    If a person neglects or refuses to pay any use tax as required, the City Treasurer shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent and shall add thereto a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under Section 4-5-140 below, plus one-half of one percent (.5%) per month from the date when due. 
(Prior code 3-9-12) 
Sec. 4-5-130. - Penalty interest on unpaid use tax. 
    Any use tax due and unpaid shall be a debt to the City and shall draw interest at the rate imposed under Section 4-5-140 below, in addition to the interest provided by Section 4-5-100 above, from the time when due until paid. 
(Prior code 3-9-13) 
Sec. 4-5-140. - Rate of interest. 
    When interest is required or permitted to be charged under any provisions of Sections 4-5-100 through 4-5-130 above, the annual rate of interest shall be that established by the State Commissioner of Banking pursuant to Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 3-9-14) 
Sec. 4-5-150. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing in Sections 4-5-100 through 4-5-140 above shall preclude the City from utilizing any other applicable penalties or remedies for the collection or enforcement of use taxes. 
(Prior code 3-9-15) 
Sec. 4-5-160. - Posting bond to pursue appeal. 
(a)  Within fifteen (15) days after filing a notice of appeal as provided in Section 4-5-190 below, the taxpayer shall file with the District Court a surety bond in twice the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the City Council that are contested on appeal. The taxpayer may, at his option, satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account or deposit in or a certificate of deposit issued by a state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with the provisions of Section 11-35-101(1), C.R.S., equal to twice the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the final decision. 
(b)  The taxpayer may, at his option, deposit the disputed amount with the City Treasurer in lieu of posting a surety bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the deficiency contested during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, after appeal to a Colorado appellate court or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the court, either retained by the City Treasurer and applied against the deficiency or returned in whole or in part to the taxpayer with interest at the rate imposed pursuant to Section 4-5-140 above. No claim for refund of amounts deposited with the City Treasurer need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in accordance with the direction of the court. 
(Prior code 3-9-16) 
Sec. 4-5-170. - Standard reporting form. 
    The City shall use the standard municipal sales and use tax reporting form and any subsequent revisions thereto adopted by the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue. The use of such form shall commence no later than the first full month one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the regulation adopting or revising such standard form. 
(Prior code 3-9-17) 
Sec. 4-5-180. - Map of municipal boundaries. 
    The City Clerk shall make available to any requesting vendor a map showing the boundaries of the City. The requesting vendor may rely on such map and any update available to determine whether to collect a use tax. No penalty shall be imposed or action for deficiency maintained against a vendor who complies in good faith with the most recent map available. 
(Prior code 3-9-18) 
Sec. 4-5-190. - Dispute resolution procedure. 
    The taxpayer may elect a state hearing on the City Treasurer's final decision on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant to the procedure set forth in this Section: 
(1)  As used in this Section, state hearing means a hearing before the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue or delegate thereof as provided in Section 29-2-106.1(3), C.R.S. 
(2)  When the City asserts that use taxes are due in an amount greater than that paid by a taxpayer, the City shall mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer by certified mail. The deficiency notice shall state the additional use taxes due. The deficiency notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, that the taxpayer has the right to elect a state hearing on the deficiency pursuant to Section 29-2-106.1(3), C.R.S. The taxpayer shall also have the right to elect a state hearing on the City's denial of such taxpayer's claim for a refund of use tax paid. 
(3)  The taxpayer shall request the state hearing within thirty (30) days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. The taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if he has not exhausted local remedies or if he fails to request such hearing within the time period provided in this Subsection. For purposes of this Subsection, exhaustion of local remedies means: 
a.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the City Council and such hearing has been held and a final decision issued. A hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence or filing of briefs shall be required. The taxpayer may, however, elect to submit a brief, in which case the City may submit a brief. The City Council shall hold a hearing and issue a final decision within ninety (90) days after receipt of a taxpayer's written request, except that the City Council may extend such period if the delay in holding a hearing or issuing a decision was occasioned by the taxpayer. In any event, the City Council shall hold a hearing and issue a decision within one hundred eighty (180) days of the taxpayer's written request; or 
b.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the City Council and the City Council has failed to hold such hearing or has failed to issue a final decision within the time periods prescribed in Subparagraph a above. 
(4)  If a taxpayer has exhausted his local remedies as provided in Paragraph (3) above, the taxpayer may request a state hearing on such deficiency notice or claim for refund. Such request shall be made and a hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as set forth in Section 29-2-106.1(3) through (7), C.R.S. 
(5)  If the deficiency notice or claim for refund involves only the City, in lieu of requesting a state hearing, the taxpayer may appeal such deficiency notice or denial of a claim for refund to the District Court as provided in Section 29-2-106.1(8), C.R.S., provided that the taxpayer complies with the procedures set forth in Paragraph (3) above. 
(6)  If the City reasonably finds that the collection of sales or use tax will be jeopardized by delay, the City may utilize the procedures set forth in Section 39-21-111, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 3-9-19; Ord. 23, 1985) 
ARTICLE VI - Excise Tax on Professional Sports Events 

Sec. 4-6-10. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
    On and after July 21, 1986, there is levied, and shall be paid and collected, an excise tax of ten percent (10%) on the price paid to gain admission to any place or event in the City that is open to the public for a professional sports event. 
(Prior code 3-10-1) 
Sec. 4-6-20. - Liability for tax. 
(a)  No person who pays to gain admission to any place or event in the City that is open to the public for a professional sports event shall fail to pay, and no person, whether owner, lessee or operator, who charges or causes to be charged admission to any place or event in the City that is open to the public for a professional sports event shall fail to collect, the tax levied by this Article. If an owner or operator of a facility leases or rents such facility to another party who conducts a professional sports event open to the public in such facility, such owner or operator is not liable for collecting and remitting the tax if the party to whom the facility is leased or rented is at the time of the leasing or rental licensed to collect and remit the tax. 
(b)  The burden of proving that any transaction is not subject to the tax imposed by this Article is upon the person upon whom the duty to collect the tax is imposed. 
(Prior code 3-10-2) 
Sec. 4-6-30. - Taxes collected held in trust. 
    All sums of money paid by a person to gain admission to any place or event in the City that is open to the public as the admissions tax imposed by this Article are public monies that are the property of the City. The person required to collect and remit the admissions tax shall hold such monies in trust for the sole use and benefit of the City until paying them to the City Treasurer. 
(Prior code 3-10-3) 
Sec. 4-6-40. - Exempt transactions. 
    The following entities and transactions are exempt from the duty to pay the tax imposed by this Article but not the duty to collect and remit the tax levied hereby: 
(1)  The United States government and the State of Colorado, their departments and institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof including the City, when acting in their governmental capacities and performing governmental functions and activities; 
(2)  Religious, charitable and quasi-governmental organizations, but only in the conduct of their regular religious, charitable and quasi-governmental capacities and only if such organizations have obtained an exempt institution license and furnish the exempt institution license to the person who charges or causes to be charged admission to any place or event in the City that is open to the public; 
(3)  Any person who refunds an admission price for any reason, either before or after an event has taken place, and refunds the admission tax along with the admission price; 
(4)  Any person who provides free "passes" or complimentary admission tickets or otherwise fails to charge an admission price for admission to a place or event open to the public, but if such person imposes a reduced admission charge for any such "pass," complimentary admission or otherwise, the tax imposed by this Chapter applies to the actual amount of such reduced admission charge; and 
(5)  Any admission fee paid or charged to gain entry into any place owned by the City or any event sponsored or conducted by the City. 
(Prior code 3-10-4) 
Sec. 4-6-50. - Licensing and reporting procedure. 
(a)  Every owner, operator or person who has the duty to collect tax imposed by this Article shall obtain a license to collect the tax and shall report such taxes on forms prescribed by the City Clerk and remit such taxes to the City. 
(b)  The City shall issue an excise tax license to persons who complete an application therefor stating the name and address of the person and the business and such other information as the City may require. Admissions tax licenses are issued for a specific professional sports event and are not transferable. 
(c)  The City, after giving reasonable notice and after hearing, may revoke the license of any person, owner or operator found by the City to have violated any provisions of this Article. 
(d)  The City may require a deposit from persons applying for an admissions tax license for a single, noncontinuing or nonrecurring event. 
(Prior code 3-10-5) 
Sec. 4-6-60. - Maintenance and preservation of tax returns, reports and records. 
(a)  The City Clerk may require any person to make such return, render such statement or keep and furnish such records as the City Clerk may deem sufficient and reasonable to demonstrate whether or not such person is liable under this Article for the payment or collection of the tax imposed by this Article. 
(b)  Any person required to make a return or file a report under this Article shall preserve such reports for a period of two (2) years. 
(Prior code 3-10-6) 
Sec. 4-6-70. - Interest and penalties for failure to file tax return or pay tax. 
(a)  Penalties for failure of a person to collect the excise tax or to make a return and remit the correct amount of tax required by this Article and procedures for enforcing such penalties are as prescribed in Section 4-5-100 through 4-5-150 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Interest on overpayments and refunds is as prescribed in Section 4-5-100 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 3-10-7) 
Sec. 4-6-80. - Refunds. 
    Refunds of taxes paid under this Article are as described in Section 4-5-90 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 3-10-8) 
Sec. 4-6-90. - Dispute resolution procedure. 
    A taxpayer may request a hearing on any proposed tax after receiving notice of final determination, assessment and demand for payment or denial of a claim for refund as provided in Section 4-5-190 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 3-10-9) 
Sec. 4-6-100. - Enforcement of tax liability. 
    The excise tax imposed by this Article, together with all interest and penalties pertaining thereto, is a first and prior lien on tangible personal property in which the person responsible to collect and remit the tax has an ownership interest, subject only to valid mortgages and other liens of record at the time of and prior to the recording of the notice of lien. 
(Prior code 3-10-10) 
Sec. 4-6-110. - Duties and powers of City Manager. 
    The City Manager, the City Clerk and the City Treasurer are authorized to administer the provisions of this Article and may promulgate reasonable procedural rules and regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code 3-10-11; Ord. 14, 1986) 
CHAPTER 5 - Franchises and Communication Systems 
ARTICLE I - Cable Television Franchise 

Sec. 5-1-10. - Approval of agreement. 
    The Cable Franchise Agreement by and between Mountain States Video Communications Co., Inc., and the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, which is incorporated herein as if set forth in full, is approved by the City Council. The Cable Franchise Agreement shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours from the City Clerk at the offices of the City of Cherry Hills Village. 
(Ord. 6 1, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 5-1-20. - Transfer of franchise. 
(a)  Mountain States Video Communications Co., Inc., is a subsidiary of and controlled by AT&T Corp. The City consents to the transfer of control of the franchise from AT&T Corp. to AT&T Comcast Corporation. 
(b)  The City confirms that the franchise is currently in full force and effect and expires on February 22, 2012; and that all other provisions of the Cable Franchise remain in full force and effect, except as amended therein. 
(Ord. 11 1-3, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE II - Gas and Electric Franchise 

Sec. 5-2-10. - Approval of agreement. 
    The franchise agreement between the City and Public Service Company of Colorado, which is incorporated herein as if set forth in full, is approved by the City Council. The franchise agreement shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours from the City Clerk at the offices of the City. 
(Ord. 14 1, 2007) 
ARTICLE III - Telephone Occupation Tax 

Sec. 5-3-10. - Levy of tax. 
    There is hereby levied upon each person engaged in the business of local exchange telephone service to the inhabitants of the City a quarterly occupation tax in the amount of one dollar eighty cents ($1.80) per account. 
(Prior code 3-2-1; Ord. 8, 1996) 
Sec. 5-3-20. - Time of payment of tax. 
    The tax levied by this Article shall accrue as of the first day of each calendar quarter (January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1). Payment of such tax shall be made to the Finance Director no later than February 15, May 15, August 15 and November 15 of each year. Such tax shall be computed by multiplying the total number of telephone accounts of the person supplying local exchange telephone service, which are in existence within the corporate limits of the City, on the first day of each quarter by the amount of one dollar eighty cents ($1.80). 
(Prior code 3-2-2; Ord. 8, 1996) 
Sec. 5-3-30. - Filing statement. 
    Each person required to pay the tax levied by this Article shall file with the Finance Director, in such form as the Director may require, a quarterly statement showing the total number of telephone accounts to which local exchange telephone service was supplied within the corporate limits of the City during such quarter. In addition to the information provided in the quarterly statement, the Finance Director may request any other information needed to determine the amount of the quarterly tax levy. The quarterly statement and any other information requested by the Finance Director shall be submitted no later than forty-five (45) days after January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year in which the tax is levied. 
(Prior code 3-2-3; Ord. 8, 1996) 
Sec. 5-3-40. - Failure to pay tax. 
    If any person required to pay the tax levied by this Article shall fail to pay such tax as herein provided, the full amount thereof shall become immediately due from and payable by such person, together with any interest thereon at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, or fraction thereof, from the date when due and payable, and a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount of taxes due and payable. The total amount of such tax, penalty and interest is further declared to be a debt due and owing from such person to the City. The City Attorney, upon direction of the City Council, shall commence and prosecute to final judgment and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect such debt in the name of the City. 
(Prior code 3-2-4; Ord. 8, 1996) 
Sec. 5-3-50. - Inspection of records. 
    The Finance Director shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of any person required to pay the tax levied by this Article and to make copies of the contents thereof. 
(Prior code 3-2-5; Ord. 8, 1996) 
Sec. 5-3-60. - Tax applicable to local functions only. 
    The tax levied by this Article is upon the occupation of supplying local exchange telephone service within the City and, as such, is not a tax upon any functions of the service supplier which relate to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the provisions of this Article shall be construed as the grant of franchise by the City to any person supplying local exchange service within its corporate limits. 
(Prior code 3-2-6; Ord. 8, 1996) 
Sec. 5-3-70. - Tax in lieu of other business and occupation taxes. 
    The tax herein provided shall be in lieu of all other occupation taxes or taxes on the privilege of doing business in the City on any person engaged in the business of local exchange telephone service subject to the provisions of this Article, and in addition shall be in lieu of any free service furnished the City by any said person. 
(Prior code 3-2-7; Ord. 8, 1996) 
Sec. 5-3-80. - Unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any officer, agent or manager of a local exchange telephone service supplier to fail, neglect or refuse to file the quarterly statement of accounts or provide any other information requested by the Finance Director as provided in Section 5-3-30 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 3-2-8; Ord. 8, 1996; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 5-3-90. - Certain offenses and liabilities to continue. 
    All offenses committed and all liabilities incurred prior to the effective date hereof shall be treated as though all prior applicable ordinances and agreements were in full force and effect for the purpose of sustaining any proper suit, action or prosecution with respect to such offenses and liabilities. All taxes, the liability for which has been accrued under the terms of a gross receipts agreement between Mountain Bell and the City, dated June 9, 1972, on or before the effective date hereof, or under the terms of the Mountain Bell (US West) occupation and business tax, shall be and remain unconditionally due and payable, and shall constitute a debt to the City, payable in conformity with the terms and provisions of said agreement prior to the effective date hereof; and all of said terms and provisions of said agreement shall be and remain in full force and effect for the purpose of the collection and payment of any and all such taxes due and payable thereunder, notwithstanding the provisions of the Article. 
(Prior code 3-2-9; Ord. 8, 1996) 
CHAPTER 6 - Business Licenses and Regulations 
ARTICLE I - Business Licenses 

Sec. 6-1-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is the regulation and registration of businesses (as defined in Section 4-4-10) operating within the City for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City and for the proper collection of taxes to support the City. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7, 2010) 
Sec. 6-1-20. - License required. 
    Every person must obtain a license from the City before operating, conducting or carrying on any retail trade, profession or business with a physical storefront within the City (zone C-2); except that nonprofit state corporations, excluding federal, state or municipal corporations, are hereby exempt from the license requirements set forth in this Article. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7, 2010) 
Sec. 6-1-30. - Separate license for each location. 
    Any storefront business operating, conducting or carrying on any retail trade, profession or business within the City must obtain a separate license for each location of such trade, profession or business. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7, 2010) 
Sec. 6-1-40. - License application. 
    An application for a business license shall be made to the City Clerk on forms provided by the City. Every applicant shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may be required for the granting of such license. It is unlawful for any person to make any false statement or misrepresentation in connection with any application for a license. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-1-50. - License fees. 
(a)  Every person required to be licensed by the provisions of this Article shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for every license unless specified otherwise in this Code or any other ordinance. 
(b)  Before granting the license, the fee required for the license must be paid at the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 4, 2004) 
Sec. 6-1-60. - Issuance. 
    Upon receipt of the required fee and compliance with Section 6-1-40, the City will issue a license that indicates that the license tax has been paid for the specified year. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-1-70. - Carrying or posting license required. 
    The license for a particular business location shall be posted at all times in a conspicuous place in the place of business. If the business is not operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed location, the licensee must carry the license upon his person when operating, conducting or carrying on any retail trade, profession or business. Every licensee shall produce his license for examination when requested to do so by any City police officer or by any person representing the City. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-1-80. - License nontransferable. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this Article shall be transferable from person to person or place to place. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-1-90. - Period of license. 
    All licenses shall expire on January 1 of each calendar year. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-1-100. - Suspension. 
    A license may be suspended: 
(1)  When any money due the City has not been paid. This includes failure to pay civil penalties, fines, taxes, impact fees or any other money owed to the City. 
(2)  When any activity conducted by the licensee or his employee or agent violates any federal, state or local rule, regulation or law. 
(3)  Upon failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the license. 
(4)  Upon any grounds of suspension provided by this Code. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-1-110. - Revocation of license. 
    A license may be revoked by the City: 
(1)  When it appears that the license was obtained by fraud, misrepresentation or false statements within the application. 
(2)  When it appears that the activity conducted pursuant to such license is a public nuisance as defined by this Code or statute or violates any federal, state or local rule, regulation or law. 
(3)  Upon failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the license. 
(4)  Upon any grounds of revocation provided by this Code. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-1-120. - Notice and hearing prior to suspension or revocation. 
    All hearings to revoke, suspend or cancel a license shall be before the City Council. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge anyone from his civil liability for the payment of the taxes, penalty and interest or from the prosecution of the offense. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-1-130. - Cease and desist. 
    If any business is operating without a license, the City Clerk may issue an order to the business to cease and desist all further operation until a license is issued for the business. The order shall give the business three (3) days to pay all amounts due the City; or to post a bond in the amount owing the City and to request in writing a hearing with the City Clerk. If the business does nothing, it shall cease operations on the third day. The hearing will be before the City Council. The proceedings shall not relieve or discharge anyone from the civil liability for the payment of the taxes, penalty and interest or from the prosecution of the offense. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-1-140. - Refund of fees. 
    Upon refusal by the City of any license or permit, the fee therefor paid in advance shall be returned to the applicant. In the event that any license or permit is revoked by the City, all monies paid therefor shall be and remain the monies of the City, and no refund shall be made to any licensee or holder of a permit. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-1-150. - Penalty. 
    Failure to comply with the terms of this Article shall constitute a violation of this Code. Any person who is found guilty of, or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to the violation of any section of this Code shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE II - Alcoholic Beverages 

Sec. 6-2-10. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this Article, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Applicant means and includes: 
a.  If an individual, that person making an application for a license under this Article. 
b.  If a partnership, the partners owning ten percent (10%) or more of the partnership that is making application for a license under this Article, 
c.  If a corporation, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, directors, manager and each stockholder owning ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of the corporation that is making application for a license under this Article. 
d.  If a limited liability company, the manager and any member owning more than ten percent (10%) interest in the company that is making application for a license under this Article. 
    Authority or Licensing Authority means the City Council. Such term shall also include the City Clerk where the City Clerk is delegated the authority to administratively approve an application in accordance with this Article. 
    Colorado Liquor Code means Articles 46 and 47 of Title 12, C.R.S., and all rules, regulations, directives, guidelines and codes promulgated by the State of Colorado under the authority of Articles 46 and 47 of Title 12, C.R.S. 
    Liquor Tastings means the sampling of malt, vinous or spirituous liquors that may occur on the premises of a retail liquor store licensee or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee by adult patrons of the licensee pursuant to the provisions of both this Article and applicable provisions of Section 12-47-301(10), C.R.S. and 1 C.C.R. 203-2 of the Colorado Code of Regulations. 
    Manager includes the person or those persons who manage, direct, supervise, oversee and administer the acts, transactions and acts of employees of the establishments governed by this Article. 
    Operator means a person licensed by law to sell alcoholic beverages at retail and who is engaged at any time during the calendar year in such operation within the City. 
    Person means a natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation or organization, or a manager, agent, servant, officer or employee thereof. 
(b)  All other words and phrases used in this Article shall have the meanings attached by state statutes regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages or, if not otherwise defined by such law, as used in their common, ordinary and accepted sense and meaning. 
(Ord. 7, 2003 1; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 5 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-20. - License and permit required. 
    No person shall manufacture, sell or possess for sale any alcoholic beverage or conduct Liquor Tastings within the City unless such person holds a valid and effective license and, if applicable, a Liquor Tastings Permit issued in accordance with both this Article and applicable provisions of Articles 46, 47 and 48 of Title 12, C.R.S., and all applicable fees and taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. 7, 2003 1; Ord. 5 2, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-30. - Applications for new licenses. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall receive all applications for licenses, and shall issue licenses granted by the Licensing Authority in accordance with this Article, upon receipt of such license fees and occupation taxes as are required by law and this Article. 
(b)  All applications for new licenses for the sale of alcoholic liquors at retail shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be subject to the provisions of this Article and Articles 46 and 47 of Title 12. C.R.S. The City Clerk shall not accept an application that is not complete in every detail. If any application is deposited with the City Clerk and found upon examination to contain any omission or error, it shall be returned to the applicant for completion or correction without further action either by the City Clerk or the Licensing Authority. All licenses granted, except special events permits, shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of their issuance unless revoked or suspended. No application shall be deemed complete by the City Clerk unless accompanied by the following: 
(1)  All items required by state statute or Colorado Department of Revenue regulations; 
(2)  Payment in full of the City and State license fees and an additional fee for the actual and necessary expenses of processing the application, conducting a public hearing and investigating, and for publishing and posting the required notice of such hearing; 
(3)  Evidence from the Department of Community Development that the location of the proposed establishment meets the requirements of the applicable City zoning ordinance; 
(4)  In the event that the application is for a hotel and restaurant license, tavern license, club license or beer and wine license, evidence from the appropriate County Health Department that the applicant is or may be licensed to operate a restaurant; 
(5)  Copies of any contract or agreement that confers a power of authority upon any party to manage, operate or supervise the affairs of the proposed establishment and the acts of its employees, whether such a contract or agreement is presently in effect or whether it is intended to become effective following issuance of a license; 
(6)  An affidavit stating that the proposed licensed premises is not located within five hundred (500) feet of any public or parochial school or the principal campus of any college, university or seminary; 
(7)  If any petitions signed by parties in interest that demonstrate the needs of the neighborhood and the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood regarding issuance of the license are to be submitted to the Licensing Authority at the public hearing, such petitions shall be submitted to the City Clerk not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing on the application; and 
(8)  Any other information, document or form that the Licensing Authority deems necessary to carry out its duties as set forth in Title 12, Articles 46, 47 and 48, C.R.S., and all applicable regulations. 
(c)  Other provisions in this Section notwithstanding, where an applicant pursuant to a previous application under this Article has submitted documentation and such documentation is complete, current and in the possession of the City Clerk, the City Clerk may waive resubmission of such documentation; 
(d)  It shall be the obligation of the applicant to post notices required by the Colorado Liquor Code except that, at the applicant's request and upon the applicant's payment of a reasonable administrative fee for posting as established by the City Clerk, the City Clerk may post such notices on behalf of the applicant. The City Clerk shall be responsible for preparing the required notices for new applications. 
(Ord. 7, 2003 1) 
Sec. 6-2-40. - Setting of public hearing for new licenses. 
(a)  Upon the City Clerk's administrative determination that the application is complete, the City Clerk shall schedule a public hearing upon the application to be heard not less than thirty (30) days from the date the application is accepted. The date of acceptance of the application by the City Clerk shall be deemed to be the date of the City Clerk's determination that the application is complete for the purposes set forth in state statutes. 
(b)  The boundaries of the City are hereby declared to establish the neighborhood affected by a proposed liquor license for purposes of the processing of a new license application. An applicant may request in writing that the Licensing Authority administratively consider alternative boundaries of the neighborhood for purposes of a specific application; and, in the event of such request, consideration of the application shall be continued or postponed until the Licensing Authority administratively considers and establishes the appropriate neighborhood boundaries for purposes of the application. Prior to the Licensing Authority's administrative consideration, the applicant may submit a written statement to the Authority supporting the establishment of boundaries of the neighborhood as advocated by the applicant. 
(c)  The City Clerk shall prepare an official map showing the location of the proposed outlet and all outlets within the defined neighborhood to be presented at the public hearing. 
(Ord. 7, 2003 1) 
Sec. 6-2-50. - Investigation. 
(a)  Within seven (7) days after the application has been accepted by the City Clerk, the following individuals shall present themselves to the Police Department to be photographed and fingerprinted: 
(1)  If the applicant is a natural person, that person; 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, those partners who have a ten-percent or more financial interest in the partnership; 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation, both the officers and directors, together with any person owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock thereof; 
(4)  If the applicant is a limited liability company, the manager and those members having more than a ten-percent interest in the company; and 
(5)  Irrespective of the identity of the applicant, the manager of the proposed establishment having a tavern license or a hotel and restaurant license. 
(b)  The Police Department shall make background investigations of the above-named individuals, and for this purpose such individuals shall provide all information necessary for the investigation. Where a partner or corporate officer, director or stockholder, member or manager lives at such a distance from the City that travel would impose undue expense or inconvenience, the Chief of Police shall have the discretion to make other suitable arrangements in order to obtain the necessary photographs, fingerprints and information. Where a background investigation has been previously made of any individual enumerated in this Section either by the Police Department or another law enforcement agency, the Chief of Police shall have the discretion to employ such investigation and may waive the fingerprinting and photographing required by this Section. 
(c)  The Police Department shall obtain additional information as necessary to properly carry out the provisions of Title 12, Articles 46, 47 and 48, C.R.S., the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Revenue, the ordinances of the City and the rules and regulations of the Licensing Authority. 
(d)  Any reports of the results of any investigation conducted by any department shall be delivered by the respective departments or officials to the City Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing on the application, the report of the findings based on the investigation shall be mailed by the City Clerk to the applicant and to other interested parties upon request. 
(Ord. 7, 2003 1) 
Sec. 6-2-60. - Public hearing. 
(a)  The applicant and a representative, if any, shall attend the public hearing on the application. 
(b)  The Licensing Authority may establish written procedures for the conduct of public hearings in conformity with state laws and ordinances and resolutions of the City. In the absence of such written procedures, the Licensing Authority shall act in accordance with common practices and procedures employed in the conduct of other quasi-judicial public hearings. 
(c)  The Licensing Authority shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to require the presence of persons and the production of papers, books and records necessary to the determination of any hearing that the Licensing Authority is authorized to conduct. It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any subpoena issued by the Licensing Authority in the proper conduct of its hearings. 
(d)  A subpoena shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued by the District Court of the State. Upon failure of any witness to comply with such subpoena, the City Attorney shall, at the direction of the Licensing Authority: 
(1)  Petition a Judge of the Municipal Court, setting forth that due notice has been given of the time and place of attendance of the witness and the service of the subpoena, and that the Court, after hearing evidence in support of or contrary to the petition, enter its order compelling the witness to attend and testify or produce books, records or other evidence, under penalty of punishment for contempt in case of willful failure to comply with such order of court; or 
(2)  Petition the District Court in the County, setting forth that due notice has been given of the time and place of attendance of the witness and the service of the subpoena, and that the Court, after hearing evidence in support of or contrary to the petition, enter its order as in other civil actions, compelling the witness to attend and testify or produce books, records or other evidence, under penalty of punishment for contempt in case of willful failure to comply with such order of court. 
(Ord. 7, 2003 1) 
Sec. 6-2-70. - Decision on new applications. 
    Following the public hearing on a new application, the Licensing Authority shall render its decision no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the public hearing; provided, however, that the Licensing Authority may continue the hearing from time to time as may be required to gather necessary facts and evidence and to permit witnesses to testify; and the time limit for the decision on a new application shall run from the date of the conclusion of the hearing, as continued. 
(Ord. 7, 2003 1) 
Sec. 6-2-80. - License renewals. 
(a)  All renewal applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk on the prescribed forms no later than forty-five (45) days prior to the date on which the license expires, except that the Licensing Authority, for good cause, may waive the time requirement set forth in this Section. The forms shall be accompanied by all the required fees and such additional materials as the Licensing Authority deems necessary to carry out the provisions of the Colorado Liquor Code, this Article and all applicable regulations. The City Clerk shall not accept an application unless the application is complete in every detail. If any application is deposited with the City Clerk and found upon examination to contain any omission or error, it shall be returned to the applicant for completion or correction without further action either by the City Clerk or the Licensing Authority. 
(b)  The City Clerk is authorized to administratively review and approve an application for the renewal of any previously approved liquor license where, after a reasonable investigation by the City Clerk and consultation by the City Clerk with other appropriate administrative and law enforcement personnel, all of the following circumstances are found by the City Clerk to exist: 
(1)  The applicant has timely and properly submitted a complete license renewal application and tendered all required fees and taxes in accordance with this Article and the provisions of Title 12, C.R.S. 
(2)  The applicant's license is in good standing with the City and the State, and no violation of law has occurred over the previous year. 
(3)  To the knowledge of the City Clerk, there is no pending or proposed criminal or legal investigation or charges against the applicant or the licensed premises. 
(4)  There is no other information or knowledge available to the City Clerk that would cause the City Clerk, in his reasonable belief, to believe that no other violation of applicable law has occurred and the license should not be renewed. 
(c)  The City Clerk shall retain the discretion to refer and forward any renewal application to the Licensing Authority for review and renewal decision when, in the Clerk's sole discretion, the renewal application presents questions or issues more appropriately considered by the Licensing Authority. 
(Ord. 7, 2003 1) 
Sec. 6-2-90. - Special events permit. 
    The Licensing Authority may issue special events permits for sale of alcoholic beverages as set forth in Title 12, Article 48, C.R.S., and the regulations promulgated by the State. An application for a special events permit shall be accompanied by payment of all applicable state fees, as well as a fee to cover the costs to the City of investigation and issuance of a permit. When an event is held on premises owned or controlled by the City, proof of insurance acceptable to the City Attorney must be filed with the application. Notice of the City's receipt of an application for special events permit and the ability to protest the issuance of the permit shall be posted on the property subject to the proposed special event permit not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of approval of the permit by the Licensing Authority. It shall be the obligation of the applicant to post notices required by the Colorado Liquor Code except that, at the applicant's request and payment of a reasonable administrative fee for posting as established by the City Clerk, the City Clerk may post such notice. The City Clerk shall be responsible for preparing the required notice for special events permits. A hearing by the Licensing Authority on the special event permit application shall not be necessary unless a protest to the application is filed in accordance with Section 12-47-107, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 7 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-2-100. - Optional premises license. 
    The Licensing Authority may issue optional premises licenses as set forth in Title 12, Article 47, C.R.S., and the regulations promulgated by the State. The standards for issuing an optional premises license shall be those standards set forth in Title 12, Article 47, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 7 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-2-110. - Liquor Tastings Permit. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall receive all applications for Liquor Tastings Permits and permit renewals, and shall issue permits granted by the Licensing Authority in accordance with this Article upon receipt of such permit fees as are required by law and this Article. 
(b)  A retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee that wishes to conduct Liquor Tastings shall submit an application for a Liquor Tastings Permit to the Licensing Authority. The application shall be in the form required by the City Clerk. The Licensing Authority may reject the permit application if the applicant fails to establish that the licensee is able to conduct Liquor Tastings without violating the provisions of this Article or applicable provisions of Article 47 of Title 12, C.R.S., or 1 C.C.R. 203-2 of the Colorado Code of Regulations or creating a public safety risk to the neighborhood. The Licensing Authority and the City Clerk may establish application procedures for Liquor Tastings Permits. 
(c)  Each new or renewal application for a Liquor Tastings Permit shall be accompanied by an application fee as set forth by the City Clerk pursuant to Section 6-2-160 of this Article. 
(d)  A Liquor Tastings Permit shall be valid for the period of the then-existing liquor license. The permit may be renewed at the time of any liquor license renewal or at any time within twelve (12) months of the permit's expiration. If a Liquor Tastings Permit has been expired for more than twelve (12) months, then an applicant must submit a new application and pay the initial application fee. 
(e)  Liquor Tastings shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Liquor Tastings shall be conducted only by a person who has completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the Liquor Enforcement Division of the Colorado Department of Revenue and who is either a retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee, or an employee of a licensee, and only on a licensee's licensed premises. 
(2)  The alcohol used in tastings shall be purchased through a licensed wholesaler, licensed brew pub or winery licensed pursuant to Section 12-47-403, C.R.S., at a cost that is not less than the laid-in cost of such alcohol. 
(3)  The size of an individual alcohol sample shall not exceed one (1) ounce of malt or vinous liquor or one-half of one (0.5) ounce of spirituous liquor. 
(4)  Liquor Tastings shall not exceed a total of five (5) hours in duration per day, which need not be consecutive. 
(5)  Liquor Tastings shall be conducted only during the operating hours in which the licensee on whose premises the tastings occur is permitted to sell alcohol beverages, and in no case earlier than 11:00 a.m. or later than 7:00 p.m. 
(6)  The licensee shall prohibit patrons from leaving the licensed premises with an unconsumed sample. 
(7)  The licensee shall promptly remove all open and unconsumed alcohol beverage samples from the licensed premises or shall destroy the samples immediately following the completion of the Liquor Tasting. 
(8)  The licensee shall not serve a person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or who is visibly intoxicated. 
(9)  The licensee shall not serve more than four (4) individual samples to a patron during a liquor tasting. 
(10)  Alcohol samples shall be in open containers and shall be provided to a patron free of charge. 
(11)  Tastings may occur on no more than four (4) of the six (6) days from a Monday to the following Saturday, not to exceed one hundred four (104) days per year. 
(12)  No manufacturer of spirituous or vinous liquors shall induce a licensee through free goods or financial or in-kind assistance to favor the manufacturer's products being sampled at a Liquor Tasting. The licensee shall bear the financial and all other responsibility for a Liquor Tasting. 
(f)  A violation of a limitation specified in this Article or of Section 12-47-301(10) or 12-47-801, C.R.S., by a retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee, whether by the licensee, the licensee's employees or agents or otherwise, shall be the responsibility of the licensee who is conducting the Liquor Tasting. 
(g)  A retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee conducting a Liquor Tasting shall be subject to the same revocation, suspension and enforcement provisions as otherwise apply to the licensee and are imposed by the Licensing Authority. 
(Ord. 5 3, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-120. - Transfer of license. 
    An application for a transfer of ownership of a licensed premises shall be on forms prepared and furnished by the state licensing authority. No application shall be accepted unless complete and unless all applicable fees have been paid. A hearing by the Licensing Authority on the application shall not be necessary, unless the City opposes the transfer or unless the Licensing Authority determines a hearing would benefit the public. 
(Ord. 7 1, 2003; Ord. 5 3, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-130. - Change in manager. 
(a)  Any change in the manager of a licensed establishment shall require approval of the Licensing Authority. The licensee seeking a change in manager shall file the prescribed forms with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of such change, and the new manager shall present himself to the Police Department for photographing, fingerprinting and background investigation. 
(b)  The City Clerk may administratively approve a change of manager for any licensed establishment upon a finding by the City Clerk, after consultation with the City Manager and the Chief of Police, that there is no information or knowledge available to the City Clerk that could support denial of the application for change in manager. The City Clerk shall refer any application for change of manager to the Licensing Authority for the Authority's review and decision where the City Clerk finds that information may support denial of the application. 
(Ord. 7 1, 2003; Ord. 5 3, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-140. - Notice of show cause or nonrenewal hearing. 
    The Licensing Authority may suspend or revoke a license in accordance with the Colorado Liquor Code. When the Licensing Authority issues an order to show cause why a license should not be suspended or revoked, the Licensing Authority shall give the licensee reasonable advance notice of the time and place of the hearing, the authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held, and the violation alleged to support the complaint. Such notice shall be mailed by the City Clerk to the licensee by first-class mail, postage prepaid. 
(Ord. 7 1, 2003; Ord. 5 3, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-150. - Procedural rules and regulations. 
    The Licensing Authority may promulgate reasonable procedural rules and regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Article, provided that the rules and regulations are not in conflict with the Colorado Liquor Code or any other provision in this Article. 
(Ord. 7 1, 2003; Ord. 5 3, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-160. - License fee and application fee. 
(a)  There shall be levied and assessed for each year an annual City liquor license fee upon the business of selling alcoholic beverages in the City based on the type of license held by the licensee. The license fee shall be levied in an amount as set forth in 12-47-505, C.R.S. 
(b)  There shall be levied and assessed an application fee for all applications submitted to the City for a license, Liquor Tastings Permit or other form of approval pursuant to the Colorado Liquor Code. The amount of such application fee shall be the maximum authorized by the State. In the event that no maximum fee is specifically established by the State, the application fee shall be administratively established by the City Clerk based on the actual and necessary expenses associated with the City's processing of the application. In no event shall the application fee be less than the amount indicated below for the following license applications: 
License Application License Application Fee New liquor license $500.00 Liquor license renewal 50.00 Modification of premises 100.00 Transfer of ownership 500.00 Transfer of location 500.00 Change of corporate structure 100.00 Special events permit (malt, vinous, spirituous liquors) 25.00 Special events permit (malt beverage) 10.00 Temporary liquor license permit 100.00 Manager's registration 75.00 Late renewal 500.00 Liquor Tastings Permit 50.00 Liquor Tastings Permit renewal 25.00  
(Ord. 7 1, 2003; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 5, 2004; Ord. 5 3, 4, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-170. - Fines in lieu of suspension. 
    The Licensing Authority is empowered to impose fines in lieu of the suspension of a license to sell alcoholic beverages as provided for in the Colorado Liquor Code. 
(Ord. 7 1, 2003; Ord. 5 3, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-180. - Violations; penalty. 
    Penalties for violations of this Article shall be as provided for in Section 1-4-20 of this Code and shall be in addition to any special penalty provided for in this Article. Each twenty-four-hour period during which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense and violation of this Article. Notwithstanding any other penalty that may be levied, any licensee, his manager or agent, who violates the terms of this Article shall be subject to suspension or revocation of his liquor license pursuant to the Colorado Liquor Code. 
(Ord. 7 1, 2003; Ord. 5 3, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-190. - Hearings, aggravating and mitigating factors. 
    In all cases where a hearing is held regarding the referred to issue, suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of any license issued pursuant to this Article, the Licensing Authority shall consider the following factors in mitigation or aggravation: 
(1)  Seriousness of the violations (affront to the public). 
(2)  Corrective actions taken (if any). 
(3)  Prior violations and offenses at the licensed premises and effectiveness of prior corrective actions. 
(4)  Prior violations and offenses by the licensee. 
(5)  Violation as a repeated course of conduct or as a single event. 
(6)  Likelihood of recurrence. 
(7)  Willfulness of the violations. 
(8)  Hardship on the licensee for the sanction imposed. 
(9)  Length of time a license has been held by the licensee. 
(10)  Previous sanctions imposed against the licensee. 
(11)  Other factors making the situation with respect to the licensee or premises unique. 
(Ord. 7 1, 2003; Ord. 5 3, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-200. - Annual occupation tax. 
(a)  The City Council finds, determines and declares that, considering the nature of the business of selling alcoholic beverages and the relationship of such business to the municipal welfare, as well as the relationship thereof to the expenditures required of the City, a proper, just and equitable distribution of the tax burdens within the City and all other matters properly to be considered in relation thereto, the classification of such business as a separate occupation is reasonable, proper, uniform, nondiscriminating and necessary for a just and proper distribution of the tax burdens within the City. 
(b)  For purposes of imposing an annual occupation tax, the following classes of licenses shall be defined: 
(1)  Class "A" Operators: All operators licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, either as hotels or restaurants or taverns, shall be Class "A" operators. 
(2)  Class "B" Operators: All operators licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and at an optional premises location at hotels or restaurants, taverns or clubs (Classes A and C) shall be Class "B" operators, which shall be supplemental to their primary class of license. 
(3)  Class "C" Operators: All operators licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as clubs shall be Class "C" operators. 
(4)  Class "D" Operators: All operators licensed to sell alcoholic beverages after the hour of 8:00 p.m. and until midnight on Sundays and Christmas, either as hotels or restaurants, taverns or clubs (Classes A and C) shall be Class "D" operators, which shall be supplemental to their primary class of license. 
(5)  Class "E" Operators: All operators licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as beer and wine shall be Class "E" operators. 
(6)  Class "F" Operators: All operators licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises as retail liquor stores shall be Class "F" operators. 
(7)  Class "G" Operators: All operators licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises as liquor-licensed drugstores shall be Class "G" operators. 
(8)  Class "H" Operators: All operators licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises as brew pubs shall be Class "H" operators. 
(9)  Class "I" Operators: All operators licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as arts shall be Class "I" operators. 
(c)  The annual occupation tax shall be levied and assessed by this Article as set forth below: 
Operator Class Annual Tax for Liquor License Class A Operators $1,000.00 Class B Operators 200.00 Class C Operators 1,000.00 Class D Operators 800.00 Class E Operators 1,000.00 Class F Operators 750.00 Class G Operators 750.00 Class H Operators 750.00 Class I Operators 500.00  
Such occupation taxes shall be in addition to the annual license fees and application fees paid to the City and the State, and shall be paid prior to the issuance of the City license. No refund of any tax paid in accordance with this Article shall be made to any person who discontinues or sells his business during the duration of the license; provided, however, that the new owner of any establishment, when approved as the new licensee, shall be credited on a monthly basis for any occupation tax paid by the previous owner for the term of the previous owner's license. 
(d)  In addition to any other remedy provided by this Article, the City shall have the right to recover all sums due and owing under this Article by any civil remedy available under existing laws. 
(Ord. 7 1, 2003; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 6, 2004; Ord. 23 1, 2010; Ord. 5 3, 2011) 
ARTICLE III - Security Guard Businesses 

Sec. 6-3-10. - Definitions. 
    When used in this Article, the following words and phrases, unless the context indicates a different meaning, shall be interpreted as follows: 
    Armed guard means any security guard who is also authorized pursuant to Section 6-3-140 to carry a firearm in the performance of his employment as a security guard. 
    Company means any individual, firm, association, corporation, partnership, school, private club or other entity. 
    Peace officer means a sheriff, undersheriff, deputy sheriff, police officer, state patrol officer, coroner, marshal, any officer, guard or supervisory employee of an institution within the Colorado Department of Institutions, a district attorney or the Attorney General, a probation or parole officer, an officer or member of the National Guard while acting under the call of the Governor in cases of emergency or civil disorder, an agent of the Colorado Bureau of Investigation, or a wildlife conservation officer. 
    Security guard means any person employed or retained to provide protection to persons or property of others. 
    Security guard business means: (i) any company that provides protection of persons or property of others with security guards, or (ii) any company that employs security guards for the protection of its own property or individuals thereon. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004; Ord. 7  1, 2015 ) 
Sec. 6-3-20. - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any company to carry on, engage in or conduct a security guard business in the City without first having obtained a license as provided in this Article. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-30. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this Article shall not apply to or regulate activities of: 
(1)  Any peace officer while acting or employed in his official capacity; 
(2)  Any private detective, not engaged in providing security guard service; 
(3)  Any person engaged in the direction, escort or protection of a funeral procession; or 
(4)  Any person engaged in the business of providing to others a pickup and delivery service for the purpose of distributing money or other negotiable securities. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-40. - Licensing requirements - age - corporate applicants. 
    No applicant shall be licensed under the provisions of this Article unless: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant is a citizen of the United States at least twenty-one (21) years of age or more; or 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other entity, the applicant is organized or authorized to do business in the State. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-50. - Licensing requirements - criminal convictions. 
    No individual or entity shall be eligible to obtain or hold any license provided by this Article if the applicant, or any member, partner, officer, director or the holder of more than a ten-percent interest in the corporate applicant, has been convicted of: 
(1)  Any crime of murder, first or second degree sexual assault, kidnapping, burglary, assault with a deadly weapon or armed robbery; or 
(2)  Any other felony or any crime involving infliction of violence upon the person of another, within the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-60. - License - application. 
    Any company desiring to carry on a security guard business in the City shall make application in writing to the Police Department for a license. The application shall set forth: 
(1)  A description of the nature and scope of the security guard business to be conducted; 
(2)  The names and places of residence of the persons making such application; or the names and places of residence of the officers and directors, partners or members of a corporation, partnership or other entity making such application, together with the names and addresses of any persons holding more than a ten-percent interest of such entity; 
(3)  The address of the principal office or place of business of such person or entity; 
(4)  The name of the individual in charge of such business; 
(5)  The name of the individual in charge of or responsible for the operations of such security guard business within the City; 
(6)  The names and addresses of not less than three (3) persons, as references, of whom inquiry can be made as to the character, standing and reputation of the person or entity making such application; 
(7)  For any company other than an individual, a duly certified copy of the certificate of good standing, or the qualification to conduct business in the State; 
(8)  A statement of the number of persons to be employed as security guards; 
(9)  A statement of the number of vehicles to be used in the conduct of the business and a description thereof; 
(10)  The acceptance by the licensee of the condition, to be expressed in the license, that the license may be revoked by the Chief of Police at any time during the term for which the same was issued, upon just cause shown, and after an opportunity, upon reasonable notice, for the licensee to show cause why such license should not be revoked; 
(11)  Payment of a nonrefundable license application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial application and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each renewal application. The applicant shall also pay with each application a fee based on the number of security guards employed to work within the City. The fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for one (1) to nine (9) security guards, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for ten (10) to nineteen (19) security guards, and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for twenty (20) or more security guards; and 
(12)  Such further and additional information as the Chief of Police may require for the investigation of the application and the enforcement of this Article. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-70. - License - issuance. 
(a)  Issuance. After the receipt and investigation of such application, and upon being satisfied that the company making the same is of good repute and intends to carry on an honest and legitimate business, and that all requirements of this Article have been met, the Chief of Police shall issue a license authorizing the applicant to carry on a security guard business within the City for a period of one (1) year from and after the date of issuance of such license. 
(b)  Denial. If, after receipt and investigation of any application received pursuant to the terms of this Article, the Chief of Police determines that the applicant's character or business responsibility is unsatisfactory, or if the applicant fails to meet any of the requirements of this Article, the Chief of Police shall deny the application and shall notify the applicant of such disapproval. 
(c)  Provisional License. In his or her sole discretion, the Chief of Police may issue a provisional license to a security guard business to legally conduct business in the City pending review of a complete application. A provisional license shall automatically expire and be of no force and effect upon one of the following events: (1) approval of the complete application and license issuance to the applicant; (2) the Police Chief's written denial of the application; (3) written revocation of the provisional license by the Chief of Police due to defects in the application, violations of this Article, delays in processing the application caused by the applicant or for other just cause determined by the Chief of Police in his or her sole discretion. 
(d)  Compliance. It shall be the sole and exclusive responsibility of the licensee to investigate and assure the compliance of each of the licensee's employees with the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004; Ord. 7  2, 2015 ) 
Sec. 6-3-80. - Security guard business employees. 
(a)  No individual shall be employed by any licensee hereunder as a security guard in the City unless such individual meets the criteria required of the licensee as set forth in Section 6-3-50 above as confirmed by a Colorado Bureau of Investigation background check. Prior to the commencement of the employment of any employee, the licensee shall provide evidence to the City that such background check has been completed for such employee. An off-duty peace officer may be employed as a security guard and no additional Colorado Bureau of Investigation background check shall be required. 
(b)  The licensee shall assure that each security guard employed by the licensee is in good physical condition, and does not suffer from any psychological or mental impairments which would preclude the employee from performing his duties or which would pose a danger to citizens and residents of the City. 
(c)  The licensee shall assure that each security guard employed or retained by the licensee will, at all times he is performing duties of his employment within the City, wear an identification card affixed to his uniform or clothing stating the licensee's name, the security guard's name, address, hire number if applicable, date of issue, and licensee's license expiration date. This identification card, which shall have a current picture, physical description, thumb print and signature of the individual employee as part thereof, shall be worn in plain view while working as a security guard within the City. If the security guard is also functioning as an armed guard, the identification card shall be red. 
(d)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee to provide a bond for the benefit of the City. The bond shall be issued by a corporate surety company in a form approved by the City Attorney, payable to the City and naming the City as obligee, in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each employee who shall act as a security guard. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-90. - Individuals not employed or retained by licensed security guard business. 
    Any individual desiring to engage in the occupation of security guard in the City without being employed or retained by a security guard business licensed under the provisions of this Article shall make application for and obtain a license as provided in Sections 6-3-40 through 6-3-70 of this Article, and shall be subject to all of the duties and requirements of this Article applicable to security guard businesses. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-100. - Authority - liability of sureties. 
    A license granted under the provisions of this Article shall be sufficient authority for the individual or entity named as licensee to carry on and engage in the security guard business in the City, and to employ such security guards, armed guards and other employees as such licensee may deem necessary, subject to the licensing requirements of this Article; however, the licensee, and the sureties upon the bond of the licensee, shall be liable upon such bond as well for the act of any security guards, armed guards or other employee as for the act of the principal obligor in the bond. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-110. - License renewal. 
    In order to renew a license prior to the expiration of the license, a renewal application shall be completed and submitted to the City on forms provided by the City, to be processed in accordance with Section 6-3-70 of this Article. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004; Ord. 6 1, 2013) 
Sec. 6-3-120. - Licenses not transferable. 
    No license granted under the provisions of this Article shall be transferable. This Section shall not be construed so as to prevent or prohibit a change by the licensee in the manager, superintendent or other person in charge of the security guard business, provided that a certificate setting forth the change, and containing the information required in Section 6-3-60 above, must first be filed by the licensee with the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-130. - Vehicle marking. 
(a)  Any vehicles used in the conduct of the security guard business within the City by the licensee shall not exhibit colorings, markings or equipment so similar to marked patrol vehicles of the City or Arapahoe County as to be confused with the City police or Arapahoe County Sheriff vehicles. In addition, the security guard business vehicles shall not be equipped with any lights or sirens in violation of the traffic code of the City or the laws of the State, nor shall any insignia be painted on the sides thereof which are similar to, or which could be confused with, that painted on the sides of the City police vehicles or the Arapahoe County Sheriff vehicles. 
(b)  At the time of application for the license identified in Section 6-3-60 of this Article, the applicant shall provide to the Police Department a picture of a vehicle utilized by security guards of the licensee. After issuance of the license provided for herein, no licensee shall change or modify the logo or painting of any such vehicle without the prior authorization of the Chief of Police. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-140. - Armed guards. 
(a)  Before any security guard employed or retained by a licensee shall carry a firearm within the City and function as an armed guard, the security guard shall either: (i) obtain a concealed weapon permit pursuant to Section 18-12-201, et seq., C.R.S., and maintain such permit in good standing thereafter, or (ii) demonstrate the need for such firearm and proficiency in the use, maintenance and care of such firearm in such manner as the Chief of Police shall determine in his sole discretion. In no event shall any individual be deemed proficient in the use, maintenance and care of a firearm unless the individual receives at least eight (8) hours annual training in the use, care and maintenance of firearms. Any armed guard shall wear a red identification card as provided in Section 6-3-80(c). It is a continuing duty of the licensee to comply with the provisions of this Section. 
(b)  All armed guards employed by the licensee who carry a weapon or firearm within the City other than a concealed weapon licensed under Section 18-12-201, et seq., C.R.S., shall provide a certification of the make, model, caliber and type of firearm, and the serial number of the firearm carried, to the Chief of Police. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize the carrying of a concealed weapon or firearm by any employee of the licensee without compliance with all applicable laws and requirements relating to the carrying of such a concealed weapon or firearm. 
(d)  Failure of the licensee to comply with, and to ensure that its employees and independent contractors comply with, the provisions of this Section shall constitute a violation of this Article and shall be grounds for revocation of the licensee's license, notwithstanding any other provision of this Article. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-150. - License revocation. 
    In addition to the other acts specifically identified and prohibited by this Article, the occurrence of any of the following acts or events shall constitute grounds for revocation of a license: 
(1)  Material misrepresentation or concealment of information required in the application for a license; 
(2)  Violation of any federal, state or municipal law relating to use or possession of firearms or weapons; 
(3)  Impersonation of a peace officer by any employee of the licensee; 
(4)  Conviction of the licensee or any principal owner or officer of the licensee, or any employee of the licensee, of any felony offense under the laws of Colorado or the United States; or the conviction of any criminal offense or city ordinance violation, except traffic violations, while acting as a security guard; 
(5)  Any violation of the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-160. - Revocation hearings. 
    Revocation of a license may occur following a hearing conducted by the Chief of Police, upon not less than five (5) days' written notice to the licensee. The decision and determination of the Chief of Police shall be subject to review or appeal to the City Manager, provided that written notice of appeal is filed with the City Manager within ten (10) days following the decision of the Chief of Police. Such decision of the City Manager shall be final and subject to review as provided by C.R.C.P. Rule 106(a)(4). 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-170. - Change in personnel, place of business or vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever the employment of a security guard is terminated for any reason, the licensee shall immediately notify the Chief of Police of such fact and surrender to the Chief of Police any and all identification cards issued to such person. 
(b)  Any licensee changing place of business shall immediately notify the Chief of Police of such fact, together with the address of the new place of business. A change of the place of business shall not be deemed a transfer of license, or require the payment of any additional fees. 
(c)  Whenever a vehicle is acquired by a licensee for use in the conduct of his business, the type and description of such vehicle, together with the type and description of any vehicle replaced by it, shall be immediately reported to the Chief of Police. 
(d)  In addition to any other requirement set forth in this Section, it shall be the duty of the licensee to provide to the Police Department in connection with each license application a current list of those employees of licensee who are providing security guard services within the City. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
Sec. 6-3-180. - Unlawful acts. 
    In addition to the other acts prohibited by this Article, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any licensee to fail to turn over immediately to the Police Department or other appropriate public law enforcement agency any person arrested by such licensee pursuant to the laws of the State. Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as authorizing any licensee to make an arrest not authorized under the laws of the State to be made by a private citizen; 
(2)  For any licensee whose employee fires a firearm within the City to fail to promptly report such incident to the Police Department; 
(3)  For any licensee or employee thereof to hinder or interfere with any investigation under the jurisdiction of the Police Department; 
(4)  For any licensee or employee thereof to fail to report immediately to the Police Department any known violations of City ordinances or to fail to report to the Police Department or other appropriate public law enforcement agency any known violations of state of federal laws; 
(5)  For any employee of the licensee, while engaged in his course of employment, to wear a uniform or insignia similar to that worn by a peace officer; 
(6)  For any employee of the licensee under this Article to represent himself to be an officer of the Police Department; 
(7)  For any employee of the licensee to carry any firearm not registered to the extent required by Section 6-3-140 of this Article; 
(8)  For any licensee to fail to surrender the licensee's identification card/license after termination of the license; 
(9)  For any person, other than a peace officer or member of the armed forces of the United States or Colorado National Guard acting in the lawful discharge of his duties or a person who has a valid permit and license pursuant to the Federal Code for such weapon, to knowingly possess an illegal weapon. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2004) 
ARTICLE IV - Security Alarm Systems 

Sec. 6-4-10. - Legislative intent; purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to set forth regulations governing security alarm systems with the City, to establish an application procedure for permits, to establish fees and assessments, to provide for revocation and nonresponse status, and to establish penalties for violation of the provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code 3-6-1) 
Sec. 6-4-20. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, certain words and phrases used in this Article are defined as follows: 
    Alarm screening system means a method of providing information from the alarm site to a predesignated monitoring location by means of audio, video, personal contact or other device approved by the Chief of Police, which information shall be used to make a reasonable determination of the need for a police response prior to notifying the Police Department of an activated alarm. 
    Applicant means a person who files an application for a new or renewal permit as provided in this Article. 
    Audible alarm system means a device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission of unlawful acts within a building, structure or facility, or both, which generates audible sound when activated. 
    Automatic telephone dialing alarm means any telephone attachment that automatically or electronically selects a public telephone line of the City or any agency providing police communication for the City, then reproduces a prerecorded message to report any burglary or other emergency. 
False alarm means any alarm signal originating from a security alarm system to which the Police Department responds and which results from: 
a.  False activation, where the activator knows or should reasonably know that such alarm is false, including reporting a burglary where there is no evidence to substantiate an attempted or forced entry to the premises or reporting a robbery where no actual or attempted robbery has occurred; 
b.  Alarm activated by human negligence; 
c.  Malfunction in a security alarm system, including overly sensitive settings. 
The term false alarm does not include alarms which arise from conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm user, e.g., electrical storms, tornadoes, floods or other acts of God. 
    Notice means written notice, given by personal service or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person to be notified at his last known address. 
    Permittee means any person granted a permit as provided in this Article. 
    Security alarm system means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. Security alarm systems include both local alarms and alarms which are monitored off of the alarm premises. 
(Prior code 3-6-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 6-4-30. - Security alarm permit. 
    No person shall install or use a security alarm system without first being granted a security alarm permit as provided in this Article. 
(Prior code 3-6-3) 
Sec. 6-4-40. - Exemption. 
    The provisions of this Article do not apply to audible alarm systems installed in motor vehicles. 
(Prior code 3-6-4) 
Sec. 6-4-50. - Intentional false alarms unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to intentionally cause the transmission of an alarm to the Police Department when that person reasonably should know such alarm to be false. 
(Prior code 3-6-5) 
Sec. 6-4-60. - Audible alarm requirements. 
    Every person maintaining an audible alarm system shall post a notice containing the name and telephone number of the person to be notified to render repairs or service and secure the premises during any hour of the day or night that the audible alarm system is activated. The notice shall be posted near the audible alarm system in such a position as to be legible from the ground level adjacent to the premises where the audible alarm system is located. All residential audible alarm systems shall be required to automatically shut off and reset after sounding for a maximum period of fifteen (15) minutes. Any person owning, possessing or using an audible alarm system which fails to shut off and reset after fifteen (15) minutes shall be subject to being charged with violation of Section 7-2-180 of this Code. 
(Prior code 3-6-6) 
Sec. 6-4-70. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Automatic telephone dialing alarm. No person shall install or use any telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects a public telephone trunk line of the City or the Sheriff's Department and then reproduces any prerecorded message to report any burglary or other emergency. 
(b)  Audible alarm system, hearing injury. No person shall install or use any security alarm system that is designed to cause hearing injury to any person. The noise level of an audible security alarm system in the City shall not exceed 110 dB. This sound level has been established using OSHA standards for permittable noise exposures during a thirty-minute time period. 
(Prior code 3-6-7) 
Sec. 6-4-80. - Permit applications and issuance. 
(a)  Issuing authority. The issuing authority shall be the City Manager. 
(b)  Approving authority. The approving authority shall be the City. 
(c)  Application forms. Applications for all permits required under this Article shall be filed with the Police Department. The Chief of Police shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to administer this Article. The application for an alarm system permit shall require the name, address and telephone number of the person who will render service or repairs to the alarm system during any hour of the day or night. 
(d)  Permit issuance. The permit shall be issued only to the person owning or using the alarm system. 
(e)  Notice of application information change. Whenever any change occurs in the written information required in a permit application, the applicant or permittee shall give written notice thereof to the Police Department within twenty (20) days. 
(f)  Permit nontransferable. A permit issued to a person for a security alarm system at a location under the provisions of this Article is not transferable upon another person becoming the owner or primary user of the security alarm system. Such person shall apply for and obtain a new permit as set forth in Section 6-4-30 above. 
(Prior code 3-6-8) 
Sec. 6-4-90. - Security alarm system permit, renewal fee. 
    Security alarm system permits shall be in an amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and shall be renewed each calendar year. The application for renewal of permit form shall be completed and the annual permit fee paid by March 1 of each year. Permit fees shall not be prorated. Applications for renewal of permits shall be processed in the same manner as applications for the initial permit; however, a permit may not be renewed while the subject security alarm system is in a nonresponse status as set forth in Sections 6-4-120 and 6-4-130 below or when false alarm response charges are past due as set forth in Section 6-4-100 below. 
(Prior code 3-6-9; Ord. 7 10, 2004) 
Sec. 6-4-100. - Police Department false alarm response charges. 
(a)  Security alarm system operating with permit. The charge for the first two (2) responses made by the Police Department to the location of a false alarm during a calendar year is included in the annual security alarm permit fee. A charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged for the third response to a false alarm, and a charge of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be charged for the fourth and each successive response to a false alarm. The charge shall be paid to the City by the permittee of a security alarm system upon each successive response made by the Police Department to the location of a false alarm during the same calendar year. 
(b)  Security alarm system operated without permit. Upon the Police Department's first response to a location of a false alarm activated by a security alarm system operated without a permit as provided in this Article, the owner or user shall be notified by the Police Department of the security alarm system permit requirements as provided in this Article. If a permit has been obtained within fourteen (14) days of the first false alarm, all alarms shall be treated as if they occurred with the security alarm system having been operated with a permit. If the owner or user fails to obtain a permit within the same time period, the Chief of Police may place the security alarm system on a nonresponse status as provided in Sections 6-4-120 and 6-4-130 below. 
(c)  Billing. The City shall issue a monthly bill for the service charge accrued during the billing period and any prior periods. Such bills shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days after the billing date. 
(Prior code 3-6-10; Ord. 19 1, 2002; Ord. 7 11, 2004) 
Sec. 6-4-110. - Adjustment period. 
    All security alarm systems shall be afforded a thirty-day adjustment period, commencing with the date of the installation, in order that the system may be brought to maximum efficiency. During that period of time, no charges will be assessed for responses made by the Police Department to false alarms at the property protected by the security alarm system. This thirty-day adjustment period shall not apply unless the Chief of Police is notified in writing of the installation of the security alarm system. Such notification shall specify the date that the security alarm system became operational. 
(Prior code 3-6-11) 
Sec. 6-4-120. - Permit revocation and nonresponse status. 
(a)  Revocation of permit. The following shall constitute grounds for the revocation of an alarm system permit: 
(1)  The violation of any of the provisions of this Article, including the failure to obtain a permit; 
(2)  When any security alarm system activates more than four (4) false alarms during any calendar year, thereby constituting a public nuisance; and 
(3)  Failure to pay the service charges after sixty (60) days of the billing date pursuant to Section 6-4-100 above. 
(b)  Nonresponse status. Any security alarm system which has had the permit revoked or any security alarm system operated without a permit may be placed on a nonresponse status by the Chief of Police to any future alarm activations during the revocation period and/or during the absence of a current permit. 
(Prior code 3-6-12; Ord. 19 2, 2002) 
Sec. 6-4-130. - Revocation and nonresponse status; administration and procedure. 
(a)  The Police Department, in the case of such revocation or nonresponse status, shall serve the permittee with a written order of revocation or nonresponse status which shall state the reasons for such revocation or nonresponse status. This order shall be effective immediately if personally served to the permittee or upon certification to the City by the United States Postal Service that delivery has been made to said address. 
(b)  Immediately upon such an order of revocation or nonresponse status becoming effective, the permittee shall discontinue the use of any security alarm system requiring a permit under this Article and cease all operations conducted under the authority of any permit issued as provided in this Article. 
(c)  All security alarm systems placed on nonresponse status for reasons specified in this Article shall be on a list maintained by the Police Department. The Police Department may elect not to respond to any alarm actuation at locations on the nonresponse status list unless a personal request has been received or it has been determined that an actual burglary, robbery or other emergency is occurring. 
(d)  Reapplication after revocation. Any person having been issued a security alarm system permit which has been revoked by the City pursuant to Section 6-4-120 above shall be entitled to reapply for a permit to use the security alarm system upon meeting the following conditions: 
(1)  Any past due fees and charges owing to the City relating to security alarm systems have been paid; 
(2)  A permit reinstatement fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the City without proration for the current calendar year; and 
(3)  All grounds for the revocation of the earlier permit have been corrected to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police, including but not limited to the installation and use of an alarm screening system on each security alarm system where the permit was revoked due to excessive false alarms. 
(e)  Appeal procedures. Any applicant for a security alarm system permit or permittee of a security alarm system as provided in this Article may seek administrative review of decisions by the Chief of Police regarding the issuance of permits, false alarm response charges, revocation of the permit or the nonresponse status of a security alarm system. Such person shall make the request for review in writing to the office of the City Manager within thirty (30) days after the date of the aggrieved action. 
(Prior code 3-6-13; Ord. 7 12, 2004) 
Sec. 6-4-140. - Confidentiality. 
    The information furnished and secured pursuant to this Article and the security alarm permit shall be confidential and shall not be subject to public inspection. 
(Prior code 3-6-14) 
Sec. 6-4-150. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to the penalties provided for in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Prior code 3-6-15) 
Sec. 6-4-160. - Enforcement. 
    The conviction or punishment of any person for violation of the provisions of this Chapter or for failing to secure a permit as required by this Chapter shall not relieve such person from paying the permit fee or service charge due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall the payment of any permit fee or service charge prevent criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this Article. All remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Article. The amount of any permit fee or service charge shall be deemed a debt to the City. An action may be commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent permit fee. All permit fees shall be deemed delinquent thirty (30) days after they are due and payable. 
(Prior code 3-6-16) 
CHAPTER 7 - Health, Sanitation and Animals 
ARTICLE I - Public Nuisances 

Sec. 7-1-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to preserve and protect the health, safety, welfare, quality of life and quiet enjoyment of property through a uniform procedure for the identification and enforcement of nuisances within the City. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as set forth below: 
    Abatement means the removal, stoppage, prostration or destruction of that which causes or constitutes a nuisance, whether by breaking or pulling it down, or otherwise destroying or effacing it. 
    City Manager means the City Manager for the City or a person or persons designated by the City Manager to act on behalf of the City Manager in the administration of all or any part of this Article. The City Manager's designee may be a City employee, hearing officer or attorney. 
    Investigating Official means the City Manager, the City Manager's designee, a police officer or the City's code enforcement officer engaged in the investigation and determination of the existence of a nuisance. 
    Nuisance means any nuisance as identified or defined by this Article or any other provision of this Code. 
    Owner means: (1) the owner of record as evidenced by the records of the County Assessor; or (2) any person known to the City to possess a legal, financial or equitable interest in the property on which an alleged nuisance exists at the time of the violation. The term owner may include but not be limited to: (a) a tenant or lessee where such tenant or lessee is lawfully authorized, by written lease or other agreement with the owner, to occupy the property upon which a nuisance is alleged to exist or is maintained; or (b) a person acting on behalf of the owner as evidenced by a power of attorney or other form of fully executed and notarized form of written authorization. 
    Property means any real property, premises, structure or location. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-1-30. - Nuisances identified and declared. 
    Each of the following conditions, events or circumstances existing in whole or in part upon property located within the City are hereby declared nuisances: 
(1)  General nuisance: It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person in possession or entitled to the possession of any property within the City, or any part thereof, to cause, maintain, permit or allow any fence, wall, shed, deck, house, garage, building, structure, tree, pole, smokestack, excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk, dock or any lot, land, yard, premises or location, in its entirety or in any part thereof, to be or to remain in a condition that endangers the health, safety, life, limb or property, or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, damage or injury to any one (1) or more individuals in the City, in any one (1) or more of the following particulars: 
a.  By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general health and safety of the community. 
b.  By reason of being a fire hazard. 
c.  By reason of being unsafe for occupancy or use on, in, upon, about or around such property. 
d.  By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the property, and/or being vacant, any of which depreciates the enjoyment and use of the property in the immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful to the community in which such property is situated or such conditions exists. 
(2)  Air pollution: The emission or escape into the open air from any source of smoke, ashes, dust, dirt, grime, acids, fumes, gases, vapors, odors or any other substances or combination of substances in such manner or in such amounts as to endanger or tend to endanger the health, comfort, safety or welfare of the public, to cause unreasonable injury or damage to property or to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of property or normal conduct of business, is declared a nuisance. 
(3)  Water pollution: 
a.  Certain ponds or pools a nuisance: Any pond, pool, stream, ditch or deposit of water or other liquid or viscous body which is unsafe, dangerous or detrimental to the public health or safety or unwholesome or offensive in odor is declared a nuisance. 
b.  Wells that overflow: Any well maintained or operated so that it overflows or waste is discharged therefrom into or over any street or other public way or place or upon or over private property so as to form ice, create a health or safety hazard or in any other manner inconvenience or endanger persons or property is declared a nuisance. 
c.  Septic tanks, underground fuel storage and leaching fields: Any septic tank, underground fuel storage or leaching field which is unsafe, dangerous or detrimental to the public health or safety, or in any other manner inconvenience or endanger persons or property, is declared a nuisance. 
(4)  Noise: It is declared a nuisance and unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise measured or registered in the manner provided in this Subsection from any source at a level which is in excess of the following dB(A) levels established for the time period and land uses listed below: 
Uses/Zone District Maximum Noise in dB(A) Residential uses within Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4 and R-5 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 1 
All other times 55 dB(A) 
50 dB(A) Nonresidential uses within Districts R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4 or R-5 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 2 
All other times 65 dB(A) 
50 dB(A) All uses within the C-1 Zone District All times: 70 dB(A) All uses within the C-2 Zone District 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 1 
All other times 60 dB(A) 
55 dB(A) All uses within the O-1 Zone District 60 dB(A)  
1 Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., the designated noise level may be increased by ten (10) decibels for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes in any one-hour period. 
2 Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., the designated noise level may be increased by ten (10) decibels for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes in any one-hour period. 
Noise shall be measured at a height of not less than four (4) feet and not greater than seven (7) feet above ground level at or within approximately ten (10) feet of the property line of the property from which the noise is emanating. Noise shall be measured on a weighing scale on a sound level meter of standard design and quality and in accordance with the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute. For the purposes of this Subsection, measurements with sound level meters shall be made when a wind velocity at the time and place of such measurement is either: (1) not more than five (5) miles per hour; or (2) not more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour with a windscreen attached to the microphone. 
(5)  Lighting nuisance: Any floodlight, spotlight or other source of artificial light or illumination is declared a nuisance where: 
a.  An owner or occupant of property neighboring the property upon which the source of lighting or illumination is located submits a written complaint to the City stating that the lighting or illumination interferes with the owner's or occupant's enjoyment of his or her property; and 
b.  The light or illumination produces, generates or discharges light at a level exceeding two-tenths (0.2) foot-candle above the ambient light level when measured at ground level at the property line of the property upon which the source of the lighting or illumination is located. 
This Subsection shall not apply to public street lighting, authorized traffic control devices or lighting necessary for the installation, repair or maintenance of public streets and public improvements by the City, the Colorado Department of Transportation or other governmental agency. 
(6)  Unclean or defective drain, ditch, garbage box, etc.: Any unclean, foul, unsafe, unhealthy, dangerous, defective or filthy drain, ditch, tank or gutter, or any leaking or broken slop, garbage or manure box or receptacle of like character, is declared a nuisance. 
(7)  Unclean stable or stall: Any stable, stall, shed, yard or appurtenance thereto in which refuse shall collect and accumulate to an extent offensive or unhealthy to others, or which shall not be kept protected from flies and other insects and rodents and in a clean or wholesome conditions, is declared a nuisance. 
(8)  Disposal of certain substances: The filling, placing, depositing or location of any dung, carrion, dead animal, offal, garbage or any putrid or offensive substance, or the contents of any privy, vault or cesspool, on any street, alley, public or private ground or upon any lake, creek or other body of water, is declared a nuisance. 
(9)  Deposit on public property or streets: The deposit in or on or the littering of any street, alley or public place with garbage, rubbish, debris, sod, earth, sand, gravel, concrete or any other construction or waste material is declared a nuisance. 
(10)  Garbage, rubbish and trash: 
a.  Stale or uncovered garbage: Any garbage stored otherwise than in watertight and airtight cans or containers or which creates odor, stench or is accessible to animals, or otherwise creates a health hazard, is declared a nuisance. 
b.  Dumping or disposal of trash, garbage or debris: The storage, dumping or disposal of trash, garbage or debris within the City is deemed a nuisance; provided, however, that it shall be permissible for owners or occupants of property, other than residentially zoned property, to bury or otherwise destroy or dispose of (except by fire) used concrete, structural materials or other similar solid debris upon such property so long as no health hazard is created and such disposal conforms with all federal, state and local health department regulations and requirements. 
c.  Improper accumulation and storage of rubbish and trash: Any rubbish or trash that is allowed to accumulate in or around cans or containers in such a manner as to foster the propagation of rats, vermin, flies and other insects or is stored in such a manner as to be accessible to animals or littered about by wind is declared a nuisance. 
d.  Compost: A compost pile that substantially annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, health or safety of the public is declared a nuisance. Such annoyance includes, but is not limited to, strong offensive odors or the presence of mice, rats or other vermin. 
(11)  Junk nuisances: 
a.  It shall be a nuisance for any person entitled to the possession of any real estate or leasehold, residence, store, building or premises within the City, or any part thereof, to permit or allow the existence or storage of junk as defined in this Subsection. 
b.  For purposes of this Section and Chapter, junk shall mean and include: iron, brass, copper, tin, lead or other metals; ropes, rags, fibers or fabrics; bottles or other glass; rubber or rubber products; machinery; motor vehicle parts; junk motor vehicles as defined below; junk trailers as defined below; tools; appliances; unstacked firewood; cartons, pallets, barrels and other containers; building materials such as but not limited to lumber, pipe and pipe fittings, conduit and conduit fittings (except where such building materials are stored for use upon property that is subject to a valid building permit, which permit authorizes construction utilizing such building materials); wastepaper; or other waste or discarded goods. 
c.  For purposes of this Section and Chapter, junk motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is inoperable or does not have a current license plate, or which lacks one (1) or more of the following items that is otherwise standard factory equipment on the particular vehicle model: windshield, side or rear window, door, fender, headlamp, muffler, wheel and/or properly inflated tire. 
d.  For purposes of this Section and Chapter, an inoperable motor vehicle means any vehicle not capable in its present condition of being promptly started and driven under its own power. 
e.  For purposes of this Section and Chapter, junk trailer means a trailer that is inoperable due to a flat tire, lack of a wheel, lack of structural integrity or other similar reason that renders the trailer inoperable. 
f.  Nothing in this Subsection shall apply to the existence or storage of junk within a fully enclosed and lawfully existing permanent structure. 
(12)  Dangerous conditions on property: 
a.  Abandoned, unattended or discarded refrigerators or containers: Any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other airtight container is declared a nuisance. 
b.  Pits, unkempt wells, tunnels and excavations: Any abandoned or unguarded pit, well, tunnel or excavation hazardous to life or property is declared a nuisance. 
c.  Dangerous or dilapidated buildings, structures or vehicles: Any building, structure, wall or tree house which is so decayed, broken down, disintegrated, dilapidated or poorly constructed as to constitute a fire hazard or other health or safety hazard to persons or property is declared a nuisance. 
(13)  Diseased, dead or dangerous tree and plant nuisance: Any trees, shrubs, vines, hedges or other plants that are diseased, infected or dead or which are placed as to be dangerous to the public health and safety are declared a nuisance. 
(14)  Property maintenance nuisance: 
a.  Failure to maintain site as approved. It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to fail to install or fail to maintain any detention ponds, drainageways, landscaping, lighting, trash enclosures, signage, retaining walls, irrigation systems, screening, fencing, parking lots, private driveways and streets and other conditions of private property required to be installed and maintained through the provisions of a rezoning, conditional or special use permit, subdivision plat, development plan, variance, fencing or landscaping plan, site plan, design standards, building permit or any other land development consent or document approved by the City, its boards, commissions and officials. 
b.  It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance to allow and to fail to prevent the erosion of soil caused by drainage originating within any property. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 04 1, 2007; Ord. 11 1, 2008) 
Sec. 7-1-40. - Exceptions to nuisance. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Property, actions or activities owned, controlled or conducted by the City, its officials, contractors and employees in the performance of official municipal functions. 
(2)  Any noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle in responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(3)  Any noise resulting from a security system licensed with the City. 
(4)  The operation of aircraft or aircraft activities that would otherwise constitute a nuisance under this Article but is authorized by federal law. 
(5)  Air pollution or noise generally emanating from the operation of a public right-of-way other than air pollution or noise emanating from a single identifiable vehicle. 
(6)  An activity that would constitute a nuisance in accordance with this Article but is expressly described in a valid City-issued permit, provided that such activity is ceased, terminated or abated with seventy-two (72) hours of commencement or within such other period of time specifically identified in the permit. 
(7)  Construction noise, meaning that noise created by construction equipment or tools at a construction or demolition site during construction times as permitted in this Code; provided, however, that there is no amplified music emanating from the construction or demolition site, and further provided that the construction noise does not exceed ninety (90) decibels dB(A). 
(8)  Nonamplified noise associated with lawfully conducted sporting, athletic, educational, worship, theatrical, musical or other similar events or services conducted upon property owned by and used for a nonprofit institution, private club, public recreational facility or nonprofit recreational facility as these uses are defined by Section 16-1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 04 2, 2007) 
Sec. 7-1-50. - Nuisance unlawful. 
    It shall be an offense and unlawful for any person being the owner, agent or occupant of, or having under his control, any building, lot or premises to maintain or allow any nuisance to be or remain thereon. It shall further be unlawful and an offense for any person to: 
(1)  Do any act constituting a nuisance; 
(2)  Fail to act where such failure causes or continues a nuisance; 
(3)  Permit any activity or condition constituting a nuisance; or 
(4)  Aid or abet in the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-60. - Nuisance a continuing offense. 
    Each calendar day that a nuisance exists shall be a separate offense and a violation of this Article. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-70. - Methods of nuisance abatement. 
(a)  In order to abate any nuisance, the City may elect to pursue any one (1) or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Pursue summary abatement pursuant to Section 7-1-80 of this Article; 
(2)  Initiate an action for judicial enforcement in the Municipal Court or a County Court pursuant to section 7-1-90 of this Article; or 
(3)  Cause abatement or removal by means of a notice and demand, together with either judicial enforcement or City abatement pursuant to Section 7-1-100 of this Article. 
(b)  No remedy provided in this Article shall be exclusive. All remedies shall be cumulative and available concurrently. The taking of any action authorized by this Article or any other provision of this Code, including charge or conviction of violation of this Article, shall not preclude or prevent the taking of other action to abate any nuisance. Any application of this Article that is in the nature of a civil action shall not prevent the commencement or application of any other charges brought under the municipal ordinances or any other provision of law. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-80. - Summary abatement of nuisances. 
(a)  The City Manager may authorize the immediate and summary abatement of any nuisance where the following criteria or circumstances are determined by the City Manger to exist: 
(1)  An Investigating Official certifies in writing to the City Manager that a condition, activity or circumstance exists upon property located within the City which constitutes a nuisance as identified and described in this Article. Such written certification should, when possible, include photographs, illustrations and other evidence to describe the scope and extent of the nuisance; 
(2)  The Investigating Official certifies in writing to the City Manager that the nuisance presents an immediate and imminent danger to the public health, safety, or welfare; and 
(3)  The delay associated with abatement of the nuisance by another method as provided in this Article will potentially result in harm or damage to person or property from the nuisance. By way of example and not limitation, such harm or damage may include: the release of sewage onto adjacent property; injury to persons resulting from open pits or cesspools; or the deposit of water upon public streets or sidewalks that results in potentially hazardous conditions. 
(b)  Following the City Manager's determination as required in Subsection (a) above, the City Manager may authorize abatement of all or a portion of the nuisance as the City Manager deems necessary to remedy the nuisance and to resolve the immediate and imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare resulting from the nuisance. When summary abatement is authorized by the City Manager, prior notice of such abatement action to the owner, agent or occupant of the property is not required. 
(c)  Following abatement, the City Manager shall deliver to the owner a written description of the circumstances resulting in the abatement or other action, together with an itemized invoice or other detailed statement of the cost and expenses incurred by the City in abating the nuisance and demand for payment within twenty (20) days of the owner's receipt of the invoice or statement. 
(d)  Within twenty (20) days following the owner's receipt of the City Manager's invoice or statement of costs and expenses, the owner shall deliver to the City Manager payment in full for the costs and expenses. Failure to timely pay an invoice or statement of costs and expense shall constitute a violation of this Code, which shall be subject to the penalties provided by Section 1-4-20 of this Code. The City may, at its discretion and only where such costs and expenses exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), assess the costs and expenses of abatement as a lien against the owner's property and certify such lien to the County Clerk and Recorder for collection in the same manner as real estate taxes against the property. Each such lien shall have priority over other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-90. - Judicial enforcement. 
(a)  The City Manager may initiate a civil action or criminal prosecution for the judicial enforcement of this Article against any nuisance at any time. Judicial enforcement shall also be available to abate a nuisance following efforts to abate the nuisance through the delivery of a notice and demand as provided in Section 7-1-100. The City Manager shall endeavor to advise and consult with the City Council regarding the nuisance prior to commencing judicial enforcement. 
(b)  If the City Manager elects to initiate judicial enforcement in the Municipal Court or a County Court, no prior notice regarding the nuisance or abatement need be provided to the defendant other than service of a summons and/or complaint in accordance with the applicable court rules. 
(c)  Upon a finding of a nuisance and violation of any provision of this Article by any defendant, the Court shall impose the following minimum penalty, unless the City, through the City Prosecutor, requests or consents to a lesser or different penalty: 
(1)  Enjoin or otherwise order the defendant to fully abate and remedy the nuisance within a specified and reasonable period of time not to exceed ten (10) days following the entry of the court's order; 
(2)  Fine the defendant for each violation an amount not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than the maximum fine authorized in Section 1-4-20 of this Code for the first violation, not less than four hundred dollars ($400.00) nor more than the maximum fine authorized in Section 1-4-20 of this Code for the second violation, and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than the maximum fine authorized in Section 1-4-20 of this Code for the third and for each subsequent violation for the same nuisance. No portion of any minimum fine may be suspended or held in abeyance by the Court; 
(3)  Order the defendant to forthwith pay restitution to the City for the actual costs or loss caused to the City by the violation, including but not limited to administrative expenses, costs to protect the public from the nuisance, court costs and attorney fees; and 
(4)  Authorize the City to assess any unpaid costs and expenses for abatement imposed by the Court in Paragraph (3) above as a lien against the owner's property and certify such lien to the County Clerk and Recorder for collection in the same manner as real estate taxes against the property. Each such lien shall have priority over other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments. 
(d)  In addition to the minimum penalty required by this Subsection, the Court shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Imprison the defendant for a term not more than three hundred sixty five (365) days for each violation; 
(2)  Permanently enjoin the defendant from further engaging in the use of the property in a manner that would constitute a nuisance; 
(3)  Find the defendant in contempt of court and assess a penalty as specified by the Court, including a fine and/or imprisonment for failure to abide by, comply with or conform to any court order or injunction; and/or 
(4)  Impose any other penalty authorized by law. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1; Ord. 10 3, 2013) 
Sec. 7-1-100. - Notice and demand for abatement. 
    Where an Investigating Official has reason to believe that a nuisance may exist upon property within the City, the Investigating Official may seek abatement of the nuisance in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Personal contact: The Investigating Official shall first attempt to personally contact the owner or occupant of the property (by personal visit, by telephone or by letter) in an effort to seek voluntary abatement of the nuisance. The Investigating Official shall provide the owner or occupant a reasonable time, and in no event less than seventy-two (72) hours, to voluntarily abate the nuisance unless the nuisance is subject to summary abatement. 
(2)  Written description: Where the nuisance remains unabated following personal contact with the owner or occupant, the Investigating Official shall prepare a written description of the condition, activity or circumstance that is believed to constitute a nuisance as described in this Article. Such written certification should, whenever possible, include photographs, illustrations and other evidence to describe the scope and extent of the nuisance. 
(3)  Notice and demand: The Investigating Official shall prepare a written notice titled "Notice and Demand for Nuisance Abatement" ("Notice and Demand"). Such Notice and Demand shall substantially conform to the following content requirements: 
a.  A written description of the condition, activity or circumstance that constitutes a nuisance and violation of this Article; 
b.  A statement that the condition, activity or circumstance constitutes a nuisance, together with a citation to the specific provision of this Article that declares such condition, activity or circumstance to be a nuisance and unlawful; 
c.  A copy of this Article, as it may be amended; 
d.  A demand that the nuisance be abated on or before a specified time and date. The time and date shall be not less than seven (7) days nor more than fourteen (14) days from the date of the Notice and Demand; 
e.  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated on or before the date and time stated in the Notice and Demand, the City may at its option pursue an action to enforce this Article in an appropriate court and/or abate the nuisance. Such statement may also inform the addressee of the potential fines and other penalties that may be imposed upon a finding by a court that a nuisance exists on the property. Such statement may also inform the addressee that the cost and expense of abatement incurred by the City will be assessed as a lien against the owner's property and that the City may certify such lien to the County Clerk and Recorder for collection in the same manner as real estate taxes against the property; and 
f.  Any other information as determined by the Investigating Official to enable the addressee to properly address the abatement of the nuisance and to contact the Investigating Official. 
(4)  Delivery of Notice and Demand: The Investigating Official shall cause the Notice and Demand to be distributed in accordance with this Subsection. Provided that the Notice and Demand is mailed or posted in substantially conformity with this Subsection, the failure of the owner, occupant or another person to receive such Notice and Demand shall not constitute a failure to comply with the requirements of this Section. The Investigating Official shall cause the Notice and Demand to be distributed as follows: 
a.  The Notice and Demand shall be mailed, by certified U.S. Mail return receipt requested, to the owner of the property as such owner's name and address appear in the records of the County Assessor; and 
b.  Either: 
1.  Where the property includes a residential or commercial structure, the Notice and Demand shall be mailed, by first class U.S. Mail, addressed to "Occupant" at the address of the property upon which the nuisance is located; or 
2.  Where the property is vacant or undeveloped, one (1) sign measuring not smaller than two (2) feet by three (3) feet shall be posted on the property at a conspicuous location visible from a traveled thoroughfare. Such sign shall be titled "Notice and Demand for Nuisance Abatement" and shall state that the property is subject to City enforcement of this Article, shall include a brief statement of the nuisance being abated and shall include the words "additional information is available at the Village Center for the City of Cherry Hills Village during normal business hours," together with the address of the Village Center and telephone number of the Investigating Official. 
(5)  Failure to timely abate following Notice and Demand: If the owner or occupant shall fail to abate the nuisance on or before the date and time stated in the Notice and Demand, the City Manager may: 
a.  Authorize abatement of all or a portion of the nuisance as the City Manager deems necessary to remedy the nuisance. No additional or prior notice of such abatement action to the owner, agent or occupant of the property is required. Following abatement, the City Manager shall deliver to the owner a written description of the action taken to abate the nuisance, together with an itemized invoice or other detailed statement of the cost and expenses incurred by the City in abating the nuisance and demand for payment within twenty (20) days of the owner's receipt of the invoice or statement. Within twenty (20) days following the owner's receipt of the City Manager's invoice or statement of costs and expenses, the owner shall deliver to the City Manager payment in full for the costs and expenses. Failure to timely pay an invoice or statement of costs and expense shall constitute a violation of this Code, which shall be subject to the penalties provided by Section 1-4-20 of this Code. The City Manager may, at the City Manager's discretion, assess the costs and expenses of abatement as a lien against the owner's property and certify such lien to the County Clerk and Recorder for collection in the same manner as real estate taxes against the property. Each such lien shall have priority over other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments. 
b.  Pursue an action for judicial enforcement of the nuisance violation as provided by Section 7-1-90 of this Article. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-110. - Costs and expenses as lien against property. 
(a)  Whenever this Article authorizes the City to assess against any person or property the cost and expense of abatement of nuisances, such costs and expenses shall include all costs actually incurred by the City and reasonably related to the abatement, including but not limited to an hourly rate for each hour of City staff time employed in administering this Article in the abatement of the nuisance, attorney fees and legal costs, equipment charges, contractors and other service personnel expenses charged to the City, transportation and storage charges, trash disposal charges and fees, insurance, and equipment and services necessary to protect the property and the general public from harm. The City Manager may establish reasonable and uniform charges for property inspection, preparation and delivery of notices and other administrative tasks customarily undertaken in the administration of this Article. 
(b)  Whenever this Article authorizes the City to assess against any person or property the cost and expense of abatement of nuisances, the City shall be authorized to assess any unpaid and delinquent costs and expenses as a lien against the property and to certify the costs and expense to the County Treasurer or other appropriate County official for collection in the same manner as real estate taxes against the property. Each such assessment shall be a lien against each lot or tract of land until paid and shall have priority over other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-120. - Review of costs and expenses of abatement. 
(a)  Any owner of property subject to an assessment for the costs and expenses of the City's abatement of a nuisance imposed in accordance with Section 7-1-100 of this Article may request an administrative review of the assessment by the City Council. 
(b)  A request for an administrative review must be made in writing by the owner and delivered to the City Manager prior to 5:00 p.m. on the date upon which payment of costs and expenses are due. The written request shall describe in detail the specific reasons why the assessment is unreasonable, together with any other written information the owner asserts demonstrates the unreasonableness of the assessment. Upon the timely submission of a request, the deadline for payment of assessed costs and expenses shall be postponed until the earlier of the City Council's decision following review or such later time the City Council directs payment to be made following review. 
(c)  The review shall be for the sole purpose of considering the reasonableness of the assessed costs and expenses. As an administrative matter, no notice or hearing shall be required prior to review of the owner's request by the City Council. 
(d)  Following review of the City Manager's assessment, the written request for review and any explanation of the City Manager concerning the costs and expenses, the City Council shall either affirm the City Manager's assessment or reduce the assessment upon a finding that the assessment is unreasonable. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-130. - Certain defenses not available. 
(a)  Any person who is the record owner of the premises, location or structure at the time a Notice and Demand or other order pursuant to this Article is issued and served upon him, shall be responsible for complying with that order and liable for any costs and expenses incurred by the City, notwithstanding the fact that he conveys interests in the property to another after such notice or order was issued and delivered. 
(b)  It shall not be a defense to the determination that a nuisance exists or to an action to abate a nuisance that the property is boarded up or otherwise enclosed, or that the nuisance is not visible by the general public. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-140. - Right of entry for inspection. 
(a)  Any Investigating Official is authorized to enter upon private property to ascertain the existence of a nuisance if: 
(1)  Emergency conditions dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare are reasonably believed to exist upon such property or upon property that is accessible from the entered property; 
(2)  The Investigative Official has obtained a search warrant; 
(3)  The private property is undeveloped or vacant; 
(4)  The Investigative Official has obtained the consent of a person who purports to be in possession of the property or authorized to consent to entry; or 
(5)  The Investigative Official, after reasonable efforts to contact a person in possession by telephone, personal visit or posting or mailing of a request to enter, is unable to make contact to request the consent of the person in possession. 
(b)  An Investigating Official shall not enter private property where the owner or person in possession denies consent except where emergency conditions are believed to exist or a search warrant authorizing entry is obtained. 
(c)  The Municipal Judge shall have the power to issue a search warrant to permit the investigation of the existence of a nuisance upon a showing by an Investigating Official of either: (1) probable cause that a nuisance exists; or (2) emergency conditions dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare exist. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-150. - Right of entry for abatement. 
    Whenever the City exercises its right to abate a nuisance in accordance with this Article, the City shall have the authority to enter upon the property and abate the nuisance. In abating such nuisance, the City may take such action as necessary to complete the abatement of the nuisance and, should it be practicable to salvage any material derived in the abatement, the City may sell the salvaged material at private or public sale at the best price obtainable and shall keep an accounting of the proceeds from such sale. The proceeds, if any, obtained from the sale of any material salvaged as a result of the City's abatement of a nuisance shall be deposited to the General Fund of the City and any deficit between the amount so received and the cost of the abatement may be levied as an assessment against the property and collected as any other assessment by the City. Should the proceeds of the sale of such salvaged material exceed the cost of abatement, the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the property from which the nuisance was abated. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-160. - Administrative regulations authorized. 
    The City Manager is authorized to promulgate administrative regulations and forms in order to implement the provisions of this Article. No administrative regulation shall conflict with a specific requirement of this Article. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-170. - Extension of deadlines authorized. 
    A reasonable extension of any time deadline established by this Article or in the administration of this Article may be granted by the Investigating Official or City Manager upon a showing of just cause for an extension. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-180. - Effect on other ordinances. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any zoning ordinance or other ordinance now or hereafter enacted authorizing certain uses or location of property, it is the intention of the City Council, and it is hereby so declared, that any use, location or activity otherwise authorized by zoning ordinances or any other ordinance shall be subject to this Article prohibiting nuisances. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
Sec. 7-1-190. - Enforcement by Tri-County District Health Department. 
    Upon consent by the City Manager, the provisions of this Article may be enforced by the Tri-County District Health Department or by the City with the assistance of the Health Department. 
(Ord. 8, 2003 1) 
ARTICLE II - Garbage and Refuse 

Sec. 7-2-10. - Accumulation of refuse prohibited. 
    Any accumulation of refuse or other material on any premises, improved or unimproved, in the City is prohibited and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-2-20. - Responsibility for refuse on premises. 
    It shall be the duty of every person, whether owner, lessee or renter of any vacant lot, building or premises, including any place of business, hotel, restaurant, dwelling house, apartment, tenement or any other establishment, at all times to maintain the premises in a clean and orderly condition, permitting no deposit or accumulation of refuse or materials other than those ordinarily attendant upon the use for which such premises are legally intended. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-2-30. - Removal of refuse from business. 
    Discarded refuse, including automobile parts, stoves, furniture and junkyard refuse, shall be removed periodically by the proprietor so that the premises are clean and orderly at all times. Silt and similar deposits from automobile wash racks shall be removed to the City dump by the establishment creating such deposit. Any accumulation of refuse that is highly explosive or flammable which might endanger life or property shall be removed to such places as approved by the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief. Such removal shall be handled by the establishments responsible therefor. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE III - Weeds, Brush and Rubbish 

Sec. 7-3-10. - Undesirable plant management advisory commission designated. 
    The Board of Trustees is appointed to act as the Undesirable Plant Management Advisory Commission for the City and shall have the duties and responsibilities as provided by state statute. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Editor's note- Section 35-5.5-101, C.R.S., establishes the requirements for undesirable plant management in the State. 
Sec. 7-3-20. - Removal required; exceptions. 
    It is the duty of every person owning vacant or improved property, including easements and drainageways within the City, to keep cut to within ten (10) inches of the ground all weeds and to keep said property free from brush and rubbish of all kinds. However, this Article shall not apply to vegetable gardens, flower gardens and shrubbery plots. Wheat, barley, oats, rye and similar agricultural commodities also shall be so exempted. 
(Ord. 9, 1968; 1980 Code; prior code 4-2-2) 
Sec. 7-3-30. - Notice to remove. 
    Whenever the City determines that the provisions of Section 7-3-20 above have not been complied with, the City may notify the owner of said property directing the removal of said weeds, brush or rubbish. Said notice shall be issued by the City Clerk and sent by certified mail to the last known address of the record owner of said property. Said notice shall direct the removal of said weeds, brush or rubbish within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice. Said notice shall further advise the owner that, in the event said weeds, brush or rubbish are not removed within the stated time, the City shall cause the work to be done at the expense of the owner and that said costs, if not promptly paid, shall constitute a lien against the property. If there is no last known address of the owner or if the notice mailed to the owner is returned without delivery, the City shall post a similar notice in a conspicuous spot on the premises for at least ten (10) days. 
(Ord. 9, 1968; 1980 Code; prior code 4-2-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-3-40. - Failure to remove. 
    If the owner fails to remove the weeds, brush or rubbish within the time and in the manner prescribed herein, the City Manager may have the weeds, brush or rubbish removed from the property. 
(Ord. 9, 1968; 1980 Code; prior code 4-2-4) 
Sec. 7-3-50. - Assessment of costs; notice. 
    The costs of removing the weeds, brush or rubbish from the property shall be chargeable against the delinquent owner and against the property. In addition to the actual out-of-pocket costs incurred by the City, the costs shall include an additional amount as set forth in Appendix A to this Code to cover inspection and other incidental costs to the City. The City may either remove the weeds, brush or rubbish or hire an independent contractor for that purpose. 
(Ord. 9, 1968; 1980 Code; prior code 4-2-5) 
Sec. 7-3-60. - Establishment of lien. 
    The cost of removing the weeds, brush or rubbish from the property (including the five-percent or twenty-five-dollar additional amount, whichever is more) together with a ten-percent penalty thereon to defray the cost of collection, shall be reported to the County Treasurer, to be placed by him upon the tax list for the current year and to be collected in the same manner as other taxes or assessments are collected. The laws of the State for the assessment and collection of general taxes, including the laws for the sale of property for taxes and the redemption thereof, shall apply to and have full effect for the collection of all such assessments. 
(Ord. 9, 1968; 1980 Code; prior code 4-2-6) 
Sec. 7-3-70. - Penalty. 
    Any person owning property within the City who, within fifteen (15) days after notice directing said person to remove weeds, brush or rubbish, fails to do so, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. The provisions of this Section shall not be construed to waive the provisions for assessment of costs and establishment and enforcement of liens upon the property. 
(Ord. 9, 1968; 1980 Code; prior code 4-2-7) 
ARTICLE IV - Trees 

Sec. 7-4-10. - Prohibited trees. 
(a)  It is unlawful to sell or import into the City, or to plant or cause to be planted within the corporate limits of the City, any female box-elder tree ( Acer negundo ). 
(b)  The owner of any property within the City, upon which any female box-elder tree has been planted after the effective date of this Article, shall cut and remove such tree from his property after being given two (2) days' written notice to do so by the City. 
(c)  In case of the failure of any owner of such property to cut and remove such box-elder tree planted after the effective date of this Article, the City shall cut and remove such box-elder tree. 
(d)  It is unlawful and deemed a nuisance to sell or import into the City or plant or cause to be planted any female cottonwood trees ( Populus spices ), Siberian elm ( Ulmus pumila ) or other undesirable plants as designated by ordinance upon any property within the City, and the planting or setting out of these certain plants is declared to be a menace to public health, safety and welfare and a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-4-20. - Trees and limbs in public right-of-way. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any property adjacent to the public right-of-way to remove any trees or limbs located in or above the public right-of-way when such trees or limbs constitute a danger to public safety. Such trees and limbs shall constitute a nuisance. For the purposes of this Section, a danger to public safety shall include all trees and limbs which hinder visibility or which may otherwise affect public health, safety and welfare, and trees and limbs which present a structural defect which may cause the tree or limb to fall on a person or on property of value. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-4-30. - Control of trees and shrubs. 
(a)  Trees, shrubs and other vegetation which are dead, broken, diseased or infested by insects so as to endanger the well-being of other trees, shrubs or vegetation or constitute a potential threat or hazard to people or property within the City are hereby declared a nuisance. 
(b)  The City shall give written notice to the owner or occupant of any property abutting City rights-of-way or other public property of any condition deemed unsafe caused by trees and other vegetation overhanging or projecting from such abutting property and onto or over such right-of-way or other public property with such unsafe condition. The City shall correct any such unsafe condition immediately upon the expiration of the notice period specified in the notice of abatement. 
(c)  It is unlawful and deemed a nuisance for any person to cut, trim, spray, remove, treat or plant any tree, vine, shrub, hedge or other woody plant upon access-controlled arterials or other public parks and greenbelts within the City, unless authorized or directed by the City. 
(d)  It is unlawful and deemed a nuisance for any person to injure, damage or destroy any tree, shrub, vine, hedge or other vegetation in or upon public rights-of-way or other public property within the City, except any person who notifies the City of such injury, damage or destruction and makes arrangements to repair or replace such vegetation or pay for the cost of such repair or replacement. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE V - Animals 
Division 1 - General 

Sec. 7-5-10. - Authorization. 
    This Article is enacted pursuant to the general police power, the Home Rule Charter and Section 31-15-401, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-20. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purposes of this Article are to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to ensure the humane treatment of animals by regulating the care and control of animals within the City. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-30. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Abandon means the leaving of an animal by its owner or keeper without making the adequate provisions for its proper care. This shall include, but is not limited to, depositing or dropping off an animal on public property or on property other than that of the owner or keeper without permission of the property owner. 
    Aggressive dog means any dog that, without intentional provocation, engages in any of the behaviors listed in Section 7-5-340(b). 
    Animal means any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. As used in this Article, animal excludes humans. 
    Animal control officer means any person designated by the City to enforce the provisions of this Article or any other ordinance or law of the State pertaining to animals, and shall include police officers. 
    Animal shelter means any impounding entity designated by the City as the facility for the boarding and disposition of any animal impounded under the provisions of this Article or any other ordinance or law of the State. The City may designate other facilities as necessary for the boarding of impounded livestock, wildlife or exotic species that may need to be confined safely or humanely. 
    Attack means any violent or hostile physical contact with a person or domestic animal, or any violent or hostile behavior that confines the movement of a person or domestic animal, including, but not limited to, chasing, cornering or encircling. 
    Bodily injury means physical injury that results in bruising, skin pain or any impairment of physical condition. 
    Bodily injury - serious means any physical injury consisting of muscle tears, broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring professional medical treatment, multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery. 
    Commercial means carried out for monetary gain. 
    Common areas include, but are not limited to, City parks, bridle and recreation paths, trails, or play areas, clubhouses and other recreational facilities that are open to the public. 
    Domestic or pet animal means dogs, cats, rodents, birds, reptiles, fish, pot-bellied pigs and any other species of animal which is sold or retained as a household pet, but does not include skunks, nonhuman primates and other species of wild, exotic or carnivorous animals that may be further restricted in this Article. 
    Exotic animal means any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, member of the feline species other than domestic cat, member of the canine species other than domestic dog, or any other animal that would require a standard of care and control greater than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or domestic farm animals. 
    Feral means wild or has escaped from domestication and become wild. 
    Guard dog means any dog used or trained for the protection of persons or property by attacking or threatening to attack any person found within an area patrolled by such dog. 
    Harbor means the act of keeping or caring for an animal, or providing premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care. 
    Keeper means any person who is in possession of or is keeping, harboring or caring for any animal. 
    Kennel means any establishment or place where one (1) or more animals, either temporarily or permanently, are bred, born, raised, boarded, trained, kept or fed for money or any other consideration, or for sale. 
    Livestock means animals commonly regarded as farm animals, including, but not limited to, cattle, horses, goats, llamas, ostriches, swine, alpacas and sheep, but excluding pet animals such as rabbits, poultry and domestic fowl. 
    Mistreatment means an act or omission that causes or unreasonably permits the continuation of unnecessary or unjustifiable pain and suffering. 
    Nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, causes damage to property other than the owners or endangers the life or health of persons. 
    Nuisance dog or cat means any such animal that, without intentional provocation, engages in any of the behaviors listed in Section 4-6-340(a) or Section 4-6-340(d). 
    Owner means any person over eighteen (18) years of age who has right of property in an animal or who harbors such animal or allows such animal to remain about his premises. The parent, guardian or legal custodian of any child under the age of eighteen (18) years who owns, keeps, harbors, has custody of or cares for an animal shall be deemed to be the owner of such animal. 
    Possess , or any derivation thereof, means exercising physical control over any animal. 
    Poultry means any domesticated bird, including but not limited to, chickens, turkeys, ducks and geese. 
    Quarantine means the confinement for a minimum of ten (10) days of an animal which has bitten a person. 
    Rabbits, poultry and domestic fowl includes rabbits, pigeons, peacocks, chickens, chicks, capons, ducks, geese, turkeys, doves, squabs and all similar domestic fowl other than pet animals. 
    Stray animal means any animal, with or without a rabies or a City registration tag, found unattended or running at large anywhere within the City. 
    Tether means to tie up or chain to a fixed or heavy inanimate object so as to restrict the free movement of an animal to a distance no greater than the length of its leash or chain. 
    Trap means any mechanical device or snare that seeks to hold, capture or kill an animal. 
    Trap - humane means a box-type live trap which does not cause bodily harm to the animal intended to be captured or any other animal or person coming in contact with such trap. 
    Trapping means the setting, laying or otherwise using of a trap. 
    Vaccination or vaccination for rabies means the inoculation of a dog or cat with a vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in the prevention of rabies. 
    Veterinarian means a person licensed by the State to practice veterinary medicine. 
    Vicious dog means any dog that engages in any of the behaviors listed in Section 7-5-340(c) of this Article. 
    Wild animal means all species of animals which exist in their natural, unconfined state and are usually not domesticated. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-40. - Duties and powers of animal control officer. 
(a)  The City Manager may appoint or the City Council may contract for an animal control officer. The animal control officer shall have authority to enforce any ordinance of the City relating to animals. 
(b)  Animal control officers are hereby designated as peace officers and shall be authorized to issue, sign and serve summonses and complaints in order to enforce the provisions of this Article, or any other provision of this Code or state law pertaining to animals, and to make all determinations within the discretion required by the provisions of this Article or other applicable law. 
(c)  An animal control officer or police officer may enter upon private property to capture any animal to be impounded for, or to investigate any report of, a violation of this Article if: 
(1)  The officer has obtained consent of the person in possession of the property; 
(2)  The officer has obtained a search warrant pursuant to Rule 241 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules; 
(3)  The officer is in pursuit of an animal which is or has been running at large, provided that the officer does not enter into any enclosed building or structure; 
(4)  The officer is in pursuit of an animal which the officer has probable cause to believe has bitten a person, provided that the officer does not enter into any enclosed building or structure; or 
(5)  The officer is attempting to abate a continuing violation of any provision of this Article when the owner of the property is not available, provided that the officer does not enter into any enclosed building or structure. 
(d)  Notwithstanding Subsection (c)(2) above, if the animal control officer has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the animal or the public health or safety, the animal control officer shall have the right immediately to enter and inspect the property or vehicle in or upon which the animal is kept, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether the property or vehicle is occupied or unoccupied and whether permission to inspect has been obtained or not. If the property or vehicle is occupied, the animal control officer shall first present proper credentials to the owner or occupant of the property or vehicle and demand entry, explaining his reasons therefor and the purpose of the inspection. Such entry shall be solely for the purpose of abating the violation, and no evidence obtained during or as a result of such entry shall be admissible for purposes of prosecution. 
(e)  No person shall fail to allow or refuse entry to an animal control officer requesting entry for the purpose of inspection pursuant to this Section. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-50. - Prohibited and restricted animals. 
(a)  Prohibited animals: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, maintain, feed, shelter or trade in any of the following species of animals: 
a.  All poisonous snakes, poisonous reptiles and nonpoisonous snakes with a length greater than six (6) feet; 
b.  Nonhuman primates; 
c.  Any species of feline other than ordinary domesticated house cats; 
d.  Bears of any species; 
e.  All crocodilians; 
f.  Raccoons, porcupines, skunks, badgers or other like species; 
g.  Foxes, wolves, coyotes or other species of canines other than dogs; or 
h.  Any other animal that is not indigenous to the State or is not classified as a domestic animal. 
(2)  Alleged domestication of any prohibited animal shall not be a defense to a violation of this Section. Any animal that is not domesticated shall be presumed to be a prohibited animal until proven otherwise by a preponderance of the evidence to the satisfaction of the Municipal Court. 
(3)  Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the bona fide activities of any wildlife rehabilitator licensed by the Colorado Division of Wildlife, so long as such licensee complies with all applicable Code and zoning ordinance provisions. 
(b)  Restricted animals: Restraint of guard dogs. It is unlawful to place or maintain a guard dog in any area for the protection of persons or property unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Confinement. The dog must be confined in a building, compartment or fenced enclosure. If the enclosure is a fence: (a) the fence must be at least six (6) feet in height; (b) the fence must be in conformance with the City's Zoning Code; and (3) fencing materials shall not have openings with a diameter of more than two (2) inches, and, in the case of wooden fences, gaps between wooden slats shall not be more than two (2) inches. The enclosure must have gates and entrances thereto securely closed and locked and all fences properly maintained and escape-proof. 
(2)  Physical control. At all times such dog is not confined within its enclosure, the dog must be restrained by means of a leash, cord or chain not exceeding four (4) feet in length, held by a person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and is physically able to control said dog. 
(3)  Signs. The owner or keeper of a guard dog must post signs on all exterior building doors, gates and other entrances, stating that a guard dog is on the premises. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 1, 2009) 
Sec. 7-5-60. - Exemptions for police dogs. 
    Police dogs used by a law enforcement agency in the performance of its functions and duties shall be deemed exempt from the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Division 2 - Care and Treatment of Animals 

Sec. 7-5-110. - Improper treatment of animals. 
(a)  Cruelty: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit or cause to be committed any intentional act of mistreatment, abandonment or harassment to any animal, exclusive of any act constituting aggravated cruelty as set forth in Section 18-9-202(1.5), C.R.S. Ownership of said animal shall not be a defense to such acts or to a violation of this Section. 
(b)  Neglect: It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to deprive such animal of adequate nutrition, potable water at all times, proper protection from the elements and extreme temperatures, opportunity for exercise, adequate veterinary care, grooming or socialization, or otherwise neglect such animal in any manner as to endanger its health or cause it to suffer. 
(c)  Unsafe tethering: It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to tether the animal in such a manner that the animal may become entangled and unable to reach shelter or water, or in such a manner that the animal may be injured, strangled or otherwise caused to suffer. 
(d)  Unsafe transporting: It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or confine an animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner as to permit injury or endanger the life of said animal. For purposes of this Section, endangering the life of an animal includes: 
(1)  Transporting any animal in an open truck or any vehicle in such a manner as to permit the animal to jump or be thrown therefrom by acceleration, sudden movement or accident involving the vehicle; or 
(2)  Confining or transporting any animal in such a way that the animal is exposed to extremes in temperature or weather conditions. 
(e)  Poisoning dogs, cats or other domestic animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to poison any dog, cat or other domestic animal or to knowingly distribute or set out poison or any other toxicant within the City that causes the poisoning of such animal. The distribution or setting out of any poison, toxicant or poisoned meat or food, other than those specifically for insect, rat, mouse or other rodent poisoning, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this Section. This Section shall not apply when a dog, cat or other domestic animal is being destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, animal control officer or police officer who is acting within the scope of his official duties. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-120. - Trapping prohibited. 
    No person shall do any trapping anywhere in the City, except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Use of a trap specifically designed to kill rats, mice, gophers or moles, when such trap is used with the express consent of the owner or adult occupant of the property on which the trap is set; or 
(2)  Use of humane traps for the control of nuisance animals under the following conditions: 
a.  Traps must be used with the express consent of the owner or adult occupant of the property where the trap is set. 
b.  Traps employed by a professional trapping or pest control company must have a tag identifying the company's name and telephone number attached. 
c.  Traps must be checked and tended at least once daily and animals captured in humane traps must be released within twenty-four (24) hours of capture. 
d.  Traps set in the open must be covered to provide shade and protection from extreme weather conditions. 
(3)  Use of traps by a public official or agency or its designee when such person is acting within the scope of his official duties, provided that if such trapping involves taking wildlife with any leghold trap, any instant kill body-gripping design trap or by poison or snare, such trapping shall have been determined by the Tri-County Health Department to be necessary for the purpose of protecting human health or safety and the Tri-County Health Department shall have requested and designated such designee to undertake such activity for such purpose on its behalf. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-130. - Livestock - running at large prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of livestock to permit the same to run at large within the City. Said livestock shall be deemed to be running at large when: 
(1)  Off of or away from the premises of the owner or keeper thereof; and 
(2)  Not under the control of such owner or keeper, or his agent or servant or member of his immediate family, either by rope, cord or chain. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-140. - Grazing and herding animals restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any livestock to herd or graze said livestock upon or in any street, alley or other public way or place in the City, or upon any vacant premises or unenclosed premises in said City, whether said livestock are attended by any person or not. This Section shall not apply to any livestock securely tied or staked on private property, beyond reach of any public place or other person's property. Any livestock found grazing or being herded within the City in violation of this Section shall be deemed to be running at large. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-150. - Fencing unneutered male animals. 
    The owner or keeper of any stallion, ram, boar or bull which is more than sixteen (16) months of age and unneutered, in addition to complying with the other provisions of this Article, shall keep said animal within a fence or similar enclosure of at least six (6) feet in height and of such sturdy construction so as to be escape-proof. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Division 3 - Health and Sanitation Requirements 

Sec. 7-5-210. - Removal of excrement. 
(a)  No owner or keeper of any dog shall cause or allow such animal to soil, defile or defecate on any public property, street, sidewalk or public way, common area or common grounds owned jointly by members of a homeowners or condominium association, or private property other than that of the owner or keeper, unless such owner or keeper immediately removes and disposes of all feces deposited by such animal. 
(b)  Animal excrement shall not be placed in storm sewers or street gutters, but shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner. 
(c)  No owner or keeper of any animal shall permit excessive excrement to accumulate on the property of the owner or keeper, or on the property of others so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary or offensive living condition on the owner's or keeper's property or to abutting property of others. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-220. - Death of animals. 
(a)  An owner or keeper shall dispose of any dead animal found on the owner's or keeper's property within twenty-four (24) hours of death or discovery of such dead animal by the following methods: burial, incineration in a state-approved facility, rendering or other state-approved means. No dead animal shall be buried within the City limits or dumped or abandoned on any public or private property. 
(b)  The City shall be responsible for disposal of any dead wild animal found upon any City streets, sidewalks or any other public property. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-230. - Sale of animals. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the commercial business of breeding, buying, selling, trading or boarding of cats or dogs upon residentially zoned property within the City. 
(b)  No person shall display any animal in a public place for the purposes of selling or giving the animal away. Public place shall include, but is not limited to, streets, highways, parking lots, sidewalks, common areas, parks and recreational trails. This Section shall not apply to a registered rescue group or animal welfare society. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Division 4 - Dogs and Cats 

Sec. 7-5-310. - Registration and vaccination requirements - dogs. 
(a)  Registration required: No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog within the City unless such dog is registered as provided in this Section. 
(b)  Application: Application for such registration shall be made by the owner on a form to be provided by the Chief of Police or his designee within ten (10) days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, after acquiring any dog or within ten (10) days after a dog becomes six (6) months of age; provided that any owner moving to the City or becoming a resident as a result of annexation shall have until ten (10) days after moving or annexation to obtain such registration. Annual renewal of registration of the dog by the owner shall be obtained between January 1 and February 28 of each year. 
(c)  Proof of vaccination: All owners registering a dog over the age of six (6) months with the City must show to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police or his designee that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian, unless such owner presents a written statement from a veterinarian that vaccination against rabies would be detrimental to the health of such dog. Such vaccination shall be repeated, as necessary, when the current vaccination expires as required by the State. 
(d)  Registration fees: The registration fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per dog, which fee must be paid to the City at the time of submission of the registration form. 
(e)  Tags: Upon acceptance of a completed registration form, and payment of the registration fee, the City shall issue a registration tag for each dog registered. Every dog for which the owner is required to obtain a registration tag must wear a valid registration tag at all times when the animal is off the premises of the owner or keeper. Every dog discovered off the owner's or keeper's property not wearing the required registration tag shall be presumed not to have been registered as required by this Section. 
(f)  Failure to register; attach tag: Failure to register a dog as required herein, or failure to cause the dog to wear the registration tag, except as herein provided, shall constitute a violation of this Article. In addition, no dog impounded pursuant to Section Division 5 below shall be released to its owner or keeper unless and until a registration tag, as described in this Section, has been issued to said dog. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003; Ord. 7 13, 2004) 
Sec. 7-5-320. - Vaccination required - cats. 
    The owner or keeper of a cat within the City limits shall have the cat vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian on or before the cat reaches the age of six (6) months, and shall have the vaccination repeated annually thereafter. A certificate of vaccination in duplicate shall be completed by the veterinarian, one (1) copy to be issued to the cat owner or keeper and one (1) to be retained in the veterinarian's files. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-330. - Control of dogs - running at large. 
    No owner or keeper of any dog shall allow such dog to run at large on public or private property within the City as provided herein. For purposes of this Section, a dog shall be deemed to be running at large under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The dog is on the property of another without the prior consent of such other person. 
(2)  The dog is on any property other than that of the owner or keeper and is not restrained by means of a leash, cord or chain held by a person who is physically able to control said dog. 
(3)  Any stray or injured dog on public or private property of another shall be deemed to be running at large and shall be impounded. An animal control officer or police officer may transport an injured dog in need of medical attention to a veterinarian for medical treatment or, if the dog is severely injured, may humanely destroy such animal. The owner, if ascertainable, shall be notified of such action. The owner of any such dog shall be liable for all expenses incurred, including but not limited to fees incurred for impoundment, treatment and disposition. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-340. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Nuisance dogs. Any dog exhibiting behavior set forth in this Section is hereby declared to be a nuisance dog. It shall be unlawful, and is prohibited within the City, for any owner or keeper of a dog to allow said dog, either individually or in combination with another dog, to: 
(1)  Create a public disturbance by continual barking, howling, yelping or other noise lasting more than thirty (30) minutes that is clearly audible by an unaided ear from an adjacent or nearby property and that unreasonably interferes with or disturbs the peaceful and ordinary activities of a resident of the City. 
a.  For purposes of this Section, it shall not be a defense in prosecution that a dog's barking, howling or other noise was provoked by a person's ordinary or reasonable use of public roadways, sidewalks, recreation trails or the Highline Canal Trail. 
b.  No summons and complaint shall be issued nor shall there be a conviction for a violation of this Paragraph (1) unless: 
1.  There are two (2) or more complaining witnesses from separate households, both of which households are within one thousand (1,000) feet measured by straight line from property line to property line, of the property on which the alleged violation occurs and each witness has signed a complaint; or 
2.  An animal control officer or police officer who has personally investigated the complaint of a single complainant and observed the nature and duration of the noise created by the dog can testify to his or her observations, and such testimony shall satisfy the requirement for the second complaining witness. 
(2)  Cause damage to or destruction of any shrubbery, plants, flowers, grass, lawn, fence or anything whatsoever upon any public or private premises owned or occupied by a person other than the owner or keeper of such animal. 
It shall not be a defense to a violation of this Section that the dog owner or keeper was not available to remedy such violation. 
(b)  Aggressive dogs. It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dog to permit or allow said animal, without provocation, to: 
(1)  Harass persons by encroaching onto public property or private property from the owner's or keeper's yard through or over a fence; 
(2)  Approach any person in a threatening manner while off the property of the owner or keeper; or 
(3)  Attack or injure another domestic animal while off the owner's or keeper's property. 
(c)  Vicious dogs, harboring prohibited. 
(1)  No one shall keep, possess or harbor a vicious dog within the City. For the purposes of this Section, a vicious dog shall be defined as a dog that: 
a.  Without provocation, causes bodily injury or serious bodily injury or the death of a person, domestic animal or livestock; or 
b.  Has been previously determined by any court to be currently listed as a vicious dog; or 
c.  Has engaged in or been trained for animal fighting as described in Section 18-9-204, C.R.S. 
(2)  It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this section if: 
a.  The dog was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an attack or assault; 
b.  At the time, the person was committing a crime or offense upon the property of the owner or keeper of the dog; 
c.  The person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog; 
d.  The dog was attacked or menaced by the domestic animal, or the domestic animal was on the property of the owner or keeper of the dog; 
e.  The dog was responding to pain or injury; or 
f.  The person or domestic animal was disturbing the dog's natural functions such as eating or sleeping. 
(d)  Nuisance cats. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a cat within the City limits to allow such cat to become or create a nuisance. A cat shall be deemed to be a nuisance when the cat has been abandoned or is known to be living in a wild state with no known rabies vaccination record, or when the cat inflicts damage or injury, by any means, to the person or property of anyone but the owner or keeper. 
(e)  Interference with police dogs prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any dog used by the Police Department in the performance of the functions or duties of said department, or to interfere with, meddle with or harass any such dog while said dog is being used by the Police Department or any officer or member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of said department or of such officer or member. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003; Ord. 3 1, 2013) 
Sec. 7-5-350. - Reporting of dog and cat bites and confinement. 
(a)  Confinement of dogs and cats which have bitten persons. The owner or keeper of any cat or dog that has bitten any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall immediately notify an animal control officer or a police officer. Any such animal shall be immediately quarantined for a period of ten (10) days or longer on the advice of the attending veterinarian or the Tri-County Health Department. No person shall remove an animal from quarantine during the quarantine period. The animal control officer shall determine, in his discretion, the location of quarantine for any animal. If not quarantined on the premises of the owner or keeper, confinement will be at the animal shelter or in any veterinary hospital or kennel. Such quarantine shall be at the sole expense of the owner or keeper. 
(b)  Owners required to produce animals which have bitten persons. The owner or keeper of any dog or cat that has been reported as having inflicted a bite which caused an abrasion of the skin of any person shall, on demand of the animal control officer, produce said animal for examination and confinement, as prescribed in this Section. If the owner or keeper of any such animal has refused to produce the animal, the owner or keeper shall be subject to immediate arrest if there is probable cause to believe the animal has inflicted a bite upon a person and that the owner or keeper is in possession of the animal and is willfully hiding or refusing to produce the animal upon such demand. Such person shall be taken before a Judge of the Municipal Court, who may order the immediate production of the animal. If the owner or keeper of any such animal shall willfully or knowingly hide or refuse to produce the animal, each day of refusal to produce the animal shall constitute a separate violation. It shall be unlawful to give away or sell such animal, remove any such animal from the City or destroy such animal before it can be properly confined by the animal control officer. 
(c)  Treatment of bites to be reported by physician. Every physician and other medical practitioner who treats a person for bites inflicted by a dog or cat shall report such treatment to an animal control officer within twenty-four (24) hours, giving the name, address and telephone number of such person. 
(d)  Veterinary and additional owner responsibilities. The owner or keeper of any dog or cat shall inform the veterinarian before any rabies inoculation is given whether the dog or cat is under bite confinement or has inflicted a bite on any person within the last ten (10) days. It shall be the responsibility of any veterinarian to vaccinate any dog or cat over six (6) months of age that is presented in good health and has not inflicted a bite upon a person in the preceding ten (10) days. 
(e)  Disposition of rabies-infected animals. Animals known to have been bitten by or exposed to a rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed, or released upon proof of current rabies immunization and "booster injection" given by a licensed veterinarian at the expense of the owner or keeper. The owner or keeper of any animal released under this Section shall be required to keep said animal under quarantine for a period of six (6) months or as may be determined necessary by the County public health officer. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Division 5 - Impoundment; Disposition; Fees 

Sec. 7-5-410. - Impoundment. 
    In addition to any other remedies provided in this Article, an animal control officer or police officer may seize, impound and humanely confine to an animal shelter or other impoundment facility, inside or outside the jurisdictional limits of the City, any animal that exhibits behavior in violation of this Article. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-420. - Notice of impoundment. 
    Upon the impoundment of any animal, the police or animal control officer shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain ownership of any impounded animal and shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner, either verbally or in writing, of such animal so impounded. In the event ownership of an impounded animal cannot be reasonably determined, notice may be posted on the main entrance to the Village Center of Cherry Hills Village, 2450 East Quincy Avenue, Cherry Hills Village, Colorado. The posted notice shall include a description of the animal, the time and place of taking, the place of impoundment and the date by which said animal must be claimed. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-430. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
    Any owner or keeper of any animal impounded pursuant to this Article may reclaim his animal from the impounding facility upon payment of all incurred fees for impoundment, boarding, euthanasia, disposal, veterinary and all other services as needed. Failure of the owner or keeper of any impounded animal to claim such animal from the animal shelter or impoundment facility shall not relieve the owner or keeper of all applicable charges and fees incurred by the impoundment facility. In addition, any dog owned or kept within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City shall be released only upon compliance with, and payment of the fees imposed by Section 7-5-310(d) hereof, and any cat owned or kept within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City shall be released only upon compliance with Section 7-5-320 hereof. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-440. - Disposition. 
    Whenever an animal has been impounded, the animal shall be impounded in a humane manner for a period of not less than five (5) days following the date of impoundment except as otherwise set forth in this Section. Any animal so impounded which is not claimed within said five-day period may be disposed of by adoption, donation or destruction at the discretion of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-450. - Summons hold status. 
    Any animal impounded or held as evidence pursuant to a "summons hold" shall not be released to the owner or keeper prior to service of a summons and complaint upon the animal owner or keeper. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-460. - Vicious dog impoundment. 
    A vicious dog shall be subject to mandatory impoundment if the victim of the offense has suffered bodily or serious bodily injury, if the animal has been engaged in or been trained for fighting, or if the dog otherwise presents a clear and present danger to the public health or safety. A vicious dog shall remain impounded unless otherwise ordered released by the Municipal Judge. The Municipal Judge shall order any owner or keeper who has entered into a deferred judgment or deferred prosecution to make payment to the impound facility for all impoundment fees, boarding costs and any reasonable and necessary medical expenses incurred during the impoundment of the dog. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-470. - Guard dog impoundment. 
    A guard dog found running at large shall be impounded and shall not be ordered released by the Municipal Judge until the owner or keeper of said dog has taken appropriate corrective action to ensure that the dog's enclosure is escape-proof. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-480. - Breaking into impound facility; interfering with police. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to break, open, assist or attempt to break or open any impoundment facility, pen or enclosure, public or private, with the intent to release any animal impounded by or on behalf of the City. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-490. - Immediate destruction. 
(a)  Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the immediate destruction of any vicious dog or other vicious animal when deemed necessary in the interest of public safety by the animal control officer or police officer under circumstances where a significant and immediate threat to the health or safety of a person or another animal exists. 
(b)  Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the immediate destruction of any domestic or wild animal when a veterinarian, animal control officer or police officer has determined that such animal is critically ill or injured, is suffering extreme pain or has a poor prognosis for recovery. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Division 6 - Enforcement; Penalties 

Sec. 7-5-610. - Prosecution for violations. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this Article to: 
(1)  Fail to comply with any provision of this Article; 
(2)  Fail to comply with any lawful order of an animal control officer or police officer unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed; 
(3)  Intentionally interfere with, hinder, harass, molest, injure or obstruct any animal control officer or police officer in the discharge of his official duties under this Article or other applicable law; 
(4)  Fail to comply with any special sanctions imposed pursuant to Subsection (e) below, or pay any fines, civil penalties or costs imposed by the Municipal Court or any fees and charges imposed by the animal shelter or impoundment facility arising from impoundment of an animal. 
(b)  Penalty. The owner of an animal shall be subject to escalating penalties, as provided below, for each violation of this Article, whether the subject animal is the same animal, a different animal or various animals belonging to the said owner. The maximum fine shall not exceed the maximum fine authorized in Section 1-4-20 of this Code for any one (1) offense, each day constituting a separate offense. Except as otherwise provided herein, any violation of this Article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first violation, not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second violation, and a mandatory court appearance and fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the third and each subsequent violation for the same offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation for an aggressive dog (Section 7-5-340(b)); vicious dog (Section 7-5-340(c)); prohibited animal (Section 7-5-50(a)); restricted animal (guard dog) (Section 7-650(b)); cruelty (Section 7-5-110(a)); neglect (Section 7-5-110(b)); or poisoning (Section 7-5-110(e)) shall require a court appearance and shall be punishable by imprisonment not exceeding the limit established in Section 1-4-20(A) of the Code and/or a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation, not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second violation, and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third and each subsequent violation for the same offense. As part of any penalty for a third violation of a vicious dog offense, where each offense concerns the same dog, the Court shall order destruction of the dog in addition to, and not in lieu of, any fine imposed. No portion of any minimum fine may be suspended or held in abeyance by the Municipal Court. The Municipal Court is authorized to adopt a fine schedule in accordance with this Section. 
(c)  Strict liability. For the purpose of prosecution for violations of any Section of this Article, it shall not be necessary in order to obtain a conviction to prove notice on the part of the owner or keeper of the animal in question that said animal was violating any provision of this Article at the time and place charged, it being the purpose of this Section to impose strict liability upon the owner or keeper of any animal. 
(d)  Separate offense. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which a violation of this Article occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(e)  Special sanctions. The animal control officer, or the City Attorney or his designee, may recommend that one (1) or more special sanctions be levied against any animal owner or keeper convicted of any violation of this Article or pursuant to a deferred judgment or deferred prosecution. This recommendation may be presented to the Municipal Court as a proposed condition of sentencing upon conviction or as a condition of deferred judgment or deferred prosecution, and may be in lieu of or in addition to the penalties specified herein. The Municipal Court may take into consideration the severity of the incident, the prior history or the owner or keeper, and the recommendation of the animal control officer or City Attorney. Special sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Confinement of an animal in a secure enclosure in compliance with the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Spaying or neutering of the animal; 
(3)  Obedience training/behavior modification for the animal; 
(4)  Responsible pet ownership class for the owner or keeper; 
(5)  Community service work for the owner or keeper; 
(6)  Microchipping of the animal; 
(7)  Euthanasia of the animal; 
(8)  Ban on owning or maintaining other animals in the City for a specified period; 
(9)  Use of humane training devices for behavior modification of the animal; 
(10)  Inspections of premises where the animal is kept in cases of neglect or cruelty; 
(11)  Restitution for costs of care rendered or shelter given at the City's designated animal shelter, costs of veterinary care and costs of medical treatment; and 
(12)  Treatment or counseling programs for the animal or owner. 
The provisions of this Section shall not in any way limit the power of the Municipal Court, on its own motion, to impose any other sanction or measure, as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003; Ord. 10 4, 2013) 
Sec. 7-5-620. - Destruction or seizure on court's order. 
(a)  If a complaint has been filed in the Municipal Court against the owner or keeper of an animal for violation of this Article, the Municipal Judge may, upon making a finding that the animal is vicious or that it represents a clear and present danger to the citizens or to other animals in the community, order the animal to be destroyed in a humane manner. Surrender of an animal by the owner or keeper or destruction of any animal shall not relieve or render the owner or keeper immune from the jurisdiction or decision of the Court, or to the fees, fines or penalties which may result from a violation of this Article. 
(b)  If an affidavit has been submitted to the Municipal Court Judge which satisfies the Judge that an animal which is the subject of a violation of this Article is located within the City, and that the animal either possesses a clear and present danger to the health, general welfare or safety of otherpersons or the animal or is suffering extreme neglect or cruelty, the Municipal Judge may order the animal seized by a designated officer or employee of the City pursuant to Rule 241 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules. The owner or keeper may request a hearing concerning any such order for seizure entered pursuant to this Section by filing an appropriate motion pursuant to Rule 241(e) of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules. Whenever an animal is seized by order of the Municipal Court or other court having jurisdiction, the animal shelter shall not adopt, donate or euthanize the animal unless such action is permitted by a subsequent order of the same court which ordered the initial seizure. Any animal held pursuant to court order may be disposed of by the animal shelter if unclaimed by the owner or keeper more than three (3) days following issuance of a court order authorizing the release of the animal. The animal owner or keeper shall be liable for all expenses arising from the impoundment and boarding of any animal under a seizure order until the animal is released or otherwise disposed of. 
(c)  Whenever an animal is seized or impounded pursuant to this Article, the animal owner or keeper may be summoned before the Municipal Court on the next scheduled court date following the seizure to answer any charges arising incident to the seizure. Trials involving charges resulting in animal seizures shall be given priority on the Municipal Court docket in order to minimize the expense to animal owners or keepers for impoundment and boarding of seized animals. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
Sec. 7-5-630. - Immunity from liability. 
    The City and its agents and employees, the animal shelter or boarding facility and its agents and employees, and any veterinarian consulted pursuant to this Article shall be immune from liability for any actions taken pursuant to this Article. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2003) 
ARTICLE VI - Reserved 
ARTICLE VII - Regulation of Unmanned Aircraft Systems 

Sec. 7-7-10. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish a registration system for hobby operators and regulations pertaining to any unmanned aircraft system operating within the jurisdictional borders of the City. It is the intent of this Article to be interpreted in conformance with any existing or future federal or state laws or regulations that address the operation of unmanned aircraft systems. 
( Ord. 13 1, 2015) 
Sec. 7-7-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Aircraft means any contrivance invented, used, or designed to navigate or fly in the air. 
    City airspace means and includes all airspace above the jurisdictional boundaries of the City, to the full extent such airspace can legally be regulated by the City. 
    Domestic animal shall have the same meaning as set forth in Article V of Chapter 7 of this Code. 
    Livestock shall have the same meaning as set forth in Article V of Chapter 7 of this Code. 
    Model aircraft means an unmanned aircraft that is: 
(1)  capable of sustained flight in the atmosphere; 
(2)  flown within visual line of sight of the person operating the aircraft; and 
(3)  flown for hobby or recreational purposes. 
    Navigable airspace means airspace above the minimum altitudes of flight prescribed by FAA regulations, including airspace needed to ensure safety in takeoff and landing of aircraft. 
    Operate means to fly, use, launch, land, employ or navigate an unmanned aircraft system through the air. 
    Hobby operator means an individual or entity operating an unmanned aircraft system for strictly recreational or hobby use. 
    Person shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 1-2-10 of Chapter 1 of this Code. 
    Unmanned aircraft system or UAS means an aircraft, powered aerial vehicle, or other device without a human pilot on board, the flight of which is controlled either autonomously by on board computers or by remote control of a pilot operator on the ground or in another vehicle or aircraft, and all associated equipment and apparatus. It includes model aircrafts and drones. 
( Ord. 13 1, 2015) 
Sec. 7-7-30. - Exemption from registration. 
    The following operations of unmanned aircraft systems are exempt from the registration requirements of this Article: 
(1)  Any local, state or federal government agency lawfully operating unmanned aircraft systems for a government purpose or function. 
(2)  Any commercial operator authorized by the FAA to operate a UAS, as evidenced by a valid certificate of authorization or exemption issued by the FAA. 
(3)  UAS operated by hobby operators weighing less than 0.55 pounds at the time of operation, inclusive of equipment, payload and fuel. 
( Ord. 13 1, 2015; Ord. 3 1, 2016) 
Sec. 7-7-40. - General requirements for hobby operators and owners. 
(a)  Registration required. Registration of UAS is required for all owners of UAS operating within City airspace unless exempted under Section 7-7-30. 
(1)  Registration. The required registration must occur prior to operating an unmanned aircraft system within City airspace. The City registration requirements set forth in subsections (a)(2)-(4) shall apply if no federal registration is required for UAS. The City shall accept a federal registration and waive the registration fee upon owner's presentation to the City of a certificate of federal registration and submission of owner contact information on a City-issued form. The City Council may establish other registration requirements by resolution. 
(2)  Application form. Application for registration of an unmanned aircraft system shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk, which form shall include but not be limited to the following information: (i) name, address and telephone number of owner of UAS; (ii) type, model of UAS; and (iii) weight of UAS. 
(3)  Registration fee. The registration fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each UAS unless waived pursuant to Section 7-7-40(a)(1), which fee must be paid to the City at the time of submission of the registration form. The City Council may increase or decrease the registration fee by resolution as codified in the City's comprehensive fee schedule. 
(4)  Registration identification. Upon receipt of a completed application, and required registration fee, the City will issue a registration number for each UAS properly registered by the City. The designated City or federal registration number shall be prominently displayed on the UAS before and as a condition of its operation within the City or City airspace. 
(b)  Operating requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this Article, persons operating a UAS in City airspace shall comply with the following operating regulations: 
(1)  UAS operated by hobby operators must weigh no more than fifty-five (55) pounds at the time of operation, inclusive of equipment, payload and fuel. 
(2)  Hobby operators must have a visual line of sight of the UAS at all times. Visual line of sight means the UAS must be visible at all times to the operator, using his or her own natural vision to observe the UAS, including the use of standard eyeglasses or contact lenses. 
(3)  Without express prior written authorization from the City Manager, no person may operate a UAS on or over any City property inclusive of public streets, alleys, bridle paths, trails, playgrounds, parks, open space, parking lots, and public buildings. 
(4)  No person shall enter, hover, launch, or land an unmanned aircraft system on or over another person's property without the prior consent of the property owner. Such unauthorized entry onto another's property shall be deemed a trespass. 
(5)  No person shall operate a UAS in a reckless or careless manner so as to endanger or cause reasonable risk of harm or actual harm to persons, property, or any domestic animal or livestock. 
( Ord. 13 1, 2015, Ord. 3  2, 2016) 
Sec. 7-7-50. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this Article. Any person who is convicted of a violation of any provision of this Article shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-4-20 of this Code. In addition, any UAS operated in violation of this Article may be immediately impounded in the interest of public safety. Law enforcement officers are authorized to disable any UAS operating within the City airspace that poses an imminent threat to public safety. 
( Ord. 13 1, 2015) 
CHAPTER 8 - Vehicles and Traffic 
ARTICLE I - Model Traffic Code 

Sec. 8-1-10. - Short title. 
    This Article may be known and cited as the Model Traffic Code. (Ord. 22 1, 2010) 
Sec. 8-1-20. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Parts 1 and 2 (Section 31-16-101, et seq., and Section 31-16-201, et seq.), C.R.S., there is hereby adopted by reference Articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code , promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700, Denver, Colorado, 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the City. The purpose of this Article and the code adopted herein is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the State. At least one (1) copy of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein is now filed in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 22 1, 2010) 
Sec. 8-1-30. - Deletions and amendments. 
    The 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length, save and except (i) the sections or subsections which are hereby declared to be inapplicable to the City and are therefore expressly deleted below; and (ii) the sections or subsections that shall be subject to the following amendments and additions: 
(1)  A new Section 104, Article I, is hereby added to the Model Traffic Code to read as follows: 
" 104. Authority of Police Department officials. 
"(1)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department, or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police, to enforce all traffic regulations of this municipality and all of the state laws applicable to street and highway traffic in the City. 
"(2)  Officers of the Police Department, or such special officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with state traffic laws and this Code, provided that, in the event of fire or emergency or to expedite traffic or protect pedestrians, officers of the Department, and other special officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police, may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the state traffic laws or this Code. 
"(3)  A police officer may issue a written summons and complaint to any person when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that the person has committed any offense under the provisions of this Code or pursuant to state law." 
(2)  Section 106, Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
" 106. Who may restrict right to use highways. 
    "The use of certain streets, roadways and highways by motor-driven cycles, trucks or other commercial vehicles, bicycles, motorized bicycles, motorcycles, mobile machinery, and horse-drawn vehicles or other nonmotorized traffic shall be restricted or prohibited when official signs giving notice thereof are erected thereon." 
(3)  Subsection 109(9), Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
" 109. Low-power scooters, animals, skis, skates, and toy vehicles on highways. 
"(9)  No person shall use the highways for traveling on skis, toboggans, coasting sleds, skates, skateboards, rollerblades or similar devices. It is unlawful for any person to use any street, roadway or highway of this municipality as a sled or ski course for the purpose of coasting on sleds, skis or similar devices. It is also unlawful for any person upon roller skates or rollerblades, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle (including but not limited to neighborhood electric vehicles, motor scooters, specially constructed vehicles, coasters, toy vehicles, coasting sleds, go-carts, skateboards and gasoline-powered or battery-powered skateboards) or similar device to go upon any street, roadway or highway except while crossing a highway in a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This subsection (9) does not apply to any public way which is set aside by proper authority as a play street and which is adequately roped off or otherwise marked for such purpose." 
(4)  A new Section 110.5, Article I, is hereby added to the Model Traffic Code to read as follows: 
" 110.5. Red-light cameras. 
"(1)  The City is hereby authorized to use red-light cameras at signalized intersections within the City to detect violations of Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code. 
"(2)  As used in this Section: 
"(a)  'Red-light camera' means a device operated by a peace officer that is placed in a fixed location at a signalized intersection and that is programmed to automatically produce a photograph of any vehicle whose driver has violated Section 603 at that intersection; and 
"(b)  'Peace officer' means an officer of the Police Department or a contractor designated by the City. 
"(3)  The photograph produced by a red-light camera shall depict the vehicle's location, license plate and driver. Printed on the photograph shall be the date of the violation, the approximate time of the violation and the approximate location of the violation. 
"(4)  When a peace officer, based on evidence obtained in whole or part by means of a red-light camera, has probable cause to believe that a vehicle has been driven in violation of Section 603, the peace officer may issue, or cause to be issued through a contractor designated by the City, a summons and complaint charging the person in whose name the vehicle is registered with a violation of Section 603. If, however, the vehicle is registered in more than one person's name, the summons and complaint shall be issued to the registrant who the issuing peace officer determines, under all the facts and circumstances, was the person most likely depicted in the photographs produced by the red-light camera. The summons and complaint shall contain the signature, or reasonable facsimile thereof, of the peace officer issuing the summons and complaint. 
"(5)  To obtain personal jurisdiction in the Municipal Court over the charged person, a copy of the summons and complaint must be personally served upon the charged person, or, in lieu of such personal service, by leaving a copy of the summons and complaint at the charged person's usual place of abode with some person over the age of eighteen (18) years residing therein, or by mailing a copy to the charged person's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested, within ninety (90) days after the alleged violation occurred and not less than five (5) days prior to the time the charged person is required, pursuant to the summons and complaint, to appear in court. The person charged may waive service of the summons and complaint by voluntarily submitting to the Municipal Court's jurisdiction through payment of a fine or other affirmative act constituting a waiver of service. 
"(6)  When a person is served with a summons and complaint under this Section, the person shall: 
"(a)  If admitting the charge, complete the summons and complaint form by providing his or her driver's license number and other information requested in the form, and return the completed form, together with payment of the fine assessed, to the Municipal Court on or before the time specified in the summons and complaint for the charged person to appear; or 
"(b)  If contesting the charge, appear on the date and time specified in the summons and complaint for arraignment. 
"(7)  Proof that a particular vehicle violated Section 603 as detected by a red-light camera and as shown by the photographs produced by the red-light camera, together with proof that the particular vehicle is registered in the charged person's name, shall raise the evidentiary presumption and constitute prima facie evidence of the fact that the charged person was the person driving the vehicle depicted in the photograph. However, such evidence and presumption may be rebutted by the presentation of any probative and competent evidence that the charged person was not the driver shown in the photograph. The City may not require a registered owner of a vehicle to disclose the identity of a driver who was detected by the use of the red-light camera. However, the owner may be required to submit evidence that the owner was not the driver at the time of the alleged violation. 
"(8)  In any proceeding under this Section, any photograph produced by a red-light camera concerning the violation shall be admissible in court as prima facie evidence of a violation of Section 603, provided that the peace officer who activated and tested the redlight camera prior to the photographs being taken testifies as to the placement of the red-light camera and the accuracy of the scene depicted in the photographs, and further testifies that he or she tested the red-light camera for proper operation within a reasonable period of time both before and after the taking of the photographs. Also, to be admissible, the photographs must be of a sufficient quality to permit identification of the driver of the vehicle. 
"(9)  In any proceeding under this Section, the Municipal Court may impose as an additional cost the cost of service of the summons and complaint upon the defendant if such service is effected through either certified mail or personal service. If the defendant is personally served, the Municipal Court may only charge the actual costs of service that shall be no more than the amount usually charged for civil service of process. 
"(10)  The maximum penalty for a violation of Section 603 that is detected by a red-light camera, including surcharge, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
"(11)  The City shall not report to the Department of Revenue: (i) any conviction or entry of judgment; or (ii) for purposes of section 42-2-107(5) or 42-2-118(3), C.R.S., any outstanding judgment or warrant based on a violation of Section 603, which was detected exclusively by means of a red-light camera. 
"(12)  The City shall post a sign in a conspicuous place at a reasonable distance before the area in which the red-light camera is to be used, notifying the public that a red-light camera is in use immediately ahead. 
"(13)  If a driver fails to pay a penalty imposed for a violation detected using red-light camera, the City shall not attempt to enforce such a penalty by immobilizing the driver's vehicle." 
(5)  Subsection 216(1.5), Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby deleted. 
(6)  Section 222, Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
" 222. Volunteer fireman/ambulance attendants - special lights. 
"(1)  (a)  All members of volunteer fire departments regularly attached to the fire departments organized within incorporated towns and cities and fire protection districts and all members of a volunteer ambulance service regularly attached to a volunteer ambulance service within an area that the ambulance service would be reasonably expected to serve may have their private automobiles equipped with a signal lamp or a combination of signal lamps capable of displaying flashing, oscillating or rotating red lights visible to the front and rear at five hundred feet in normal sunlight. In addition to the red light, flashing, oscillating or rotating signal lights may be used that emit white or white in combination with red lights. At least one of such signal lamps or combination of signal lamps shall be mounted on the top of the automobile. Said automobiles may be equipped with audible signal systems such as sirens, whistles or bells. Said lights, together with any signal systems authorized by this subsection (1), may be used only as authorized by subsection (3) of this section or when a member of a fire department is responding to or attending a fire alarm or other emergency or when a member of an ambulance service is responding to an emergency requiring the member's services. Except as authorized in subsection (3) of this section, neither such lights nor such signals shall be used for any other purpose than those set forth in this subsection (1). If used for any other purpose, such use shall constitute a violation of this subsection (1). 
"(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of this subsection (1), a member of a volunteer fire department or a volunteer ambulance service may equip his or her private automobile with the equipment described in paragraph (a) of this subsection (1) only after receiving a permit for the equipment from the fire chief of the fire department or chief executive officer of the ambulance service through which the volunteer serves. 
"(2)  Deleted. 
"(3)  A fire engine collector or member of a fire department may use the signal system authorized by subsection (1) of this section in a funeral, parade or for other special purposes if the circumstances would not lead a reasonable person to believe that such vehicle is responding to an actual emergency." 
(7)  Subsection 225(3), Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
" 225. Mufflers - prevention of noise. 
"(3)  Any person who violates subsection (1) of this section commits a class B traffic infraction. Any person who violates subsection (1.5) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars." 
(8)  Subsection 234, Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    " 234. Slow-moving vehicles - display of emblem. 
"(1)  (a)  All machinery, equipment, and vehicles, except bicycles, electrical assisted bicycles, and other human-powered vehicles, designed to operate or normally operated at a speed of less than twenty-five miles per hour on a public highway shall display a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem on the rear. Bicycles and other human-powered vehicles shall be permitted but not required to display the emblem specified in this subsection (1). 
"(2)  Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction." 
(9)  Subsection 237(4)(a), Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
" 237. Safety belt systems - mandatory use - exemptions - penalty. 
"(4)  (a)  Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (b) of this subsection (4), any person who operates a motor vehicle while such person or passenger is in violation of the requirement of subsection (2) of this section commits a class B traffic infraction." 
(10)  Subsections 507(2)(b), 507(2)(b.5) and 507(2)(c), Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
" 507. Wheel and axle loads. 
"(2)  (b)  Except as provided in paragraph (b.5) of this subsection (2), when the wheel attached to a single axle are equipped with pneumatic tires, eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds. 
"(2)  (b.5)  When the wheels attached to a single axle are equipped with pneumatic tires and the vehicle is a digger derrick or bucket boom truck operated by an electric utility on a highway, nineteen thousand (19,000) pounds. 
"(2)  (c)  When the wheels attached to a tandem axle are equipped with pneumatic tires, thirty thousand (30,000) pounds." 
(11)  Subsection 508(1)(a)(III), Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
" 508. Gross weight of vehicles and loads. 
"(1)(a)  (III)  The gross weight of a vehicle having three or more axles shall not exceed forty-six thousand (46,000) pounds." 
(12)  A new Section 513, Article 1, is hereby added to the Model Traffic Code adopted in this Chapter to read as follows: 
" 513. Weight limits on certain streets or parts thereof. 
    "When official signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a weight limit in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof or upon any of the bridges or viaducts." 
(13)  Section 614, Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
" 614. Designation of highway maintenance, repair or construction zones - signs - increase in penalties for speeding violations. 
"(1)  If maintenance, repair or construction activities are occurring or will be occurring within four hours on a state highway or municipal street, the department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may designate such portion of the highway or street as a highway or street maintenance, repair or construction zone. Any person who commits a speeding violation in a maintenance, repair or construction zone that is designated pursuant to the provisions of this section is subject to doubled penalties and charges. 
"(2)  The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall designate by appropriate signs that a maintenance, repair or construction activity is taking place within four hours. Such sign shall notify the public that increased penalties for speeding violations are in effect in such zone. The department of transportation or local authorities shall erect or place a second sign after such zone indicating that the increased penalties for speeding violations are no longer in effect. A maintenance, repair or construction zone begins at the location of the sign indicating that increased penalties are in effect and ends at the location of the sign indicating that the increased penalties are no longer in effect. 
"(3)  Signs used for designating the beginning and end of a maintenance, construction or repair zone shall conform to department of transportation requirements. The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may display such signs on any fixed, variable or moveable stand. The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may place such a sign on a moving vehicle if required for certain activities, including but not limited to highway painting work." 
(14)  Section 615, Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
" 615. Designation of school zones - signs - increase in penalties for speeding violations. 
"(1)  Any person who commits a speeding violation on a portion of the state highway or municipal street designated as a school zone pursuant to the provisions of this section is subject to doubled penalties and charges. 
"(2)  The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall designate a school zone by appropriate signs. Such sign shall notify the public that increased penalties for speeding violations are in effect in such zone. The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall erect or place a second sign after such school zone indicating that the increased penalties for speeding violations are no longer in effect. A school zone begins at the location of the sign indicating that increased penalties are in effect and ends at the location of the sign indicating that the increased penalties are no longer in effect. 
"(3)  Signs used for designating the beginning and end of a school zone shall conform to department of transportation requirements. The department of transportation or the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may display such signs on any fixed, variable or moveable stand." 
(15)  Subsections 901(1)(a) and (b), Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
" 901. Required position and method of turning. 
"(a)  Right Turns. Both the approach for a right turn and the right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. Unless double-turn lanes are clearly marked by official signs, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make a right turn into any traffic lane other than the right-most lane of traffic of the road onto which the turn is made. 
"(b)  Left Turns. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left shall approach the turn in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. Unless double-turn lanes are clearly marked by official signs, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make a left turn into any traffic lane other than the left-most lane of traffic lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle." 
(16)  Section 1012 (High occupancy vehicle [HOV] and high occupancy toll [HOT] lanes), Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby deleted. 
(17)  Subsection 1101(2)(c), Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read as follows, and Subsection 1101(2)(e), Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby deleted: 
" 1101. Speed limits. 
"(2)  (c)  Twenty-five miles per hour in any residence district, as defined in section 42-1-102(80), C.R.S. 
"(2)  (e)  Deleted." 
(18)  Subsection 1102(4), Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code, is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
" 1102. Altering of speed limits. 
"(4)  No alteration of speed limits on state highways within cities, cities and counties, and incorporated towns shall be effective until such alteration has been approved in writing by the department of transportation." 
(19)  A new Section 1203, Article 1, is hereby added to the Model Traffic Code, to read as follows: 
" 1203. Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
"(1)  No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principal purpose of: 
"(a)  Painting, servicing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency; or 
"(b)  Displaying advertising. 
"(2)  As used in this section, the term 'semi-trailer' and the term 'laden truck tractor' shall have the meaning as set forth in the Model Traffic Code adopted in this Chapter. 
"(3)  No laden truck tractor with a total gross vehicle weight of twenty-five thousand (25,000) pounds or more or any truck tractor shall be parked on any street in the City for more than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. 
"(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any semi-trailer in or upon any public street or highway in the City when such semi-trailer is not attached to a truck tractor. 
"(5)  Vehicles for sale. 
"(a)  No person shall park a vehicle upon private property for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale. 
"(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property located within Cherry Hills Village to allow vehicles owned by others to be parked on such property for the principal purpose of being offered for sale. 
"(c)  Whenever a parked vehicle displays a sign or message indicating that it is being offered for sale, such display shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is parked for the principal purpose of being displayed for sale. 
"(d)  For purposes of this section 1203(5) only, the term 'vehicle' shall include any device capable of being moved from place to place upon wheels or tracks, as well as devices capable of being moved on or through water or air, such as boats and airplanes. 
"(e)  No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway, street, alley, sidewalk or sidewalk area, in a park or in any publicly owned parking area within Cherry Hills Village for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale. 
"(6)  No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or highway in such a manner or under such conditions as to interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic or proper street or highway maintenance." 
(20)  Section 1204, Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by adding the following new Subsections (6) and (6.5): 
"(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading in a private driveway or on private property without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. 
"(6.5)  Parking of travel homes. 
"(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store one or more travel homes in the front yard area of property or on any public street, highway, road, alley or other right-of-way for a period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) hours. It is lawful to park or store travel homes, trailers or boats in other areas of the property if they are screened from view from public thoroughfares. Screening may be in the form of fencing, landscaping or other opaque materials. For purposes of this section, 'travel home' shall mean and shall include, but not be limited to, a vehicular portable structure built on a chassis, either towed or self-propelled, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight (8) feet. 
"(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to relocate or otherwise move a travel home to a new location from the travel home's original parked location in an attempt to circumvent or evade the provisions of (6.5)(a) above." 
(21)  Subsections 1208(1)(a), 1208(1)(b), 1208(2), 1208(3)(a), 1208(5)(b), 1208(7), 1208(10)(a), 1208(10)(b), 1208(11) and 1208(13)(a), Article 1, of the Model Traffic Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
" 1208. Parking privileges for persons with disabilities. 
"(1)  (a)  'License plate or placard' means a license plate or placard issued pursuant to section 42-3-204(2), C.R.S. 
"(1)  (b)  'Person with a disability' has the meaning provided for such term in section 42-3-204(1), C.R.S. 
"(2)  In a jurisdiction recognizing the privilege defined by this subsection (2), a vehicle with a license plate or a placard obtained pursuant to section 42-3-204, C.R.S., or as otherwise authorized by subsection (4) of this section, may be parked in public parking areas along public streets regardless of any time limitation imposed upon parking in such area; except that a jurisdiction shall not limit such a privilege to park on any public street to less than four hours. The respective jurisdiction shall clearly post the appropriate time limits in such area. Such privilege need not apply to zones in which: 
"(3)  (a)  A person with a disability may park in a parking space identified as being reserved for use by persons with disabilities, whether on public property or private property available for public use. A license plate or placard obtained pursuant to section 42-3-204, C.R.S., or as otherwise authorized by subsection (4) of this section shall be displayed at all times on the vehicle while parked in such space. 
"(5)  (b)  A license plate or placard obtained pursuant to section 42-3-204, C.R.S., or as otherwise authorized by subsection (4) of this section is displayed in such vehicle. 
"(7)  Any person who is not a person with a disability and who uses a license plate or placard issued pursuant to section 42-3-204, C.R.S., in order to receive the benefits or privileges available to a person with a disability under this section commits a class B traffic infraction and shall be subject to a fine of up to twice the maximum penalty identified for a class B traffic infraction in section 1701(3)(a)(I). 
"(10)  (a)  For purposes of this subsection (10), 'holder' means a person with a disability as defined in section 42-3-204(1)(b), C.R.S., who has lawfully obtained a license plate or placard issued pursuant to section 42-3-204(2), C.R.S., or as otherwise authorized by subsection (4) of this section. 
"(10)  (b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, a holder is liable for any penalty or fine as set forth in this section or section 42-3-204, C.R.S., or for any misuse of a disabled license plate or placard, including the use of such plate or placard by any person other than a holder, unless the holder can furnish sufficient evidence that the license plate or placard was, at the time of the violation, in the care, custody or control of another person without the holder's knowledge or consent. 
"(11)  Any person who knowingly and fraudulently obtains, possesses, uses, or transfers a placard issued to a person with a disability pursuant to section 42-3-204, C.R.S., or knowingly makes, possesses, uses, or transfers what purports to be, but is not, a placard issued to a person with a disability pursuant to section 42-3-204, C.R.S., is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to the criminal and civil penalties provided under section 139(3) and (4). Any person who knowingly and willfully receives remuneration for committing a misdemeanor pursuant to this subsection (11) shall be subject to twice the civil and criminal fine that would otherwise be imposed. 
"(13)  (a)  For purposes of this subsection (13), 'holder' means a person with a disability as defined in section 42-3-204(1)(b), C.R.S., who has lawfully obtained a license plate or placard issued pursuant to section 42-3-204(2), C.R.S., or as otherwise authorized by subsection (4) of this section." 
(22)  Subsection 1211(1), Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
" 1211. Limitations on backing. 
"(1)  The driver of a vehicle, whether on public property or private property, shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic, parked vehicles or immobile objects." 
(23)  A new Section 1212, Article I, is hereby added to the Model Traffic Code to read as follows: 
" 1212. Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
    "In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this code governing the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred." 
(24)  Subsection 1402(2), Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby deleted. 
(25)  Subsection 1406(5), Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby deleted. 
(26)  Subsections 1407.5(3)(a) and 1407.5(3)(b), Article I, of the Model Traffic Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
" 1407.5. Splash guards - when required. 
"(3)  This section does not apply to: 
"(a)  Passenger-carrying motor vehicles registered pursuant to section 42-3-305(2), C.R.S.; 
"(b)  Trucks and truck tractors registered pursuant to section 42-3-305(4) or (5), C.R.S., having an empty weight of ten thousand pounds or less;" 
(27)  Section 1409(4)(a), Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read as follows, and Subsection 1409(9) is deleted: 
" 1409. Compulsory insurance - penalty. 
"(4)  (a)  Any person who violates the provisions of subsection (1, (2) or (3) of this section commits a traffic offense. 
"(9)  Deleted." 
(28)  Section 1701, Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
" 1701. Traffic offenses and infractions classified - penalties. 
"(1)  Except as set forth herein, it is a traffic infraction for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this Chapter. Such a traffic infraction shall constitute a civil matter. The Colorado Rules of Municipal Procedure shall apply to traffic infraction proceedings, except that no bench warrant for arrest shall be issued for a defendant's failure to appear when the only violation charged is a non-criminal traffic infraction. Instead, the court may enter judgment of liability by default against the defendant for failure to appear, assess any penalty and costs established by law and report the judgment to the Colorado Department of Revenue, Motor Vehicle Division, or to the motor vehicle department of any other state which participates in the Interstate Non-Resident Violator Compact, as codified at Section 24-60-2101, C.R.S., which may assess points against the defendant's driver's license and may take appropriate action to ensure that the judgment is satisfied. There is no right to trial by jury for any non-criminal traffic infraction. 
"(2)  The following violations constitute criminal traffic offenses: 
"(a)  A violation of Section 1101(1) of the Model Traffic Code adopted by this Chapter involving driving twenty-five (25) or more miles per hour in excess of the reasonable and prudent speed or in excess of the lawful speed limit is a criminal traffic offense. 
"(b)  A violation of Section 1101(8)(a) of the Model Traffic Code adopted by this Chapter involving driving twenty-five (25) miles or more per hour in excess of a maximum speed limit of seventy-five (75) miles per hour on any interstate highway is a criminal traffic offense. 
"(c)  A violation of any of the following sections of the Model Traffic Code adopted by this Chapter: 1105 (speed contests), 1401 (reckless driving), 1402 (careless driving), 1409 (failure to show compulsory insurance), 1413 (eluding or attempting to elude a police officer), 1703 (aiding or abetting a traffic offense), and 1903 (failure to stop for a school bus). 
"(3)  (a)  Traffic infractions shall be subject to the following penalties: 
"Minimum Sentence Maximum Sentence "1 day imprisonment, or a fine of $10.00, or both 1 year imprisonment, or a fine of $1,000.00, or both  
"(b)  Court costs as authorized by state law shall be added to the fine. 
"(c)  Any person convicted of a traffic infraction shall be required to pay restitution as required by Code 18.5 of title 16, C.R.S, and may be sentenced to perform a certain number of hours of community or useful public service in action to any other sentence provided by sub-subparagraph (a) of this subparagraph (3). 
"(4)  Every person who is convicted of, who admits liability for, or against whom a judgment is entered for a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be fined or penalized, and have a surcharge levied thereon pursuant to section 2-4-80 of the Municipal Code, as amended, or any other surcharge that has been or may be lawfully enacted by the City Council." 
(29)  Section 1705, Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby added as follows: 
" 1705. Person arrested to be taken before the proper court. 
"(1)  Whenever any person is arrested by a police officer for any violation of this code, the arrested person shall, in the discretion of the officer, either be given a written notice or summons to appear in court as provided in Section 1707 or be taken without unnecessary delay before a municipal judge who has jurisdiction of such offense when the arrested person does not furnish satisfactory evidence of identity or when the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe the person will disregard a written promise to appear in court or will disregard a summons to appear. The court shall provide a bail bond schedule and available personnel to accept adequate security for such bail bonds. 
"(2)  Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, a police officer may place a person who has been arrested and charged with a violation of section 42-4-1301(l)(a) or (2), C.R.S., and who has been given a written notice or summons to appear in court as provided in Section 1707 in a state-approved treatment facility of alcoholism even though entry or other record of such arrest and charge has been made. Such placement shall be governed by Part 3 of Article 1 of Title 25, C.R.S., except where in conflict with this section." 
(30)  Section 1707, Article I, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby added as follows: 
" 1707. Summons and complaint for traffic violations. 
"(1)  Whenever a person commits a violation of this Chapter or any statute and such person is not required by the provisions of section 1705 to be arrested and taken without unnecessary delay before a municipal judge, the peace officer may issue and serve upon the defendant a summons and complaint which shall contain the name and address of the defendant, the license number of the vehicle involved, if any, the number of the defendant's driver's license, if any, a citation of the statute or Model Traffic Code section alleged to have been violated, a brief description of the offense, the date and approximate location thereof, and the date the summons and complaint is served on the defendant; shall direct the defendant to appear in or otherwise respond to the City Municipal Court or Arapahoe County Court, at a specified time and place; shall be signed by the peace officer; and shall contain a place for the defendant to execute a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the summons portion of the summons and complaint. 
"(2)  (a)  The City of Cherry Hills Village may offer or extend to a defendant the opportunity for the defendant to pay a penalty assessment for a non-criminal traffic infraction prior to the date and time scheduled for the defendant's appearance in the City Municipal Court or Arapahoe County Court. Whenever a penalty assessment is made available for a traffic infraction, the defendant shall be required to execute a signed acknowledgment of guilt and shall pay the penalty prescribed by the City within a specified period of time, as well as provide such other information as may be required by the City. Payment of a penalty assessment notice by the person to whom the notice is tendered shall constitute an acknowledgement of guilt by such person of his or her violation of the offense stated in such notice and shall be deemed a complete satisfaction for the violation, and the City, upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging payment thereof, if requested." 
(31)  Section 102, Article II, of the Model Traffic Code is amended to add the following definitions to read as follows: 
" 102. Definitions. 
"(11.5)  'City Manager' means the City Manager of the City of Cherry Hills Village or his or her designee. 
"(17.5)  'Department of Transportation' means the Department of Transportation of the State of Colorado." 
(Ord. 22 1, 2010) 
Sec. 8-1-40. - Application. 
    This Chapter shall apply to every highway, street, road, avenue, alley, sidewalk, driveway, park and to every other public place or public parking area, either within or outside of the corporate limits of the City, the use of which the City has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. Any other provision of the Model Traffic Code adopted in Section 8-1-20 notwithstanding, the provisions of Sections 1401, 1402, 606, 1211 and 1413 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively concerning reckless driving, careless driving, unauthorized devices, limitations on backing and eluding an officer, shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout the City. 
(Ord. 22 1, 2010) 
Sec. 8-1-50. - Interpretation. 
    This Chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the local traffic regulations contained herein. Chapter and section headings of this Article and adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(Ord. 22 1, 2010) 
Sec. 8-1-60. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person who commits a violation of any provision stated in or adopted by this Article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1701 of the Model Traffic Code, as herein adopted and amended by the City, and in Section 1717 thereof, which reads as follows: 
" 1717. Conviction - attendance at driver improvement school. 
    "Whenever a person has been convicted of violating any provision of this code or other law regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, the court, in addition to the penalty provided for the violation or as a condition of either the probation or the suspension of all or any portion of any fine or sentence of imprisonment for a violation other than a traffic infraction, may require the defendant, at his own expense, if any, to attend and satisfactorily complete a course of instruction at any designated driver improvement school providing instruction in the traffic laws of this State, instruction in recognition of hazardous traffic situations, and instruction in traffic accident prevention. Unless otherwise provided by law, such school shall be approved by the court." 
(Ord. 22 1, 2010) 
CHAPTER 10 - General Offenses 
ARTICLE I - General Provisions 

Sec. 10-1-10. - Accessory to crime. 
(a)  A person is an accessory to crime if, with intent to hinder, delay or prevent the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment of another for the commission of a crime, he renders assistance to such person. 
(b)  Render assistance means to: 
(1)  Harbor or conceal the other; 
(2)  Warn such person of impending discovery or apprehension; except that this does not apply to a warning given in an effort to bring such person into compliance with the law; 
(3)  Provide such person with money, transportation, weapon, disguise or other thing to be used in avoiding discovery or apprehension; 
(4)  By force, intimidation or deception, obstruct anyone in the performance of any act which might aid in the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution or punishment of such person; or 
(5)  Conceal, destroy or alter any physical evidence that might aid in the discovery, detection, apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment of such person. 
(c)  Being an accessory to crime is a Class 1 petty offense if the offender knows that the person being assisted has committed, has been convicted of or is charged by pending information, indictment or complaint with a crime, or is suspected of or wanted for a crime, and if that crime is designated by this Code as a misdemeanor of any class. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-1-20. - Aiding and abetting. 
    Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit, aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be in violation of the ordinances of the City, whether individually or in connection with one (1) or more persons, as a principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense, and every person who fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any ordinance of the City is likewise guilty of such offense. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-1-30. - Confiscation. 
    In all cases of arrest under the terms of this Chapter, the arresting officers are hereby authorized to confiscate the property involved and to deliver the same to the Chief of Police, to be held by him until final determination of the prosecution of said offense. Upon a finding of guilt, the Municipal Judge may order forfeiture of such property and deliver the same to the Chief of Police for destruction or for the account of the City. 
(Prior code 9-2-3-3) 
Sec. 10-1-40. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Ord. 7, 1955; 1980 Code; prior code 9-2-3-4; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE II - Government and Public Officers 

Sec. 10-2-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed hereafter: 
    Government includes any branch, subdivision, institution or agency of the government of this City. 
    Governmental function includes any activity which a public servant is legally authorized to undertake on behalf of a government. 
    Public servant means any officer or employee of the government, whether elected or appointed, and any person participating as an advisor or consultant, engaged in the service of process or otherwise performing a governmental function, but the term does not include witnesses. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-2-20. - Impersonating a police officer. 
    Any person who, without due authority, dresses in the uniform of, or in a uniform which is an imitation or colorable imitation of the uniform adopted and worn by, a City police officer, who exercises or attempts to exercise the authority of a police officer, or who claims, pretends or holds himself out to be such a police officer is guilty of impersonating a police officer. 
(Prior code 9-2-4-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-2-30. - Obstructing government operations. 
(a)  It is unlawful to obstruct government operations. 
(b)  A person commits obstructing government operations if he intentionally obstructs, impairs or hinders the performance of a governmental function by a public official, employee or servant, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or obstacle. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense that: 
(1)  The obstruction, impairment or hindrance was of unlawful action by a public servant; 
(2)  The obstruction, impairment or hindrance was of the making of an arrest; or 
(3)  The obstruction, impairment or hindrance was by lawful activities in connection with a labor dispute with the government. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-2-40. - Obstructing a police officer or firefighter. 
(a)  No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer made or given in the discharge of the police officer's duties. 
(b)  No person shall, in any way, interfere with or hinder any police officer who is discharging or apparently discharging the duties of the position. 
(c)  It is unlawful to obstruct a police officer or firefighter. 
(d)  A person commits obstructing a police officer or firefighter when, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or obstacle, such person knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the enforcement of the law or the preservation of the peace by a police officer, acting under color of his official authority, or knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the prevention, control or abatement of fire by a firefighter, acting under color of his official authority. 
(e)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the police officer or firefighter was acting in an illegal manner, if the police officer or firefighter was acting under color of his official authority as defined in Subsection 10-2-50(c) of this Code. 
(f)  This Section does not apply to obstruction, impairment or hindrance of the making of an arrest. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-2-50. - Resisting an officer; resisting arrest. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to resist the Chief of Police, any police officer, fireman, the Animal Control Officer or any person duly empowered with peace officer authority, while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way to interfere with or hinder him in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty. 
(b)  It is unlawful to resist arrest. A person commits resisting arrest if he knowingly prevents or attempts to prevent a police officer, acting under color of his official authority, from effecting an arrest of the actor or another by: 
(1)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the police officer or another; or 
(2)  Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the police officer or another. 
(c)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this Section that the police officer was attempting to make an arrest which in fact was unlawful, if the police officer was acting under color of his official authority, and in attempting to make the arrest, the police officer was not resorting to unreasonable or excessive force giving rise to the right of self-defense. A police officer acts under color of his official authority when, in the regular course of assigned duties, the police officer is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made by the police officer. 
(d)  The term police officer as used in this Section means a police officer in uniform or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself by exhibiting his credentials as such police officer to the person whose arrest is attempted. 
(Prior code 9-2-4-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-2-60. - False reporting to authorities. 
    It is unlawful for a person to falsely report to authorities. A person commits false reporting to authorities if he: 
(1)  Knowingly causes a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or within an official or volunteer fire department, ambulance service or any other government agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; 
(2)  Makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern when he knows that it did not occur; 
(3)  Makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when he knows that he has no such information or knows that the information is false; 
(4)  Knowingly gives false information to any law enforcement officer with the purpose of implicating another; or 
(5)  Gives a false name or address to a law enforcement officer with the intent of concealing or hiding one's own real name, address and/or age. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-2-70. - Duty of citizens to render aid. 
    It is the duty of all persons when called upon by the Chief of Police, any police officer, fireman, the Animal Control Officer or any police officer to promptly aid and assist such officer or member in the discharge of his duties. 
(Prior code 9-2-4-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE III - Streets and Public Places 

Sec. 10-3-10. - Unlawful conduct on public property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any public building or on any public property or to conduct himself in or on them in violation of any order, rule or regulation concerning any matter prescribed in this Section, limiting or prohibiting the use, activities or conduct in such public building or on such public property, issued by any officer or agency having the power of control, management or supervision of the building or property. In addition to any authority granted by any other law, each such officer or agency may adopt such orders, rules or regulations as are reasonably necessary for the administration, protection and maintenance of such public buildings and property, specifically, orders, rules and regulations upon the following matters: 
(1)  Preservation of property, vegetation, wildlife, signs, markers, statues, buildings, grounds and other structures, and any object of scientific, historical or scenic interest; 
(2)  Restriction or limitation of the use of such public buildings or property as to time, manner or permitted activities; 
(3)  Prohibition of activities or conduct within public buildings or on public property which may be reasonably expected to substantially interfere with the use and enjoyment of such places by others or which may constitute a general nuisance; 
(4)  Camping and picnicking, public meetings and assemblages and other individual or group usages, including the place, time and manner in which such activities may be permitted; 
(5)  Use of all vehicles as to place, time and manner of use; and 
(6)  Control and limitation of fires and designation of places where fires are permitted. 
(b)  No conviction may be obtained under this Section unless notice of such limitation or prohibition is prominently posted at all public entrances to such building or property or unless such notice is actually first given the person by the office or agency, including any agent thereof or by any law enforcement officer having jurisdiction or authority to enforce this Section. 
(c)  Any person who violates this Section is guilty of unlawful conduct on public property. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-3-20. - Trespass or interference in public buildings. 
(a)  No person shall so conduct himself or herself at or in any public building owned, operated or controlled by the City as to willfully deny to any public official, public employee or invitee on such premises the lawful rights of such official, employee or invitee to enter, to use the facilities of or to leave any such public building. 
(b)  No person shall, at or in any public building, willfully impede any public official or employee in the lawful performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion or intimidation or by force and violence or threat thereof. 
(c)  No person shall willfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building upon being requested to do so by the City officer charged with maintaining order in such public building, if the person has committed, is committing, threatens to commit or incites others to commit any act which did, or would if completed, disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures or functions being carried on in the public building. 
(d)  No person shall, at any meeting or session conducted by any judicial, legislative or administrative body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such meeting or session by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of the body or official conducting the meeting or session or by any act designed to intimidate, coerce or hinder any member of such body or official engaged in the performance of duties at such meeting or session. 
(e)  No person shall, by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of any executive body or official at or in any public building, willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such body or official. 
(f)  The term public building, as used in this Section, includes any premises being temporarily used by a public officer or employee in the discharge of his or her official duties. 
(g)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section commits an unlawful act. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-3-30. - Interfering with use of streets or sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for any person, alone or in a group or assemblage of persons, whose standing, remaining or congregating on any public highway, street, alley or sidewalk in the City shall obstruct, interfere with or prevent the free, unobstructed and reasonable use of that public highway, street, alley or sidewalk by any other person, to fail or refuse to yield to the reasonable use or passage of any other person on that public highway, street, alley or sidewalk or to fail or refuse to move on, disperse or cease such obstruction or interference immediately upon being so ordered by any police officer of the City or other authorized police officer. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-3-40. - Damage or removal of street signs. 
    It is unlawful for any person without proper authorization to remove, deface, damage or destroy any street sign or sign erected or placed in or adjacent to any street indicating the name of such street. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE IV - Public, Private and Personal Property 

Sec. 10-4-10. - Criminal mischief. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly damage the real or personal property of one (1) or more other persons in the course of a single criminal episode where the aggregate damage to the real or personal property is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 13 1, 2007) 
Sec. 10-4-20. - Destroying or removing public or private property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or in any other manner injure, damage, destroy or remove without authorization any property, real or personal, owned by the City or by any person. 
(Ord. 4, 1970; prior code 9-2-6-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-4-30. - Trespassing. 
    It is unlawful for any person to trespass upon, use or occupy the premises of another person without authority to do so from the owner or lawful occupant thereof. It is further unlawful for any person willfully and intentionally to deprive the owner or lawful occupant of the use, benefit or enjoyment of such premises. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as altering, amending or affecting the laws governing acquisition of property, or rights therein, by adverse possession, and nothing in this Section makes lawful door-to-door solicitation, as permitted by Section 10-10-20 of this Code, unlawful. 
(Ord. 4, 1970; prior code 9-2-6-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 08 1, 2008) 
Sec. 10-4-40. - Littering. 
(a)  It is unlawful to throw or deposit in any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds in the City any paper, old clothes, cloth of any kind, boots, shoes, hats, leather, hair, grass, junk cars, straw, hay, trash or any other thing, except in public receptacles and authorized private receptacles. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, to throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the City or upon private property. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-4-50. - Theft. 
    It is unlawful for a person to commit theft. A person commits theft when he or she knowingly obtains or exercises control over anything of another without authorization or by threat or deception when the value of the thing is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; 
(3)  Uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value, intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; or 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he or she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 13 2, 2007) 
Sec. 10-4-60. - Theft of rental property. 
    It is unlawful for a person to commit theft of rental property. A person commits theft of rental property if he or she: 
(1)  Obtains the temporary use of personal property of another, which is available only for hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the personal property; 
(2)  Having lawfully obtained possession for temporary use of the personal property of another which is available only for hire, knowingly fails to reveal the whereabouts of or to return the property to the owner thereof or his or her representative or to the person from whom he or she has received it within seventy-two (72) hours after the time at which he or she agreed to return it; and 
(3)  The value of the property involved is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 13 3, 2007) 
Sec. 10-4-70. - Theft by receiving. 
    It is unlawful to commit theft by receiving. A person commits theft by receiving when he or she receives, retains, loans money by pawn or pledge on or disposes of anything of value of another, knowing or believing that the thing of value has been stolen, and when he or she intends to deprive the lawful owner permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value, where the value of such thing is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 13 4, 2007) 
Sec. 10-4-80. - Concealment of goods. 
    If any person willfully conceals unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise valued at less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment, whether the concealment is on his or her own person or otherwise and whether on or off the premises of the store or mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima facie evidence that the person intended to commit the crime of theft. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 13 5, 2007) 
Sec. 10-4-90. - Tampering and unauthorized connection. 
(a)  Any person who connects any pipe, tube, stopcock, wire, cord, socket, motor or other instrument or contrivance with any main, service pipe or other medium conducting or supplying gas, water or electricity to any building without the knowledge and consent of the person supplying such gas, water or electricity commits tampering and unauthorized connection, which is unlawful. 
(b)  Any person who in any manner alters, obstructs or interferes with any meter pit, meter or metering device provided for measuring or registering the quantity of gas, water or electricity passing through said meter without the knowledge and consent of the person owning said meter commits tampering and unauthorized connection, which is unlawful. 
(c)  A person who tampers with property of another with intent to cause injury, inconvenience or annoyance to that person or to another, or if he knowingly makes unauthorized connection with property of a utility, commits tampering and unauthorized connection, which is unlawful. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to apply to any licensed electrical or plumbing contractor while performing usual and ordinary services in accordance with recognized customs and standards. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE V - Public Peace, Order and Decency 

Sec. 10-5-10. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person commits disorderly conduct if he intentionally, knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Makes a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture or display in a public place and the utterance, gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(2)  Abuses or threatens a person in a public place in an obviously offensive manner; 
(3)  Makes unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private residence that he has no right to occupy; 
(4)  Fights with another in a public place except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill; 
(5)  Not being a police officer, discharges a deadly weapon in a public place except when engaged in lawful target practice or hunting; or 
(6)  Not being a police officer, displays a deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(2) of this Section that the actor had significant provocation for his abusive or threatening conduct. 
(Prior code 9-2-3-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-5-20. - Disrupting lawful assembly. 
    A person commits disrupting lawful assembly if, intending to prevent or disrupt any lawful meeting, procession or gathering, he significantly obstructs or interferes with the meeting, procession or gathering by physical action, verbal utterance or any other means. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-5-30. - Harassment. 
(a)  A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he: 
(1)  Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise touches a person or subjects him to physical contact; 
(2)  In a public place directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; 
(3)  Follows a person in or about a public place; 
(4)  Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise by telephone, computer, computer network or computer system in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal by telephone, computer, computer network or computer system which is obscene; 
(5)  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; 
(6)  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another's home or private residence or other private property; or 
(7)  Repeatedly insults, taunts, challenges or makes communications in offensively coarse language to another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response. 
(b)  As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires, obscene means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus or excretory functions. 
(c)  Any act prohibited by subparagraph (a)(4) above may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place at which the telephone call, electronic mail or other electronic communication was either made or received. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-5-40. - Loitering. 
(a)  The word loiter means to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay, or wander about, or to remain, abide, or tarry in a public place. 
(b)  It is unlawful to: 
(1)  Loiter for the purpose of unlawful gambling; 
(2)  Loiter for the purpose of engaging or soliciting another person to engage in prostitution or deviate sexual intercourse; 
(3)  With intent to interfere with or disrupt the school program or with intent to interfere with or endanger schoolchildren, loiter in or about a school building or grounds, or within one hundred (100) feet of school grounds when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the building or on the grounds, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of, or responsibility for, a pupil or any other specific legitimate reason for being there, and not having written permission from a school administrator or having been asked to leave by a school administrator or his representative or by a peace officer; or 
(4)  Loiter with one (1) or more persons for the purpose of unlawfully using or possessing a narcotic or dangerous drug. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense that the defendant's acts were lawful and he was exercising his rights of lawful assembly as a part of a peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, either in the course of labor disputes or otherwise. 
(d)  In all cases of arrest under the terms of this Section, the violators may be kept or caused to be kept in custody by the arresting officers, unless lawfully released on bond, until trial. 
(1980 Code; prior code 9-2-8; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 1, 2016) 
Sec. 10-5-50. - Assault. 
(a)  An assault is an unlawful attempt of a person, coupled with a present ability, to commit a bodily injury on another person. 
(b)  It is unlawful to assault, beat, strike, wound, imprison or inflict violence on another. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-5-60. - False alarms. 
    Any person who shall intentionally make or give a false alarm of fire shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-5-70. - Storage of flammable liquids. 
    It is unlawful to store or cause to be stored or parked, except for delivery, any tank vehicle carrying flammable liquids or gases upon any streets, ways or avenues of the City or in any other part of the City, except those areas zoned for such uses. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-5-80. - Explosives. 
    It is unlawful for any person to store within the City limits or within one (1) mile thereof any amount of gunpowder, blasting powder, nitroglycerine, dynamite or other high explosive in excess of one (1) fifty-pound box or in excess of five hundred (500) caps or other devices used for the detonation of such high explosives. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-5-90. - Abandoned containers and appliances. 
    It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator, washer, dryer, freezer or other container or appliance which has a door, lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said door, lid, snap lock or other locking device. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-5-100. - Throwing of objects threatening public health and safety prohibited. 
    No person shall throw or shoot any object at or upon any person, vehicle, animal or property, if such action causes a threat to public health or safety. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 8 1, 2009) 
Sec. 10-5-110. - Fraud by check. 
(a)  As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Check means a written, unconditional order to pay a certain sum in money, drawn on a bank, payable on demand, and signed by the drawer. Check, for the purposes of this Section only, also includes a negotiable order of withdrawal and a share draft. 
    Drawee means the bank upon which a check is drawn or a bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union on which a negotiable order of withdrawal or a share draft is drawn. 
    Drawer means a person, either real or fictitious, whose name appears on a check as the primary obligor, whether the actual signature is that of himself or of a person authorized to draw the check on himself. 
    Insufficient funds means a drawer has insufficient funds with the drawee to pay a check when the drawer has no checking account, negotiable order of withdrawal account or share draft account with the drawee, or has funds in such an account with the drawee in an amount less than the amount of the check plus the amount of all other checks outstanding at the time of issuance; and a check dishonored for "no account" shall also be deemed to be dishonored for insufficient funds. 
    Issue. A person issues a check when he makes, draws, delivers or passes it or causes it to be made, drawn, delivered or passed. 
    Negotiable order of withdrawal and share draft mean negotiable or transferable instruments drawn on a negotiable order of withdrawal account or a share draft account, as the case may be, for the purpose of making payments to third persons or otherwise. 
    Negotiable order of withdrawal account means an account in a bank, savings and loan association or industrial bank, and share draft account means an account in a credit union, on which payment of interest or dividends may be made on a deposit with respect to which the bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union, as the case may be, may require the depositor to give notice of an intended withdrawal not less than thirty (30) days before the withdrawal is made, even though in practice such notice is not required and the depositor is allowed to make withdrawal by negotiable order of withdrawal or share draft. 
(c)  Any person, having acquired rights with respect to a check which is not paid because the drawer has insufficient funds, shall have standing to file a complaint under this Section, whether or not he is the payee, holder or bearer of the check. 
(d)  Any person who opens a checking account, negotiable order of withdrawal account or share draft account using false identification or an assumed name for the purpose of issuing fraudulent checks commits fraud by check, which is unlawful. 
(e)  If deferred prosecution is ordered, the court as a condition of supervision may require the defendant to make restitution on all checks issued by the defendant which are unpaid as of the date of commencement of the supervision in addition to other terms and conditions appropriate for the treatment or rehabilitation of the defendant. 
(f)  A bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union shall not be civilly or criminally liable for releasing information relating to the drawer's account to a sheriff, deputy sheriff, undersheriff, police officer, district attorney, assistant district attorney, deputy district attorney or authorized investigator for a district attorney investigating or prosecuting a charge under this Section. 
(g)  This Section does not relieve the prosecution from the necessity of establishing the required culpable mental state. However, for purposes of this Section, the issuer's knowledge of insufficient funds is presumed, except in the case of a postdated check or order, if: 
(1)  He has no account upon which the check or order is drawn with the bank or other drawee at the time he issues the check or order; or 
(2)  He has insufficient funds upon deposit with the bank or other drawee to pay the check or order, on presentation within thirty (30) days after issue. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 13 6, 2007) 
Sec. 10-5-120. - Public indecency. 
    It is unlawful to commit public indecency. Any person who performs any of the following in a public place or where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public commits public indecency: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse; 
(2)  A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of any person; or 
(3)  A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-5-130. - Indecent exposure. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to appear in public in a state of nudity or to commit or attempt to commit in the presence of another in a place open to the public view any indecent, wanton or lascivious act. 
(b)  In all cases of arrest under the terms of this Section, the violators shall be kept or caused to be kept in custody by the arresting officers, unless lawfully released on bond, until trial. 
(Ord. 10, 1955; 1980 Code; prior code 9-2-5-1, 9-2-5-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE VI - Minors 

Sec. 10-6-10. - Curfew. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person twenty-one (21) years of age or older, to congregate or loiter, either on foot or in or upon any conveyance being driven or parked on or about any street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, parking lot, alley, vacant lot, park, playground or yard, whether public or private, without the consent or permission of the owner or occupant thereof during the following hours: 
(1)  Between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday; or 
(2)  Between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Friday or Saturday, or any night preceding a national holiday, according to the applicable time standard then in effect for the City, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person over the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(b)  Definitions: 
(1)  As used in this Section, loitering or loiter shall mean remaining idle in essentially one (1) location, to be dilatory, to tarry or to dawdle, and shall include, but not be limited to, standing around, hanging out, sitting, kneeling, sauntering or prowling. 
(2)  As used in this Section, public place means a place to which the public or a substantial number of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, highways, transportation facilities, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds and the common areas of public and private buildings and facilities. 
(Prior code 9-2-9; Ord. 7, 1990; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-6-20. - Parent or guardian aiding, abetting. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any minor child, or to aid, abet, approve, encourage, allow, permit, tolerate or consent to the violation by any minor child of any provision of this Article or any ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-6-30. - Encouraging delinquency. 
    It is unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid or cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities, and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate a motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-6-40. - False statement; false credentials. 
    It is unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to make false statements, to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false registration card, identification card, note or other document for any unlawful purpose, or to furnish, present or exhibit such document or documents issued to a person other than the one presenting the same for the purpose of gaining admission to prohibited places for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or delivery of prohibited articles, including beer, liquor, wine or fermented malt beverages as defined in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-6-50. - Services of others. 
    It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to engage or utilize the services of any other person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure any article which the minor is forbidden by law to purchase. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-6-60. - Loitering and other acts around schools. 
    It is unlawful for any person to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in, about or on any public, private or parochial school, college or seminary grounds or buildings, either on foot or in or on any vehicle, without having some lawful business therein or thereabout or in connection with such school or the employees thereof, or for any person to: 
(1)  Annoy, disturb or otherwise prevent the orderly conduct of classes and activities of any such school; 
(2)  Annoy, disturb, assault or molest any student or employee of any such school, college or seminary while in any such school building or on any school grounds; 
(3)  Conduct himself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior in or about any school building or school grounds; or 
(4)  Park or move a vehicle in the immediate vicinity of or on the grounds of any such school, college or seminary for the purpose of annoying or molesting the students or employees thereof or in an effort to induce, entice or invite students into such vehicles for immoral purposes. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE VII - Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs 

Sec. 10-7-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Code, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed hereafter: 
    Alcoholic beverage or alcoholic liquor means fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
    Controlled substance means a drug or other substance or an immediate precursor which is declared to be a controlled substance under this Article, and also includes marijuana, marijuana concentrate and cocaine. 
    Drug paraphernalia means any machine, instrument, tool, equipment or device which is primarily designed and intended for one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  To introduce into the human body any controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law; 
b.  To enhance the effect on the human body of any controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law; 
c.  To conceal any quantity of any controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law; or 
d.  To test the strength, effectiveness or purity of any controlled substance under circumstances in violation of state law. 
    Establishment means a business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal organization, club, institution, entity, group or residence, and any real property, including buildings and improvements connected therewith, and shall also include any members, employees and occupants associated therewith. 
    Fermented malt beverage means any beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any similar product or any combination thereof in water containing not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) and not more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight. 
    Malt liquor includes beer and shall be construed to mean any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination thereof, in water containing more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) of alcohol by weight. 
    Marijuana means that definition contained in Section 10-12-20 of this Chapter. 
    Marijuana accessories means that definition contained in Section 10-12-20 of this Chapter. 
    Marijuana product means that definition contained in Section 10-12-20 of this Chapter. 
    Openly and publicly means in a manner observable by or in a place accessible to members of the general public. 
    Private property means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person for habitation and which is not open to the public, and privately owned real property which is not open to the public. Private property shall not include: 
a.  Any establishment which has or is required to have a license pursuant to Article 46, 47 or 48 of Title 12, C.R.S.; 
b.  Any establishment which sells alcoholic beverages or upon which alcoholic beverages are sold; or 
c.  Any establishment which leases, rents or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. 
    Public area or building means an area or buildings and facilities owned, leased or under the control of the City and includes, but is not limited to, public buildings, structures, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, streets, alleys, sidewalks, trails or open space areas. 
    Public place means any place commonly or usually open to the general public or to which members of the general public may resort, or accessible to members of the general public. By way of illustration, such public places include but are not limited to public ways, streets, buildings, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, shopping centers, shopping center malls, places of business usually open to the general public, and automobiles or other vehicles in or upon any such place or places, but shall not include the interior or enclosed yard area of private homes, residences, condominiums or apartments. 
    Spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation, mixed with water and other substances in solution, and includes among other things brandy, rum, whiskey, gin and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing at least one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol and which is fit for use for beverage purposes. Any liquid or solid containing beer or wine in combination with any other liquor except malt liquors and vinous liquors shall be construed to be spirituous liquor. 
    Vinous liquor means wine and fortified wines which contain not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) and not more than twenty-one percent (21%) of alcohol by volume and shall be construed to mean alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contents of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 8 1, 2013) 
Sec. 10-7-20. - Alcohol-related violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to represent himself to be over the age of twenty-one (21) years for the purpose of purchasing within the City any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to attempt to purchase, purchase or obtain, either directly or through an intermediary, any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by misrepresentation or any other means. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess or consume, whether actual or constructive, fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(d)  It is unlawful to sell fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, or to permit any fermented malt beverage, malt or vinous liquors to be sold or dispensed by a person under eighteen (18) years of age, or spirituous liquors to be sold or dispensed by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, or to permit any such person to participate in the sale or dispensing thereof. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age any fermented malt beverage or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors. 
(f)  It is unlawful in any place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed upon the premises, for any person to beg or to solicit any patron or customer of or visitor in such premises to purchase any alcoholic beverage for the one begging or soliciting. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-7-30. - Illegal possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by an underage person. 
(a)  Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age who possesses or consumes alcoholic beverages anywhere in the City commits illegal possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by an underage person. Illegal possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to the offense described in Subsection (a) above that the alcoholic beverages were possessed or consumed by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age under the following circumstances: 
(1)  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property and the alcoholic beverages were possessed or consumed with the consent of his parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; or 
(2)  When the existence of alcoholic beverages in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained alcoholic beverages within the limits prescribed by Section 25-5-410(1)(i)(II), C.R.S., or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcoholic beverages by weight. 
(c)  The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall not constitute a violation of this Section if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(d)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of Subsection (a) above shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and possessed or consumed alcoholic beverages anywhere in this State; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with alcoholic beverage intoxication or impairment while present anywhere in this State. 
(e)  During any trial for a violation of Subsection (a) above, any bottle, can or other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can or other container shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of alcoholic beverages. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol" or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  A parent or legal guardian of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, or any natural person who has the permission of such parent or legal guardian, may give, or permit the possession and consumption of, alcoholic beverages to or by a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years under the conditions described in Subsection (b)(1) above. This Subsection shall not be construed to permit any establishment which is or is required to be licensed pursuant to Article 46, 47 or 48 of Title 12, C.R.S., or any members, employees or occupants of any such establishment to give, provide, make available or sell alcoholic beverages to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-7-40. - Sales near schools. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer or expose for sale or gift any fermented malt beverage or any vinous, spirituous or malt liquors within a distance of five hundred (500) feet from any private, public or parochial school, said distance to be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property lines. However, this prohibition shall not affect the rights of any person holding a lawful permit or license to conduct such business within the restricted area hereby established; nor shall this prohibition prevent the renewal, upon the expiration thereof, of any license in effect at such time authorizing such business within the restricted area hereby established. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-7-50. - Alcoholic beverages in certain places. 
(a)  No person shall carry or have any open containers of alcoholic beverages on any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place, in any automobile or on the grounds or in the facilities of any public or private school, college or university except where authorized by the governing authority of such institution. 
(b)  No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages in or on any of the above enumerated places. 
(c)  The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to any place duly licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-7-60. - Open container. 
    It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume by open container any alcoholic beverage, whether such possession is actual or constructive, in any public place as defined in Section 10-7-10 of this Chapter, upon property owned, operated, leased or maintained by the State or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or upon property owned, operated, leased or maintained by the City; provided, however, that it shall not be a violation of this provision to store or consume any alcoholic beverage in conformance with, and pursuant to the terms of, any validly issued permit or license. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-7-70. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  A person commits possession of drug paraphernalia if he possesses drug paraphernalia and intends to use the drug paraphernalia under circumstances in violation of state law. 
(b)  Any person who commits possession of drug paraphernalia commits a Class 2 petty offense. 
(c)  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to personal possession or use of marijuana accessories as such term is defined in Section 10-12-20 of this Chapter by any person who is twenty-one (21) years of age or older to the extent provided by Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 8 2, 2013) 
Sec. 10-7-80. - Possession of marijuana; unlawful procurement for or sales of marijuana to persons under twenty-one years of age. 
(a)  Except as to personal use or possession by any person who is twenty-one (21) years of age or older to the extent provided by Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution, it is unlawful to possess one (1) ounce or less of marijuana, marijuana products or marijuana accessories and, upon conviction thereof or plea of guilty or no contest thereto, shall be punishable by a fine only in accordance with Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to purchase marijuana for consumption or possession by, or otherwise provide marijuana for consumption or possession by, or to sell marijuana to, any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to consume or grow marijuana openly and publicly or in a manner that endangers others. 
(d)  It is unlawful to make marijuana that is grown for personal use in accordance with Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution available for sale in any manner. 
(e)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Section that a person is in possession of a valid registry identification card authorizing the medicinal use of marijuana issued by the State, so long as the consumption, use or growing does not occur openly or publicly and is otherwise in compliance with state law. 
(f)  The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any person who possesses or uses marijuana or marijuana concentrate pursuant to the Dangerous Drugs Therapeutic Research Act. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 8 3, 2013) 
Sec. 10-7-90. - Unlawful consumption, sale or use in public areas or buildings. 
    It is unlawful for any person to display, consume, sell, dispense or use marijuana, marijuana products or marijuana accessories in or upon any public area or building. 
(Ord. 8 4, 2013) 
Sec. 10-7-100. - Abusing toxic vapors. 
(a)  As used in this Section, the term toxic vapors means the following substances or products containing such substances: alcohols, including methyl, isopropyl, propyl or butyl; aliphatic acetates, including ethyl, methyl, propyl or methyl cellosolve acetate; acetone; benzene; carbon tetrachloride; cyclohexane; Freons, including Freon 11 and Freon 12; hexane; methyl ethyl ketone; methyl isobutyl ketone; naphtha; perchlorethylene; toluene; trichloroethane or xylene. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors for the purpose of causing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulled senses of the nervous system. No person shall knowingly possess, buy or use any such substance for the purposes described in this Section. This Subsection shall not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, offer for sale, deliver or give away to any other person any substance or product releasing toxic vapors, where the seller, offeror or deliverer knows or has reason to believe that such substance will be used for the purpose of inducing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulled senses of the nervous system. 
(d)  In a prosecution for a violation of this Section, evidence that a container lists one (1) or more of the substances described in Subsection (a) above as one (1) of its ingredients shall be prima facie evidence that the substance in such container contains toxic vapors and emits the fumes thereof. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 8 4, 2013) 
ARTICLE VIII - Weapons 

Sec. 10-8-10. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Ballistic knife means any knife that has a blade which is forcefully projected from the handle by means of a spring-loaded device or explosive charge. 
    Blackjack includes any billy, sand club, sandbag or other hand-operated striking weapon consisting, at the striking end, of an encased piece of lead or other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or springy shaft which increases the force of impact. 
    Bomb means any explosive or incendiary device or Molotov cocktail as defined in Section 9-7-103, C.R.S., or any chemical device which causes or can cause an explosion, which is not specifically designed for lawful and legitimate use in the hands of its possessor. 
    Firearm silencer means any instrument, attachment, weapon or appliance for causing the firing of any gun, revolver, pistol or other firearm to be silent or intended to lessen or muffle the noise of the firing of any such weapon. 
    Gas gun means a device designed for projecting gas-filled projectiles which release their contents after having been projected from the device and includes projectiles designed for use in such device. 
    Gravity knife means any knife that has a blade released from the handle or sheath thereof by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force that, when released, is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever or other device. 
    Handgun means a pistol, revolver or other firearm of any description, loaded or unloaded, from which any shot, bullet or other missile can be discharged, the length of the barrel of which, not including any revolving, detachable or magazine breech, does not exceed twelve (12) inches. 
    Knife means any dagger, dirk, knife or stiletto with a blade over three and one-half (31/2) inches in length, or any other dangerous instrument capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing or tearing wounds; but does not include a hunting or fishing knife carried for sports use. The issue that a knife is a hunting or fishing knife must be raised as an affirmative defense. 
    Machine gun means any firearm, whatever its size and usual designation, that shoots automatically more than one (1) shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger. 
    Nunchaku means an instrument consisting of two (2) sticks, clubs, bars or rods to be used as handles, connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
    Short rifle means a rifle having a barrel less than sixteen (16) inches long or an overall length of less than twenty-six (26) inches. 
    Short shotgun means a shotgun having a barrel or barrels less than eighteen (18) inches long or an overall length of less than twenty-six (26) inches. 
    Stun gun means a device capable of temporarily immobilizing a person by the infliction of an electrical charge. 
    Switchblade knife means any knife the blade of which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in its handle. 
    Throwing star means a disk having sharp radiating points or any disk-shaped bladed object which is handheld and thrown and which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to any provision of this Article, that the act was committed by a police officer in the lawful discharge of his duties. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-8-20. - Carrying concealed weapon. 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsections (c) and (e) hereof, it is unlawful for any person to wear under his clothes or concealed about or upon his person, to display in a threatening manner or to flourish any dangerous or deadly weapon, including, but not by way of limitation, any pistol, revolver, short-barreled rifle, shotgun, air gun, gas-operated gun, spring gun, slingshot, black jack, club, bill, brass knuckles, knuckles of any material whatsoever, Bowie knife, dirk, dagger, knife resembling a Bowie knife, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to use, possess or carry any knife having the appearance of a pocket knife, the blade of which exceeds three and one-half (31/2) inches in length and which can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle or other mechanical contrivance. Any such knife is hereby declared to be a dangerous or deadly weapon within the meaning of Subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Every person convicted of any violation of this Section shall forfeit to the City such dangerous or deadly weapon so concealed or displayed. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to forbid a police officer or any duly appointed or elected enforcement officer of the various law enforcement agencies of the United States or of the State, any sheriff, deputy or ex officio police officer from carrying, wearing or using such weapons as shall be necessary while on duty in the proper discharge of his duties. 
(e)  In all cases of arrest under the terms of this Section, the violators may be kept or caused to be kept in custody by the arresting officers, unless lawfully released on bond, until trial. 
(f)  The Mayor or the Chief of Police may issue and promulgate from time to time rules and regulations to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City in relation to issuing permits to individuals to carry concealed weapons. Such rules may pertain by way of example to: 
(1)  Permit application and fees; 
(2)  Qualification of the permittee; 
(3)  The manner of the conduct of the permittee; 
(4)  Duration of the permit; 
(5)  Permit revocation and renewal; 
(6)  Make and type of the weapon to be carried; and 
(7)  Identification cards. 
Pursuant to such properly issued and promulgated rules and regulations, the Mayor or Chief of Police may issue permits authorizing individuals to carry concealed weapons. 
(g)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge of carrying a concealed weapon in violation of this Section that the defendant was: 
(1)  A person in his own dwelling or place of business or on property owned by him or under his control at the time of the act of carrying; 
(2)  A person in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance who carries a weapon for lawful protection of his or another's person or property while traveling; 
(3)  A person who, prior to the time of carrying a concealed weapon, has been issued a permit to carry the weapon by the Mayor or the Chief of Police, the mayor of any other municipality, the Chief of Police of any other municipality or the sheriff of any county; or 
(4)  A police officer. 
(Ord. 11, 1955; 1980 Code; Ord. 9, 1980; prior code 9-2-1-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-8-30. - Disposition of confiscated concealed weapons. 
    It is the duty of every police officer, upon making any arrest and taking such a concealed weapon from the person of the offender, to deliver the weapon to the Police Department, to be held by the Department until the final determination of the prosecution for said offense. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-8-40. - Discharging firearms prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearms, including, but not by way of limitation, any cannon, gun, fowling piece, pistol or firearm of any size or description, within the corporate limits of the City, without written permission from the Chief of Police, which permission shall prescribe the time and method of discharge of such firearm and shall be subject to revocation by said Chief of Police at any time after the same has been granted. However, nothing herein shall be construed to restrict the right of the Chief of Police or duly appointed law enforcement officers from such use of firearms as may be proper in carrying out their duties of law enforcement. 
(Ord. 3, 1964; 1980 Code; prior code 9-2-1-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-8-50. - Prohibited use of weapons. 
(a)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he: 
(1)  Knowingly and unlawfully aims a firearm at another person; 
(2)  Recklessly or with criminal negligence discharges a firearm or shoots a bow and arrow; 
(3)  Knowingly sets a loaded gun, trap or device designed to cause an explosion upon being tripped or approached, and leaves it unattended by a competent person immediately present; 
(4)  Has in his possession a firearm while he is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a controlled substance. Possession of a permit issued under Section 18-12-105.1, C.R.S., is no defense to a violation of this Section; or 
(5)  Knowingly aims, swings or throws a throwing star or nunchaku at another person, or knowingly possesses a throwing star or nunchaku in a public place except for the purpose of presenting an authorized public demonstration or exhibition or pursuant to instruction in conjunction with an organized school or class. When transporting throwing stars or nunchaku for a public demonstration or exhibition or for a school or class, they shall be transported in a closed, nonaccessible container. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the use of any such instruments in shooting galleries or in any private grounds or residences under circumstances when such instrument can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property and also in such manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such gallery, grounds or residence; and further provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the carrying of any type of gun whatsoever, when unloaded and properly cased, to or from any range or gallery. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the use of any such instruments by any peace officer as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of his duties. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-8-60. - Selling weapons to intoxicated persons. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to purchase, sell, loan or furnish any gun, pistol or other firearm in which any explosive substance can be used, to any person under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug, stimulant or depressant, to any person in a condition of agitation and excitability, or to any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  Such unlawful purchase, sale, loan or furnishing shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued by the City to such person. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE IX - Noise 

Sec. 10-9-10. - Noises on public property. 
    It is unlawful, without prior written permission from the City Manager or Chief of Police, for any person, either as principal, agent or employer, to play, use or operate for any purpose whatever on the streets or other public places in the City any device known as a sound truck, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, radio or phonograph with a loudspeaker or amplifiers, or any other instrument of any kind or character whatever that amplifies sound or which emits loud and raucous noises. Police and fire officers and anti-theft devices are excepted from the provisions of this Section. 
(Prior code 9-2-3-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-9-20. - Unreasonable noise. 
    No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any unreasonable noise; and no person shall knowingly permit such noise upon any premises owned or possessed by such person or under such person's control. For purposes of this Section, members of the Police Department are empowered to make a prima facie determination as to whether a noise is unreasonable. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-9-30. - Animals. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use, keep, have in his possession or harbor any domesticated animals which, by frequent or habitual howling, barking, meowing, squawking or otherwise, shall cause annoyance or disturbance to persons in the neighborhood; provided, however, that the provisions of this Section shall not apply to hospitals licensed for the treatment of small animals or to premises occupied or used by the City animal shelter. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-9-40. - Sirens, whistles, gongs and red lights. 
    It is unlawful for any person to carry or use upon a vehicle, other than Police or Fire Department vehicles or emergency vehicles for public use, any gong, siren, whistle or red light similar to that used on ambulances or vehicles of the Police and Fire Departments. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE X - Miscellaneous Provisions 

Sec. 10-10-10. - Fireworks. 
    Any person who, within the corporate limits of the City, discharges any firecrackers, fireworks as defined by state law, or explosives of any description without written permission from the Chief of Police, which permission shall limit the time and fix the place of the discharge of such firecrackers, fireworks or other explosives, and which permission shall be subject to revocation by the Chief of Police at any time after the same has been granted, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 4, 1947; 1980 Code; prior code 9-2-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-10-20. - Door-to-door solicitation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in door-to-door solicitation within the City after the earlier of sunset or 8:00 p.m. and before 9:00 a.m. For purposes of this Section, sunset shall mean the time of day published by the Denver Post newspaper as the time of sunset for such day. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in commercial door-to-door solicitation within the City at any time. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in door-to-door solicitation within the City at a private residence where it is displayed at the primary entrance of such residence a sign reading "No Solicitation" in legible print not smaller than one and one-half (11/2) inches in height. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, corporation or business entity to instruct, direct, command, order, organize or otherwise arrange for any person to engage in door-to-door solicitation in violation of Subsections (a), (b) or (c) above. 
(e)  For purposes of this Section, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning indicated: 
    Commercial door-to-door solicitation shall mean the act of going in or upon private properties or private residences, without the consent of the owners or occupants, for the purpose of advertising, offering, promoting, selling, explaining or soliciting the sale, rental, lease or other form of conveyance or transfer of any product, goods, wares, merchandise or services. Commercial door-to-door solicitation does not include: (i) the solicitation or acceptance of donations incidental to and associated with the discussion, advocacy, explanation or promotion of ideas or beliefs of a non-commercial nature; or (ii) the distribution of printed material at the primary entrance of a private property or residence without attempting to personally contact the owner or occupant. 
    Door-to-door solicitation shall mean the act of going in or upon private properties or private residences, without the consent of the owners or occupants, for the purpose of personally contacting the owners or occupants. Door-to-door solicitation includes: (i) the solicitation or acceptance of donations incidental to and associated with the discussion, advocacy, explanation or promotion of ideas or beliefs of a noncommercial nature; and (ii) the distribution of printed material at the primary entrance of a private property or residence without attempting to personally contact the owner or occupant. 
(Prior code 9-2-7; Ord. 2, 1991; Ord. 2, 1997; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 10-10-30. - Hawkers and peddlers. 
(a)  Public ways. It is unlawful for any person to sell or attempt to sell merchandise on or from any public way. 
(b)  Private property. It is unlawful for any person to sell or attempt to sell merchandise on or from private property except: 
(1)  In zone districts permitting such sale as a use by right, and then only in accordance with the limitations on such activity applicable to each such zone district; or 
(2)  In zone districts not permitting commercial activity as a use by right only after obtaining from the City any applicable permits or other approvals specified by this Code. 
(Prior code 9-2-10; Ord. 6, 1993) 
ARTICLE XI - Medical Marijuana 

Sec. 10-11-10. - Intent, authority and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this Article to prohibit certain land uses related to medical marijuana, and in furtherance of its intent, the City Council makes the following findings: 
(1)  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Section 12-43.3-101, et seq., C.R.S., clarifies Colorado law regarding the scope and extent of Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(2)  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code specifically authorizes the governing body of a municipality to "vote to prohibit the operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers' licenses." 
(3)  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code specifically authorizes a municipality "to prohibit the operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers' licenses...based on local government zoning, health, safety and public welfare laws for the distribution of medical marijuana." 
(4)  Based on careful consideration of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution, and the potential secondary effects of the cultivation and dispensing of medical marijuana, and the retail sale, distribution and manufacturing of medical marijuana-infused products, such land uses have an adverse effect on the health, safety and welfare of the Village and its inhabitants. 
(5)  As a matter of the Village's local land use and zoning authority, and consistent with the authorization provided by the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, no suitable location exists within the Village for the operation of medical marijuana centers, medical marijuana cultivation operations or medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing. 
(6)  Patients and primary caregivers should otherwise be afforded the protections of Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution, pursuant to applicable law. 
(b)  Authority. The City's authority to adopt this Section is found in: the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Section 12-43.3-101, et seq.; C.R.S., the Local Government Land Use Control Enabling Act, Section 29-20-101, et seq., C.R.S.; Section 31-23-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
(municipal zoning powers); Sections 31-15-103 and 31-15-401, C.R.S. 
(municipal police powers); and Section 31-15-501, C.R.S. 
(municipal authority to regulate businesses). 
(c)  Applicability. This Article shall apply to all property within the City. 
(Ord. 24 1, 2010) 
Sec. 10-11-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Medical marijuana means marijuana that is grown and sold for a purpose authorized by Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Medical marijuana center means a person licensed to operate a business as described in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code that sells medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products to registered patients or primary caregivers as defined in Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution, but is not a primary caregiver, and which a municipality is authorized to prohibit as a matter of law. 
    Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer means a person licensed pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code to operate a business manufacturing medical marijuana-infused products, and which a municipality is authorized to prohibit as a matter of law. 
    Optional premises cultivation operation means a person licensed pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code to grow and cultivate marijuana for a purpose authorized by Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution, and which a municipality is authorized to prohibit as a matter of law. 
    Patient has the meaning set forth in Article XVIII,  14(1)(c) of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Primary caregiver has the meaning set forth in Article XVIII,  14(1)(f) of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. 24 1, 2010) 
Sec. 10-11-30. - Uses prohibited, penalty, patients and primary caregivers. 
(a)  Uses prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated or permit to be operated a medical marijuana center, an optional premises cultivation operation or a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility in the Village. 
(b)  Penalty. A violation of the provisions of this Article shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  Each and every day a violation of the provisions of this Article is committed, exists or continues shall be deemed a separate offense; 
(2)  The Village is specifically authorized to seek an injunction, abatement, restitution or any other remedy necessary to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation; 
(3)  Any remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law or in equity; and 
(4)  In addition to any other penalties that may exist under state, federal and local laws, violation of this Section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding the maximum fine authorized in Section 1-4-20 of this Code, or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or both such fine and imprisonment, as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(c)  Patients and primary caregivers. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to affect the protections of the use of medical marijuana by patients as provided in Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution, or the provision of medical marijuana by a primary caregiver to a patient in accordance with Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and rules promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. 24 1, 2010; Ord. 10 5, 2013) 
ARTICLE XII - Marijuana Cultivation Facilities, Marijuana Product Manufacturing Facilities, Marijuana Testing Facilities and Retail Marijuana Stores 

Sec. 10-12-10. - Intent, authority and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Article is to promote the general public welfare and safety throughout Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, by prohibiting the operation of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities or retail marijuana stores. 
(1)  Based upon Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution, Personal Use and Regulation of Marijuana, and the potential secondary effects of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities or retail marijuana stores, such land uses have an adverse effect on the health, safety and welfare of the Village and its inhabitants. 
(2)  As a matter of the Village's local land use and zoning authority, and consistent with the authorization provided by Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution, no appropriate location exists within the Village for the operation of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities or retail marijuana stores. 
(b)  Authority. The Village's authority to adopt this Section is found in: Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution; the Local Government Land Use Control Enabling Act, Section 29-20-101, et seq., C.R.S.; Section 31-23-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
(municipal zoning powers); Sections 31-15-103 and 31-15-401, C.R.S. 
(municipal police powers); Section 31-15-501, C.R.S. 
(municipal authority to regulate businesses); and the Cherry Hills Village Home Rule Charter. 
(c)  Applicability. The prohibition of the operation of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities or retail marijuana stores as set forth in this Article shall apply to all property within the Village. 
(Ord. 2 1, 2013) 
Sec. 10-12-20. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise specified or the context otherwise requires, any terms used herein shall have the same meanings as provided in Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution. These definitions include, but are not limited to, the following: 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. Marijuana does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or other product. 
    Marijuana accessories means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
    Marijuana cultivation facility means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana establishment means a marijuana cultivation facility, a marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility or a retail marijuana store. 
    Marijuana product manufacturing facility means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana products means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments and tinctures. 
    Marijuana testing facility means an entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana. 
    Medical marijuana center means a person or entity licensed to operate a business as described in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code that sells medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products to registered patients or primary caregivers as defined in Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, but is not a primary caregiver, and which a municipality is authorized to prohibit as a matter of law. 
    Retail marijuana store means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers. 
(Ord. 2 1, 2013) 
Sec. 10-12-30. - Uses prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  Uses prohibited. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to operate marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities or retail marijuana stores in the Village. 
(2)  It is unlawful to grow marijuana for personal use anywhere in the City other than an enclosed, locked space which is not open or public. Enclosed means having a roof and all sides closed to the weather, with walls, windows or doors. 
(3)  It is unlawful to make marijuana grown for personal use available for sale in any manner. 
(b)  Penalty. A violation of the provisions of this Article shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  Each and every day a violation of the provisions of this Article is committed, exists or continues shall be deemed a separate offense; 
(2)  The Village is specifically authorized to seek an injunction, abatement, restitution or any other remedy necessary to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation; 
(3)  Any remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law or in equity; and 
(4)  In addition to any other penalties that may exist under state, federal and local laws, violation of this Section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment, as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Ord. 2 1, 2013) 
CHAPTER 11 - Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property 
ARTICLE I - Streets and Sidewalks 

Sec. 11-1-10. - Repair and maintenance. 
    The owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession or control of any premises or property shall maintain the sidewalks adjoining such premises or property in good repair and in a safe, unobstructed condition, free of snow, weeds and debris. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-1-20. - Snow and ice removal from sidewalks. 
(a)  Every owner or occupant of any premises within the City having a sidewalk on or adjacent to the premises shall have the duty to keep the sidewalk clean of snow and ice. 
(b)  All snow and ice shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of accumulation. 
(c)  For purposes of this Section, premises shall mean any lot, parcel, outlot or other subdivision of real property, whether occupied or not, and whether or not a structure exists on the lot, parcel, outlot or other subdivision. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-1-30. - Landscape maintenance. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent or lessee of any real property abutting a public right-of-way or other City property to provide landscape maintenance, including but not limited to mowing of all right-of-way area between the property line and the curbline or edge of the roadway or right-of-way; provided, however, that the City shall maintain landscaping and shall be responsible for mowing all of the rights-of-way that comprise Quincy Avenue, Clarkson Street, Colorado Boulevard, Holly Street and Happy Canyon Road and all state rights-of-way. The vegetation in said areas shall be maintained to the same levels required under Section 7-3-20 of this Code. 
(Ord. 5 1, 2010) 
Sec. 11-1-40. - Public right-of-way and public easement encroachments prohibited. 
    Except as provided in Section 11-2-40 of this Chapter, no person shall erect or maintain any building, structure, fence, barrier, post, mailbox, landscaping, obstruction or other encroachment within, under, above or upon any public right-of-way, path, alley or public easement without first obtaining the required permits from the City. 
(Ord. 5 2, 2010) 
ARTICLE II - Public Right-of-Way Permits 

Sec. 11-2-10. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to establish principles, standards and procedures for the placement of facilities, construction, excavation, encroachments and work activities within, under or upon any public right-of-way, and to protect the integrity of the City's street system. 
(b)  Objectives. Public and private uses of public rights-of-way should, in the interests of the general welfare, be accommodated; however, the City must ensure that the primary purpose of the public right-of-way, passage of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, is protected. The use of the public rights-of-way by private users is secondary to these public objectives. This Article has several objectives: 
(1)  To minimize public inconvenience. 
(2)  To protect the City's infrastructure investment by establishing repair standards for the pavement, facilities and property in the public rights-of-way. 
(3)  To standardize regulations and thereby facilitate work within the rights-of-way. 
(4)  To maintain an efficient permit process. 
(5)  To conserve and fairly apportion the limited physical capacity of public rights-of-way held in public trust by the City. 
(6)  To establish a public policy for enabling the City to discharge its public trust consistent with the rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development. 
(7)  To promote cooperation among permittees and the City in the occupation of the public rights-of-way, and work therein, in order to: 
a.  Eliminate duplication of facilities that is wasteful, unnecessary or unsightly; 
b.  Lower the permittees' and the City's costs of providing services to the public; and 
c.  Minimize street cuts. 
(8)  To protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005) 
Sec. 11-2-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Access structure means any structure providing access to facilities in the public right-of-way. 
    Approved alignment means the designed horizontal and vertical alignment of facilities to be installed in the public right-of-way which is approved by the City at the time the permit is issued, plus any alignment variance tolerances set forth in the Construction and Excavation Standards, plus any alignment variances approved by the City in accordance with the Construction and Excavation Standards. 
    City means the City Manager for the City of Cherry Hills Village or his designee. 
    Construction and Excavation Standards means the document entitled Construction and Excavation Standards for Work in Public Rights-of-Way , as adopted by resolution of the City Council and amended from time to time. 
    Contractor means a person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity which undertakes to construct, install, alter, move, remove, trim, demolish, repair, replace, excavate or add to any improvements or facilities in the public right-of-way, or which requires work, workers and/or equipment to be in the public right-of-way in the process of performing the above-named activities. 
    Developer means the person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity improving a parcel of land within the City and being legally responsible to the City for the construction of infrastructure within a subdivision or as a condition of a building permit. 
    Emergency means any event which may threaten public health or safety, or that results in an interruption in the provision of service, including but not limited to damaged or leaking water or gas conduit systems, damaged, plugged or leaking sewer or storm drain conduit systems, and damaged electrical and communications facilities. 
    Equipment means any materials, trailers, storage units, waste collection containers or any other equipment typically used to perform construction activities within the City's right-of-way. 
    Excavate or excavation means to dig into or in any way remove or penetrate any part of a public right-of-way, including trenchless excavation such as boring, tunneling and jacking. 
    Facilities means any pipe, conduit, wire, cable, amplifier, transformer, fiber-optic cable, antenna, pole, streetlight, duct, fixture, appurtenance or other like equipment used in connection with transmitting, receiving, distributing, offering and providing utility and other services, whether above or below ground. 
    Infrastructure means any public facility, system or improvement, including but not limited to water and sewer mains and appurtenances, storm drains and structures, streets, alleys, traffic signal poles and appurtenances, conduits, signs, landscape improvements, sidewalks and public safety equipment. 
    Landscaping means grass, groundcover, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees and nonliving natural materials commonly used in landscape development, as well as attendant irrigation systems. 
    Major installation means work in the public rights-of-way involving an excavation exceeding fifty (50) feet in length. 
    Minor installation means work in the public rights-of-way that is not deemed a major installation. 
    Permit means an authorization for use of the public rights-of-way granted pursuant to this Article. 
    Permittee means the holder of a valid permit issued pursuant to this Article. 
    Public right-of-way means any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, easement, park, square, median, parkway, boulevard or plaza that is dedicated to public use or maintained by the City except for those rights-of-way owned by the Colorado Department of Transportation within the City limits. 
    Routine maintenance means maintenance of facilities or landscaping in the public right-of-way which does not involve excavation, installation of new facilities, lane closures, sidewalk closures or damage to any portion of the public-right-of-way. 
    Work means any labor performed within a public right-of-way and/or any use or storage of equipment or materials within a public right-of-way, including but not limited to: 
a.  Excavation; 
b.  Construction of streets, fixtures, improvements, sidewalks, driveway openings, bus shelters, bus loading pads, streetlights and traffic signal devices; 
c.  Tree trimming; 
d.  Construction, maintenance and repair of all underground facilities, such as pipes, conduit, ducts, tunnels, manholes, vaults, cable, wire or any other similar structure; 
e.  Maintenance of facilities; and 
f.  Installation of overhead poles used for any purpose. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, work shall not include routine maintenance. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 01 1, 2006; Ord. 16 1, 2013) 
Sec. 11-2-30. - Police power. 
(a)  A permittee's rights hereunder shall at all times be subject to the police power of the City, which includes the power to adopt and enforce ordinances, including amendments to this Article, necessary for the safety, health and welfare of the public. 
(b)  The City reserves the right to exercise its police power, notwithstanding anything in this Article or any permit to the contrary. Any conflict between the provisions of any permit and any other present or future lawful exercise of the City's police power shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005) 
Sec. 11-2-40. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person except an employee or official of the City or a person exempted by contract with the City shall undertake or permit to be undertaken any work in a public right-of-way or place any equipment in a public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the City as set forth in this Article. Copies of the permit and associated documents shall be maintained on the worksite and available for inspection upon request by any officer or employee of the City. 
(b)  No permittee shall perform work in an area larger, at a location different or for a period of time longer than that specified in the permit. If, after work is commenced under an approved permit, it becomes necessary to perform work in a larger or different area or for a longer period of time than what the permit specifies, the permittee shall notify the City immediately and within two (2) days shall file a supplementary application for the additional work. 
(c)  Permits shall not be transferable or assignable without the prior written approval of the City. 
(d)  Upon oral or written notification from the City, any person conducting any work within the public right-of-way, without having first obtained the required permit, shall immediately cease all activity and obtain a permit before work may be resumed, except for emergency operations performed pursuant to Section 11-2-260. 
(e)  No private improvements are allowed within the City's right-of-way without the approval of the City, with the exception of placing and maintaining limited landscaping, such as sod or grasses, flowers and no more than four (4) bushes or small trees of a caliper not to exceed two (2) inches, that will not interfere with the public's use of the right-of-way. In no case shall trees or bushes be placed in drainage ditches/areas. All newly planted trees must be at least ten (10) feet from the actual road surface. Allowing the placement and maintenance of such limited landscaping in the right-of-way shall not be construed to abridge, limit or restrict the City in exercising its right to make full use of the City right-of-way encroached upon as public thoroughfares or public places, nor shall it operate to restrict utility companies or any other licensees in exercising their rights to construct, remove, operate and maintain their installations within the City's right-of-way, having first obtained the proper permits required. 
(f)  No improvements are allowed within any trail easement in the City unless there is an underlying utility easement. The placement of structures within a trail easement must be approved by the City before installation. If there is an underlying easement that predates the trail easement, such senior easement takes precedent. However, it is the intent of the City to work cooperatively with all utilities holding easements to allow for the full use of the easement granted. 
(g)  The public right-of-way permit process is to allow for work within the City's right-of-way. The permit may be used to cover the need to occupy the right-of-way for work outside of the right-of-way at the sole discretion of the City. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 3, 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-50. - Developer installation of infrastructure. 
    Construction of infrastructure necessary to serve new development is the responsibility of the developer. Once a public right-of-way has been dedicated to the City, all work in that public right-of-way, including the installation of new infrastructure by a developer, shall be subject to this Article. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005) 
Sec. 11-2-60. - Permit application. 
(a)  An applicant for a public right-of-way permit shall file a written application on a form furnished by the City which includes the following information: 
(1)  The date of application; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and any contractor or subcontractor who will perform any of the work; 
(3)  A plan showing the work site, the public right-of-way boundaries, all existing and proposed infrastructure in the area, as applicable, and identifying all improved landscape areas that will be disturbed; 
(4)  The purpose of the proposed work; 
(5)  A traffic control plan in accordance with the Construction and Excavation Standards; 
(6)  The dates for beginning and ending the proposed work, the proposed hours of work and the number of actual work days required to complete the project; 
(7)  If applicable, documentation of the approval required by Subsection 11-2-190(c); and 
(8)  The applicable permit fees as set by the Construction and Excavation Standards. 
(b)  For any work in the public right-of-way which includes excavation, in addition to the information required by Subsection (a) above, the application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Copies of all permits and licenses (including required insurance, deposits, bonds and warranties) required to do the proposed work, whether required by federal or state law or City resolution, ordinance or regulation. When performing water or sewer taps, the applicant shall provide evidence that all applicable tap fees have been paid prior to submitting an application for a right-of-way permit. 
(2)  Copy of a site stormwater drainage quality assurance plan to keep sedimentation from entering any stormwater system within the City, including roadside ditches. No engineering is required, but instead a plan of what BMPs will be used for water quality during the project and until vegetation has been reestablished within the areas disturbed by the work. No stormwater quality assurance plan shall be required when the permitted work in the right-of-way will have no impact on stormwater quality. 
(c)  An applicant for a public right-of-way permit for a major installation shall, in addition to the information required by Subsections (a) and (b) above, submit the following information: engineering construction drawings or site plans for the proposed work in a format acceptable to the City and signed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Colorado, except that an applicant expressly exempt from the signature requirement pursuant to Section 12-25-103, C.R.S., need not include the signature of a licensed professional engineer. 
(d)  An applicant shall notify the City immediately and shall update a permit application within two (2) days after any material change occurs. 
(e)  Applicants may apply jointly for permits to work in public rights-of-way at the same time and place. Applicants who apply jointly for permits may share in the payment of the permit fees. Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each shall pay, and if no agreement is reached, payment in full shall be required of all applicants. 
(f)  By signing an application, the applicant is certifying to the City that the applicant is in compliance with all other permits issued by the City, and that the applicant is not delinquent in any payment due to the City for prior work. This certification shall not apply to outstanding claims which are honestly and reasonably disputed by the applicant, if the applicant and the City are negotiating in good faith to resolve the dispute. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010; Ord. 16 2, 2013) 
Sec. 11-2-70. - Blanket maintenance permits. 
(a)  A public right-of-way permit shall not be required for routine maintenance in the public right-of-way, as the term routine maintenance is defined in Section 11-2-20 of this Article. However, other maintenance operations within the public right-of-way which involve traffic lane closures or sidewalk closures shall require a public right-of-way permit. To expedite the process for ongoing maintenance operations, owners of facilities within the public right-of-way may, at their sole option and in the alternative to obtaining individual public right-of-way permits, obtain a blanket maintenance permit pursuant to this Section. 
(b)  A blanket maintenance permit shall be valid from the date of issuance of the permit through December 31 of the calendar year in which it was issued. Under no circumstances shall a blanket maintenance permit be valid for more than one (1) year. 
(c)  A blanket maintenance permit shall not, under any circumstances, authorize any pavement disturbance, excavation or installation of new facilities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, existing facilities may be removed and replaced, if no excavation or pavement disturbance is required. 
(d)  Any person seeking a blanket maintenance permit shall file an application, on a form provided by the City, which includes the following information: 
(1)  The date of application; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  A description of the maintenance operations to be performed pursuant to the permit; 
(4)  The precise location of maintenance operations known at the time of application; 
(5)  Traffic control plans as required by this Section and the Construction and Excavation Standards; 
(6)  If applicable, documentation of the approval required by Subsection 11-2-190(c) of this Article; and 
(7)  The applicable permit fee as set by the adopted fee schedule. 
(e)  Blanket maintenance permits shall be subject to applicable provisions of the Construction and Excavation Standards. 
(f)  Work performed pursuant to a blanket maintenance permit shall not be subject to the specific inspections set forth in Section 11-2-140 of this Article, but may be subject to random inspection by the City to ensure compliance with the terms of the blanket maintenance permit and applicable provisions of the Construction and Excavation Standards. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010; Ord. 16 3, 4, 2013) 
Sec. 11-2-80. - City review and approval. 
(a)  An application for a public right-of-way permit shall be reviewed by the City for completeness. If the application is not complete, the City shall notify the applicant of all missing information. 
(b)  Once an application is deemed complete by the City, the City shall review the application to determine whether the application complies with this Article and the Construction and Excavation Standards. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the review period, the City shall either approve the permit, approve the permit with conditions or deny the permit. If the permit is denied, the City shall send a written notice of denial to the permittee at the address listed on the application, via first-class mail, postage prepaid. The notice shall include the reasons for denial. 
(d)  Permits for work within trail easements will only be issued if the trail easement has an underlying utility easement. The City is not authorized to grant any additional use of trails other than the use granted the City by the trail easement. No other use shall be allowed by the City unless an easement for that use has been granted by the property owner. 
(e)  For utility companies needing to place structures within a trail/utility easement, the location of the structure must receive review and approval from the City before placement of each structure. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005) 
Sec. 11-2-90. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Before a public right-of-way permit is issued, the applicant shall pay to the City a permit fee, which shall be determined by the City Council in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution and available in the City Clerk's office. Permit fees shall be reasonably related to the costs incurred by the City in providing services relating to the granting or administration of permits pursuant to this Article and future repair and maintenance costs related to a permittee's work in the City's rights-of-way. These costs include, but are not limited to, the costs of issuing right-of-way permits, verifying right-of-way occupation, mapping right-of-way occupation, inspecting work and administering this Article and future repair and maintenance of City-owned rights-of-way related to a permittee's work. 
(b)  Pavement restoration fees. Pavement restoration fees shall be applied and collected as set forth in the Construction and Excavation Standards and adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 01 1, 2009; Ord. 16 5, 2013) 
Sec. 11-2-100. - Insurance. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement or median maintenance agreement between a permittee and the City, prior to the granting of any permit, the permittee shall carry and maintain in full effect at all times the following insurance coverage: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including broad form property damage, completed operations contractual liability, explosion hazard, collapse hazard, underground property damage hazard, commonly known as XCU, for limits not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence for damages of bodily injury or death to one (1) or more persons; and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) each occurrence for damage to or destruction of property. 
(2)  Workers' compensation insurance as required by state law. 
(b)  The permittee shall file with the City proof of such insurance coverage in a form satisfactory to the City. 
(c)  Upon prior written approval of the City, a permittee may provide self-insurance with the minimum coverage limits set forth in Subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005) 
Sec. 11-2-110. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Each permittee, for himself and his related entities, agents, employees, subcontractors and the agents and employees of said subcontractors, shall holdthe City harmless and defend and indemnify the City, its successors, assigns, officers, employees, agents and appointed and elected officials from and against all liability or damage and all claims or demands whatsoever in nature and reimburse the City for all its reasonable expenses, as incurred, arising out of or in any way related to the permittee's work or activity in the public right-of-way, including but not limited to the actions or omissions of the permittee, his employees, representatives, agents, contractors, related entities, successors and assigns, or the securing of and the exercise by the permittee of any rights granted in the permit, including any third-party claims, administrative hearings and litigation, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Article or other applicable law. A permittee shall not be obligated to hold harmless or indemnify the City for claims or demands to the extent that they are due to the negligence or willful and wanton acts of the City or any of its officers, employees or agents. 
(b)  Following the receipt of written notification of any claim, the permittee shall have the right to defend the City with regard to all third-party actions, damages and penalties arising in any way out of the exercise of any rights in the permit. If at any time, however, the City elects to defend itself with regard to such matters, the permittee shall pay all expenses incurred by the City related to its defense, including reasonable attorney fees and costs. 
(c)  If a permittee is a public entity, the indemnification requirements of this Section shall be subject to the provisions of the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act. 
(d)  If any provision of this Section conflicts with any provision of a valid, effective franchise agreement between the permittee and the City, the conflicting provision of this Section shall not apply to the franchisee, and the franchisee shall instead honor the provision of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005) 
Sec. 11-2-120. - Performance bonds and letters of credit. 
(a)  Before a public right-of-way permit is issued, the applicant shall file with the City a bond or letter of credit, at the applicant's choice in a form approved by the City, in favor of the City in an amount equal to the total cost of construction, including labor and materials but excluding the cost of any facilities being installed, or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is greater. For trail permits, the bond or letter of credit shall be a minimum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The bond or letter of credit shall be executed by the applicant as principal and by at least one (1) surety upon whom service of process may be had in the State. The bond or letter of credit shall be conditioned upon the applicant fully complying with all provisions of City ordinances, resolutionsand regulations, and upon payment of all judgments and costs rendered against the applicant for any violation of anyCity resolution, regulation orordinance or state law arising out of any negligent or wrongful act of the applicant in the performance of work pursuant to the permit. 
(b)  The City may bring an action on the bond or letter of credit on its own behalf. 
(c)  The bond or letter of credit shall be approved by the City prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(d)  The performance bond orletter of credit shall remain in force and effect for a minimum of two(2) years after completion and acceptance of the street cut, excavation or lane closure. 
(e)  If any provision of this Section conflicts with any provision of a valid, effective franchise agreement between the applicant and the City, the conflicting provision of this Section shall not apply to the franchisee, and the franchisee shall instead honor the provision of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 16 6, 2013) 
Sec. 11-2-130. - Warranty. 
(a)  A permittee, by acceptance of the permit, expressly warrants and guarantees complete performance of the work in a manner acceptable to the City and in accordance with this Article and the Construction and Excavation Standards, and warrants and guarantees all work done for a period of two (2) years after the date of probationary acceptance. 
(b)  Under the warranty, the permittee shall at his own expense repair or replace, at the discretion of the City, any portion of the work that fails, is defective, is unsound or is unsatisfactory because of design, engineering, materials or workmanship. 
(c)  The warranty period shall begin on the date of the City's probationary acceptance of the work. If repairs are required during the warranty period, those repairs need only be warranted until the end of the initial two-year period starting with the date of probationary acceptance. 
(d)  At any time prior to completion of the warranty period, the City may notify the permittee in writing of any needed repairs. If the defects are determined by the City to be an imminent danger to the public health, safety and welfare, the permittee shall begin repairs within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of the written notice and continue the repairs until completion. Nonemergency repairs shall be completed within thirty (30) days after notice. 
(e)  The warranty shall cover only those areas of work performedby the permittee which provided the warranty and not directly impacted by the work of any other permittee or the City. If a portion of work warranted by a permittee is subsequently adversely impacted by work of another permittee, another user of the right-of-way or the City during the warranty period, the other permittee or the City, as applicable, shall assume responsibility for repair to the subsequently adversely impacted portion of the public right-of-way. 
(f)  If any provision of this Section conflicts with any provision of a valid, effective franchise agreement between the applicant and the City, the conflicting provision of this Section shall not apply to the franchisee, and the franchisee shall instead honor the provision of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005) 
Sec. 11-2-140. - Inspections. 
(a)  The following four (4) inspections shall take place, at a minimum: 
(1)  Preconstruction inspection. The City shall conduct a preconstruction inspection, to determine any necessary conditions for the permit. The permittee shall mark with white paint the area proposed for excavation. 
(2)  One (1) site inspection shall be conducted on or after the first day the work starts as stated on the permit. 
(3)  Completed work inspection. The permittee shall notify the City immediately after completion of work. The City shall inspect the work within ten (10) working days of the permittee's notification. Probationary acceptance shall be made if all work complies with this Article, the Construction and Excavation Standards and any other applicable City regulation, ordinance or resolution. The probationary acceptance shall begin after the inspection has been completed. If all work does not meet the requirements established by the City, written notice will be mailed to the address on the permit listing all items that must be corrected. 
(4)  Warranty inspection. Approximately thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the two-year warranty period, the City shall conduct a final inspection of the work. If the work is still satisfactory, the bond or letter of credit shall be returned or allowed to expire. 
(b)  Upon review of the application for a permit, the City shall determine how many additional inspections, if any, may be required. The total number of required inspections shall be listed on the permit. For a permit which does not include excavation, the City may waive any or all of the above-listed inspections. At any time during the permit period, the City may increase the number of inspections required. The additional fees associated with the inspections shall be paid for within two (2) working days of such change to the permit. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005) 
Sec. 11-2-150. - Time of completion. 
(a)  All work covered by the permit shall be completed within the time period stated on the permit, unless an extension has been granted by the City in writing, in which case all work shall be completed within the time period stated in the written extension. 
(b)  Permits shall be void if work has not commenced within thirty (30) days after issuance, unless an extension has been granted by the City in writing. The permittee shall request such an extension in writing, and the City shall either grant or deny the request within five (5) days of receipt of the request. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005) 
Sec. 11-2-160. - Joint planning and construction. 
(a)  Permittees shall make reasonable efforts to attend and participate in meetings of the City, of which the permittee is notified, regarding public right-of-way issues that may impact their facilities, including planning meetings to anticipate joint trenching and boring. 
(b)  Eachpermittee owning, operating or installing facilities in public rights-of-way shall meet annually with the City, at the City's request, to discuss the permittee's planned major excavations in the City. As used in this Subsection, the term planned major excavations means any major excavations planned by the permittee that will affect any public right-of-way for more than five (5) days per year during the next three (3) years. Between the annual meetings to discuss planned major excavations, the permittee shall use his best efforts to inform the City of any substantial changes in the planned major excavations discussed at the annual meeting. 
(c)  Whenever it is possible and reasonably practicable to joint trench or share bores or cuts, a permittee shall meet and cooperate with other providers, licensees, permittees and franchisees so as to reduce so far as possible the number of street cuts within the City and the amount of pedestrian and vehicular traffic that is obstructed or impeded. Should two (2) permittees refuse to joint trench or share bores or street cuts, the City may require each permittee to submit written evidence detailing why such joint trenching or sharing would be impossible or impractical. Such evidence may include the potential impact of joint trenching or sharing on the timing of the initiation and/or completion of the work. The City shall consider the evidence submitted. Should the permittee fail to provide evidence satisfactory to the City that joint trenching or sharing is impossible or impractical, the City may deny a permit on that basis. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005) 
Sec. 11-2-170. - Locate information. 
(a)  Any person owning facilities in the public right-of-way shall provide field-locate information to the City and any other permittee with a valid public right-of-way permit which authorizes locate pothole excavation or other excavation work. Within seven (7) days of receipt of a written request from the City or such a permittee, the facility owner shall field locate facilities in the public right-of-way in which the work will be performed. 
(b)  For major installations, a permittee shall obtain a public right-of-way permit to locate other existing facilities as provided in the Construction and Excavation Standards. The location of such facilities shall be field-verified in a manner approved by the City. 
(c)  Before beginning excavation in any public right-of-way, a permittee shall contact the Utility Notification Center of Colorado (UNCC) and, to the extent required by Section 9-1.5-102, et seq., C.R.S., make inquiries of all ditch companies, utility companies, districts, local governments and all other agencies that might have facilities in the area of work to determine possible conflicts. The permittee shall contact the UNCC and request field locates of all facilities in the area pursuant to UNCC requirements. Field locates shall be marked prior to commencing work. 
(d)  Before beginning excavation in any public right-of-way that has been landscaped and is maintained by a contiguous property owner, the permittee shall contact the property owner to provide him with notice of the planned work in the right-of-way. In all cases, all improvements that are disturbed during the work will be restored to their condition before work commenced. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005) 
Sec. 11-2-180. - Damage to public rights-of-way or other City property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow to be caused any damage to public rights-of-way or other City property, regardless of whether a City permit is required for work performed that contributes to the damage. A property owner that authorizes work for which a permit is not required, together with the person actually causing the damage, shall be responsible for all damages to the public rights-of-way or other City-owned property. The provisions of Section 11-2-270 of this Article shall apply to damages caused by work for which a permit is not required or issued, and any notice to a permittee pursuant to that Section shall be provided to the property owner and/or the person causing the damage. 
(Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-190. - Minimal interference with other property. 
(a)  Work in the public right-of-way or on or near other public or private property shall be done in a manner that causes the least interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and residents. Facilities shall be located, constructed and maintained in such a manner as not to interfere with sewers, water pipes or any City property, or with any other pipes, wires, conduits, pedestals, structures or other facilities that may have been laid in the public rights-of-way by the City or its authority. 
(b)  Facilities shall not unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the public rights-of-way or other public property, interfere with the travel and use of the public rights-of-way by the public during the construction, repair, operation or removal thereof, or obstruct or impede traffic. 
(c)  No permit shall be granted for work in a landscaped median or roadside landscaping unless the applicant demonstrates that his plans, specifications and a proposed schedule of work have been submitted to and approved by the City, special district or other entity responsible for the median or roadside landscaping. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-200. - Underground construction and use of poles. 
(a)  When required by City ordinance, resolution or regulation or applicable state or federal law, and in locations where all existing facilities are located underground, all of a permittee's facilities shall be installedunderground at no cost to the City. 
(b)  In areas where existing facilities are aboveground, the permittee may install aboveground facilities on existing poles with approval from the owner of that aboveground facility. 
(c)  For aboveground facilities, a permittee shall useexisting poles. If at any time the existing aboveground facilities are converted to underground, the permittee will place his facilities underground at that time and at no cost to the City or property owners that are utilizing those facilities for any services provided by those facilities, subject to the requirements of Section 29-8-101, et seq., C.R.S., as applicable. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-210. - Use of trenches and bores by City. 
    Should the City desire to place its own facilities in trenches or bores opened by apermittee, the permittee shall cooperate with the City in any construction by the permittee that involves trenching or boring, provided that the City has first notified the permittee in writingthat it is interested in sharing the trenches or bores in the area where the permittee's construction is occurring. The permittee shall allow the City to place its facilities in the permittee's trenches and bores, provided that the City incurs any incremental increase in cost of the trenching and boring; the City's installation does not unreasonably delay the permittee's work; and the City's facilities are used solely for noncommercial, City purposes. The City shall be responsible for maintaining its respective facilities buried in the permittee's trenches and bores. If requested by the permittee, the City shall have separate access structures and shall not use the permittee's access structures. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-220. - Construction and excavation standards. 
(a)  Each permittee shall comply with the Construction and Excavation Standards for all work in the public right-of-way, including the location of the work and facilities within the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the permittee shall be fully responsible for the cost and actual performance of all of his work in the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  All restoration shall result in a work site condition equal to or better than that which existed prior to the work. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-230. - Hours of work. 
(a)  To reduce the impact of work within the public right-of-way in and around certain heavily traveled collector streets within the City, work will only be allowed between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. No work will be allowed on weekends or holidays or at any other time unless directed by the City. 
(b)  Exemptions for emergency operations. Emergency operations in restricted rights-of-way shall be permitted pursuant to Section 11-2-260 of this Article. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-240. - Relocation of facilities. 
(a)  If the relocation of any facilities in the public right-of-way becomes necessary to allow the City to make any public use of the public right-of-way, or because of the improvement, repair, construction or maintenance of any public right-of-way, or because of traffic conditions, public safety or installation of any type of public improvement by the City, other public agency or special district, or if the City or local improvement district implements any general program for the undergrounding of such facilities pursuant to Section 29-8-101, et seq., C.R.S., as applicable, the City may request a permittee to relocate facilities within or adjacent to public rights-of-way, either temporarily or permanently. The City shall notify the affected permittee, at least ninety (90) days in advance, except in the case of emergencies, of the reason for the relocation and the projected start date of the project necessitating the relocation. The City shall provide the affected permittee with such notice at least one hundred twenty (120) days in advance if the relocation will be considered a major installation under this Article. The permittee shall thereupon, at his own cost, unless otherwise required by Section 29-8-101, et seq., C.R.S., or when the facility owner by law can pass that cost on to the customer, accomplish the necessary relocation within a reasonable time from the date of the notification, but in no event later than three (3) working days prior to the date listed in the notice as the proposed start date, or immediately, in the case of emergencies. 
(b)  Should the permittee fail to perform the relocation, the City may perform such relocation at the permittee's expense, and the permittee shall reimburse the City as provided in Section 11-2-270 of this Article, unless otherwise required by Section 29-8-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
(c)  Following relocation, the permittee shall, at the permittee's own expense, unless otherwise required by Section 29-8-101, et seq., C.R.S., restore all affected property to, at a minimum, the condition which existed prior to the work. A permittee may request additional time to complete a relocation project, and the City may grant an extension if, in itssole discretion, the extension will not adversely affect the City's project or the public use of the affected public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-250. - Abandonment and removal of facilities. 
(a)  Notification. A permittee who intends to discontinue use of any facility within the public right-of-way shall notify the City in writing of the intent to discontinue use. Such notice shall describe the facilities for which the use is to be discontinued; a date of discontinuance of use, which date shall not be less than fifteen (15) days from the date such notice is submitted to the City; and the method of removal and restoration. The permittee may not remove, destroy or permanently disable any such facilities during said fifteen-day period without written approval of the City. After fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice, the permittee may commence removal and disposal of such facilities as set forth in the notice, as the notice may be modified by the City. The permittee shall complete such removal and disposal within one hundred eighty (180) days, unless additional time is requested from and granted by the City. 
(b)  Abandonment of facilities in place. Upon prior written approval of the City, a permittee may either: 
(1)  Abandon the facilities in place and immediately convey full title and ownership of such abandoned facilities to the City. The only consideration for the conveyance shall be the City's permission to abandon the facilities in place. The permittee shall be responsible for all obligations and liabilities until the conveyance to the City is completed. 
(2)  Abandon the facilities in place, but retain ownership and responsibility for all liabilities associated therewith. 
(c)  If any provision of this Section conflicts with any provision of a valid, effective franchise agreement between the permittee and the City, the conflicting provision of this Section shall not apply to the franchisee, and the franchisee shall instead honor the provision of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-260. - Emergency procedures. 
(a)  Any person maintaining facilities in the public right-of-way may proceed with repairs upon existing facilities without a permit when emergency circumstances demand that the work be done immediately. The person doing the work shall apply to the City for a permit on the first working day after such work has commenced. All emergency work shall require prior telephone notification to the Public Works Department, the Police Department and the appropriate fire protection agency. 
(b)  If any damage occurs to an underground facility or its protective covering, the contractor or permittee responsible shall notify the facility's owner promptly. When the facility's owner receives a damage notice, the facility's owner shall promptly dispatch personnel to the damage area to investigate. If the damage results in the escape of any inflammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid or endangers life, health or property, the contractor or permittee responsible shall immediately notify the facility's owner and 911 and take immediate action to protect the public and nearby properties. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-270. - Reimbursement of City costs. 
(a)  The City may make any repairs necessary to eliminate any imminent danger to the public health or safety without notice to any permittee, at the responsible permittee's expense. 
(b)  For any work not performed by a permittee as directed by the City but not constituting imminent danger to the public health or safety, the City shall provide written notice to the permittee, ordering that the work be corrected within ten (10) days of the date of the notice. If the work is not corrected within the ten-day period, the City may correct the work at the permittee's expense. 
(c)  Costs of any work performed by the City pursuant to this Section shall be billed to the permittee. The permittee shall also be responsible for any direct costs incurred by the City. The permittee shall pay all such charges within thirty (30) days of the statement date. If the permittee fails to pay such charges within the prescribed time period, the City may, in addition to taking other collection remedies, seek reimbursement through the performance bond or letter of credit. Furthermore, the permittee may be barred from performing any work in the public right-of-way, and under no circumstances will the City issue any further permits of any kind to said permittee, until all outstanding charges (except those outstanding charges that are honestly and reasonably disputed by the permittee and being negotiated in good faith with the City) have been paid in full. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-280. - Permit revocation and stop work orders. 
(a)  A public right-of-way permit may be revoked or suspended by the City for any of the following: 
(1)  Violation of any condition of the permit or any provision of this Article or the Construction and Excavation Standards. 
(2)  Violation of any other City ordinance or state law relating to the work. 
(3)  Existence of any condition or performance of any act which, in the City's determination, constitutes or causes a condition endangering life or property. 
(b)  Stop work orders. A stop work order may be issued by the City to any person performing or causing any work to be performed in the public right-of-way for: 
(1)  Performing work without a permit except for emergency repairs to existing facilities as provided for in this Article. 
(2)  Performing work in violation of the permit, any provision of this Article or any other City resolution, ordinance or regulation, or state law relating to the work. 
(3)  Performing any act which, in the City's determination, endangers life or property. 
(c)  A suspension, revocation or stop work order shall take effect immediately upon delivery of written notice to the person performing the work or to the permittee. If neither the person performing the work nor the permittee can be located on the work site on the day of issuance of the suspension, revocation or stop work order, the suspension, revocation or stop work order shall take effect upon mailing of the written notice via first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the permittee's last known address. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
Sec. 11-2-290. - Penalties. 
(a)  If any person is found guilty of or pleads guilty to a violation of any of the provisions of this Article, he shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Article IV, Chapter 1 of this Code. Each and every day or portion thereof during which a violation is committed, continues or is permitted shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to or in lieu of the penalties set forth in Article IV, Chapter 1 of this Code, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of any of the following offenses, the party convicted thereof shall be assessed the following mandatory minimum penalty for each such offense: 
(1)  For any occupancy of a travel lane or any portion thereof beyond the time periods or days set forth in the traffic control plan approved by the City: 
a.  In restricted streets (as defined in the City of Cherry Hills Village Transportation System Map) from the hour of 6:30 a.m. through 8:30 a.m., inclusive and from 3:00 p.m. through 6:00 p.m., inclusive, Monday through Friday: one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each fifteen (15) minutes, or portion thereof, for a maximum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day. 
b.  In restricted streets during any time other than the times specified in Subparagraph a. above, or in local streets at any time: fifty dollars ($50.00) for each fifteen (15) minutes, or portion thereof, for a maximum of fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per day. 
(2)  For commencing work without a valid permit: five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus twice the applicable permit fee. 
(3)  For facilities installed outside of the approved alignment: ten dollars ($10.00)per linear foot. This penalty shall not be imposed if the facilities are removed and/or relocated to comply with the approved alignment, or the facilities are abandoned pursuant to Subsection 11-2-250(b) of this Article. 
(4)  For any other violation of any other term of a permit: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation, with no maximum amount. 
(c)  The penalties set forth in this Section shall not be the City's exclusive remedy for violations of this Article, and shall not preclude the City from bringing a civil action to enforce any provision of a public right-of-way permit, or to collect damages or recover costs associated with any use of the public rights-of-way. Furthermore, the exercise of one (1) penalty shall not preclude the City from exercising any other penalty. 
(Ord. 10 1, 2005; Ord. 5 4, 2010) 
ARTICLE III - City Property, Parks and Rights-of-Way 

Sec. 11-3-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    City property means any City-owned or City-leased property, building or right-of-way not otherwise defined herein as a park or trail. 
    Park means Blackmer Common, Dahlia Hollow Park, John Meade Park, Three Pond Park and Woodie Hollow Park. 
    Trail means any City-owned, City-leased or City-maintained bridle trail, bicycle trail, pedestrian trail or recreational easement or area, including but not limited to the High Line Canal trail. 
(Prior code 8-2-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 10 1, 2007; Ord. 8 2, 2017 ) 
Sec. 11-3-15. - Parks held public trust. 
    All parks currently held of acquired by the City shall be held, protected and regulated as park and recreational property and shall be maintained in perpetuity in public trust for the use and benefit of the public. 
(Ord. 10 2, 2007) 
Sec. 11-3-20. - Violations of park or trail rules and regulations. 
    It is unlawful for any person to fail to observe or refuse to obey any lawful rule or regulation of any sign posted in any City park or on any City trail. 
(Prior code 8-2-1-1; Ord. 10 1, 2007) 
Sec. 11-3-30. - Acts and conditions; penalty. 
    The acts and conditions or violations of the required provisions set forth in this Article shall subject the offender to be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(Prior code 8-2-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-3-40. - Unlawful deposits. 
    It is unlawful to deposit, throw or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited any offal composed of animal or vegetable substance or both, any dead animal, garbage, refuse, trash, landfill, waste material or other offensive matter or any other substance upon any park or trail or into the water of any stream, canal, pond or other body of water or so near any such place as to be liable to pollute said water or decrease the natural beauty or adversely affect the recreational use thereof. 
(Prior code 8-2-2-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 10 1, 2007) 
Sec. 11-3-50. - Permitting and administrative policy for use of city property, public parks and trails. 
(a)  The City owns and maintains public parks and trails for the benefit of and use by the public. The City Manager is hereby authorized to promulgate an administrative policy and rules for public parks and trails and other City property involving: 
(1)  Use of space limitations, including temporary closures of areas; and 
(2)  Rentals of facilities within the City's parks and City property; and 
(3)  Permitting of special events and group gatherings, including criteria of approval and an administrative process, including appeals of decisions, and uniform fees and deposits. 
(b)  The City's property usage policy as promulgated by the City Manager in accordance with subsection (a) of this section shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A process for permit decisions and appeals; and 
(2)  Permit fees based on direct and indirect administrative and maintenance costs associated with usage of City property, parks and trails; and 
(3)  An exemption from permitting for City events. 
(Prior code 8-2-2-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 10 1 2007; Ord. 8 3, 2017 ) 
Sec. 11-3-60. - Watercraft restricted; permits. 
    It is unlawful to operate or to use in or upon any lake or canal in any park within the City any boat, raft or other floating device without having first obtained a permit for the use of same from the City Manager. 
(Prior code 8-2-2-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-3-70. - Swimming or wading prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to swim or wade in, or otherwise bodily to enter the water of, any lake or canal within any park within the City. 
(Prior code 8-2-2-4; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-3-80. - Operation of motor vehicles. 
    It is unlawful to drive any motor vehicle in any park or on any trail within the City. For the purposes of this Section, motor vehicle includes any wheeled vehicle propelled wholly or in part by internal combustion or electric engine or motor, except for individual handicapped propulsion devices and any police, fire, ambulance and any other park, fire protection, water or sanitation district, City, Denver Water Department, U.S. Postal Service or other public vehicle; or a vehicle operated for the purpose of installing, maintaining or servicing parks or trails or a utility such as a water, sewer or gas line or telephone or electric power line or installation. 
(Prior code 8-2-2-5; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 10 1, 2007) 
Sec. 11-3-90. - Parking or camping. 
    It is unlawful to park or camp, or to place or erect any tent, table, bench, trailer or any structure, or to burn or cook within a park or trail within the City without first having obtained a permit for the same from the City Manager. 
(Prior code 8-2-2-6; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 10 1, 2007) 
Sec. 11-3-100. - Removal or damage of structures, property. 
    It is unlawful to remove, deface or otherwise damage any sign, building, equipment, tree, bush, plantings or other property located in any park or trail within the City. 
(Prior code 8-2-2-7; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 10 1, 2007) 
Sec. 11-3-110. - Hours of observance. 
    It is unlawful for any person other than those authorized by the City Manager to enter or be within any park or trail within the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Prior code 8-2-2-8; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 10 1, 2007) 
Sec. 11-3-120. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It is unlawful to consume any alcoholic beverage within any park or trail within the City. 
(Prior code 8-2-2-9; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 10 1, 2007) 
Sec. 11-3-130. - Control of dogs. 
    It is unlawful for any dog owner, possessor or handler to fail to restrain and control a dog by means of a leash while in any City park or trail. A dog, even while on a leash, is presumed to be out of control if it harasses or inflicts damage or injury by biting or jumping on any person, animal, property or wildlife. 
(Prior code 8-2-2-10; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 10 1, 2007) 
Sec. 11-3-140. - Bicycle and equestrian safety regulations. 
    All bicyclists and equestrians entering any park or trail will be subject to a speed limit of fifteen (15) miles per hour. Bicyclists and equestrians must ride in a safe and controlled manner while in the vicinity of pedestrians, and bicyclists must yield the right-of-way to all equestrians and pedestrians. 
(Prior code 8-2-2-11; Ord. 3, 1990; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE IV - Local Improvements 

Sec. 11-4-10. - Local improvements. 
    The City shall use the procedures set forth in Title 31, Article 25, Part 5, C.R.S., for notice, the method and time of filing protest and disposition thereof, the method and manner of making local improvements, letting contracts therefor, assessing the cost thereof and issuing and paying bonds for costs and expenses relating to the organization of special or local improvement districts and of construction or installation of such improvements within the City. 
(Prior code 8-3-1; Ord. 13, 1981; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE V - Vacation of Public Rights-of-Way 

Sec. 11-5-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish a uniform procedure for the vacation of interests in rights-of-way owned or otherwise held by the City and to supplement the procedures for vacation of rights-of-way provided by Title 43, Article 2, Part 3, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 8-4-1; Ord. 5, 2001) 
Sec. 11-5-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Interested person means the owner of property contiguous to or served by a right-of-way that is the subject of a petition for vacation submitted in accordance with this Article. 
    Petitioner means an interested person submitting a petition for vacation of a right-of-way as permitted by this Article. 
    Right-of-way includes any platted or designated public street, alley, lane, parkway, avenue, road, easement including utility easements and pedestrian or equestrian trail easements, or other public way, whether or not it has been used as such, owned by the City. 
(Prior code 8-4-2; Ord. 5, 2001; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 11-5-30. - City Council authority. 
(a)  The City Council is authorized to vacate all or any portion of a right-of-way in accordance with this Article upon the petition of any interested person or upon the City's own initiative. The vacation of a right-of-way shall be a legislative and discretionary decision of the City Council. 
(b)  The City Council may impose reasonable conditions upon the vacation of any right-of-way, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The payment of consideration by the landowners receiving benefit from the vacation; 
(2)  The approval of a subdivision plat in accordance with Chapter 17 of this Code documenting the vesting of the ownership interests resulting from the vacation of a right-of-way; and/or 
(3)  The imposition of a deed restriction or other form of covenant upon the vacated right-of-way as may be deemed necessary or desirable by the City Council to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(c)  The City Council may reserve, except or otherwise create and retain one (1) or more easements within any right-of-way vacated pursuant to this Article. 
(Prior code 8-4-3; Ord. 5, 2001) 
Sec. 11-5-40. - Petition. 
(a)  Preliminary petition for vacation. 
(1)  Any interested person may submit to the City Manager a written preliminary petition requesting that the City Council consider the vacation of a right-of-way located within the City. At a minimum, the petition shall include the name, address and telephone number of the petitioner, together with a general description or illustration of the right-of-way proposed for vacation and all properties contiguous to or served by such right-of-way. A preliminary petition shall not be required for a City-initiated vacation. 
(2)  The City Manager shall inform the City Council of the City Manager's receipt of a preliminary petition at a regular meeting of the City Council. The City Council shall, following an administrative review of the preliminary petition, determine whether the requested vacation possesses sufficient merit to justify the petitioner's preparation and submission of a formal petition and the processing of such formal petition in accordance with this Article. The City Council's decision that a preliminary petition lacks sufficient merit to justify further consideration shall constitute a legislative finding that the requested vacation is not in the public interest and that the petition is rejected. The City Council's decision that a preliminary petition possesses sufficient merit to justify further consideration shall only authorize the further processing of a formal petition for vacation; such decision shall not constitute a finding or imply that the vacation will be approved following such further consideration. 
(b)  Formal petition for vacation. 
(1)  In the event that the City Council determines that a preliminary petition possesses sufficient merit to justify further consideration, the petitioner may prepare and submit a formal petition for vacation to the City, at the petitioner's cost and expense, containing the following: 
a.  An application letter signed by the petitioner requesting the City's approval of the right-of-way vacation and generally describing the reasons for the vacation; 
b.  A nonrefundable application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). In addition, the petitioner shall deposit with the City ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or such other amount determined by the City Manager based upon the City Manager's estimate of the City's cost and expense associated with the processing of the petition. The deposit shall be applied toward the petitioner's payment of the City's planning and engineering review services, attorney review fees, plat recordation fees, appraisal fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City and made necessary as a result of the City's processing of the petition. The deposit shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 17-3-20(b) of this Code; 
c.  A complete legal description of the right-of-way proposed for vacation; 
d.  A survey of the right-of-way proposed for vacation and of all property located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the boundaries of such right-of-way prepared by a Colorado licensed land surveyor. The survey shall include a written certification signed by the surveyor certifying to the City the survey's accuracy and conformance with applicable law. Such survey shall illustrate or include a description of: 
1.  Both the existing right-of-way and the resulting vesting of the ownership of such right-of-way pursuant to Section 11-5-60 below in the event the vacation is approved by the City Council; 
2.  All easements within the right-of-way and the location of all existing utilities within, above or below the right-of-way; and 
3.  The location of all physical improvements within the right-of-way and, where applicable, the portion of the right-of-way used by the petitioner, other owners of property served by the right-of-way and the general public; and 
e.  A current commitment for title insurance ("title commitment") identifying the current ownership interests in the right-of-way proposed for vacation, together with liens, encumbrances and restrictions thereon, if any, prepared by a Colorado title insurance company. The title commitment shall be accompanied by a copy of each recorded lien, encumbrance and restriction identified in the title commitment. The petitioner may be required by the City to obtain a policy of title insurance based on the title commitment as a condition of approval of the requested vacation; 
f.  A written description, including sketch drawings, of the planned use of the right-of-way proposed for vacation and a description of the means of access to all properties affected by the proposed vacation; and 
g.  A list of the names and mailing addresses of all owners of property within five hundred (500) feet of the right-of-way proposed for vacation as their names and addresses appear on record with the County Assessor's office. The list shall be accompanied by a statement signed by the petitioner certifying that: 1) the list was prepared not more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of submission of the formal petition to the City; and 2) the list accurately identifies the information concerning ownership available from the County Assessor's office. 
(2)  The City Manager may commission the preparation by a Colorado licensed real estate appraiser of a written appraisal of the fair-market value of the right-of-way proposed for vacation. The expense of such appraisal shall be paid from the petitioner's deposit required by Subparagraph (1)b above unless otherwise directed by the City Council. 
(3)  The City Manager or the City Council may modify or waive all or any requirement of a formal petition imposed by Paragraph (1) above and may request additional information deemed necessary by the City to permit the City's thorough review of the merits of the proposed right-of-way vacation. 
(4)  The City may initiate a petition for vacation by motion or resolution of the City Council. Prior to processing a City-initiated petition for vacation of a right-of-way, the City Council shall consider and decide the applicability of the requirements of a formal petition as provided in Paragraph (1) above. A City-initiated petition shall be processed in accordance with Section 11-5-50 below. 
(Prior code 8-4-4; Ord. 5, 2001; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 16, 2004) 
Sec. 11-5-50. - Procedure. 
(a)  After the City receives a complete formal petition for vacation of a right-of-way, the City Manager shall schedule a public meeting before the Planning and Zoning Commission to consider the petition. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide recommendations to the City Council for action on the proposed vacation and include, where appropriate, any conditions necessary or desirable to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The petitioner shall give notice of the public meeting. 
(b)  If a right-of-way proposed for vacation affects a trail easement, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall obtain recommendations from the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission before making recommendations to the City Council. The City Manager shall schedule a public meeting before the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission to consider the petition. The petitioner shall give notice of the public meeting. 
(c)  After the Planning and Zoning Commission considers the petition, the City Attorney shall prepare an ordinance to vacate the right-of-way. If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends approval or conditional approval of the petition, the ordinance shall be in a form consistent with the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendations. 
(d)  After the Planning and Zoning Commission has acted on a petition, the City Manager shall schedule the ordinance for first reading before the City Council. If approved on first reading, the ordinance, together with the petition, shall be scheduled for second reading and consideration at a public hearing before the City Council. The petitioner shall give notice of the public hearing. 
(e)  After the public hearing, the City Council shall reject the ordinance or approve the ordinance with amendments. The City Council may, in its discretion, continue the public hearing and postpone a final decision if it determines that additional information would assist in its deliberations. 
(f)  No ordinance vacating a right-of-way shall be approved unless the City Council finds the following: 
(1)  For the vacation of any right-of-way, that the vacation serves the public interest; and 
(2)  For the vacation of a right-of-way that provides vehicular access to property, that the vacation will not leave any property without an established public road or private access easement connecting with another established public road. 
(Prior code 8-4-5; Ord. 5, 2001; Ord. 09 1, 2007) 
Sec. 11-5-55. - Notice. 
(a)  The petitioner shall provide notice of any public meeting required by this Article by depositing letters in certified United States mail, at least twenty (20) days before the date of the meeting, addressed to all owners of property identified under Subparagraph 11-5-40(b)(1)g. The letter shall state that the petitioner is requesting the vacation of a right-of-way, the date, time and place of the meeting and describe or illustrate the right-of-way proposed for vacation. The petitioner shall deliver to the City, prior to the public meeting, evidence from the United States Postal Service of the certified mailing of the notice letters. 
(b)  The petitioner shall provide notice of any public hearing required by this Article by the posting of one (1) notice sign in a conspicuous location within the right-of-way described in the petition for vacation at least twenty (20) days before the date of the hearing. The notice sign shall be provided by the City and bear a caption "NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING," with each letter of the caption at least two (2) inches in height, shall state the date, time and place of the public hearing, shall state that the petitioner is requesting the City's vacation of a right-of-way and shall describe or illustrate the right-of-way proposed for vacation. The petitioner shall also provide notice of the public hearing by depositing letters in certified United States mail, at least twenty (20) days before the date of the hearing, addressed to all owners of property identified under Subparagraph 11-5-40(b)(1)g. The letter shall state that the petitioner is requesting the vacation of a right-of-way, the date, time and place of the hearing, and describe or illustrate the right-of-way proposed for vacation. The petitioner shall deliver to the City, prior to the public hearing, evidence from the United States Postal Service of the certified mailing of the notice letters. 
(Ord. 09 2, 2007) 
Sec. 11-5-60. - Effect of vacation of right-of-way. 
    For any right-of-way vacated in accordance with this Article, the ownership of the City's vacated interest in a right-of-way shall vest as follows: 
(1)  For a roadway as such term is defined by Section 43-2-301(3), C.R.S., ownership of the City's vacated interest shall vest in accordance with the provisions of Section 43-2-302, C.R.S.; or 
(2)  For an easement not within the definition of Section 43-2-301(3), C.R.S., ownership of the City's vacated interest shall vest with the then-current owners of the underlying fee simple estate, as their ownership interests may appear. 
(Prior code 8-4-6; Ord. 5, 2001) 
CHAPTER 13 - Municipal Utilities 
ARTICLE I - Water and Sanitary Sewer Regulations[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 10, Series 2014 , adopted December 9, 2014, amended Art. I,  13-1-10-13-1-70 in its entirety to read as set out herein. The previously existing Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code 4-3-3-4-3-7; Ord. 9, 1951; Ord. 2, 1955; 1980 Code; Ord. 9  1, 2003. See also the Ordinance Disposition Table. 

Sec. 13-1-10. - Authority and powers. 
(a)  General. The City shall have and exercise with regard to City owned utilities, including water and wastewater, all of the authority and powers now provided by the statutes of the state of Colorado, including those hereafter established, and all related home rule powers authorized under the Constitution. 
(b)  Contracts. The City shall have the power to enter into contracts for the provision of water or sanitary sewer service based on the present and future needs and requirements of the City and its residents. 
(c)  Rates and fees. The City shall have the authority and power to impose rates, fees, tolls and charges for water and sanitary sewer service and facilities furnished by or through the City including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, minimum charges, charges for the availability of service, tap fees, disconnection fees, reconnection fees, and reasonable penalties for any delinquencies from any date due at a rate of not exceeding one percent per month or fraction thereof, reasonable attorneys' fees, and other costs of collection. Said rates, fees, tolls and charges shall be established by resolution adopted by the City Council, as amended from time to time. Late fees for delinquent payments to the City shall apply if the City does not receive payment within thirty (30) days of the billing date. 
(d)  Rules and regulations. The City shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations governing this Article adopted by resolution of the City Council, copies of which shall be available in the City Clerk's office and published on the City's web site. 
Sec. 13-1-20. - Definitions. 
    Main means any publicly owned pipe, whether owned by the City, the City and County of Denver, acting by and through its Board of Water Commissioners, or the City of Englewood and which is used for distributing water or collecting sewage from users' property, whether or not the main is located along or within public streets or other rights-of-way or easements. The term Main does not include any privately owned water or sanitary sewer service line. 
    Septic System means a privately owned individual sewage disposal system. 
    Service line means any privately owned and maintained pipe that delivers potable water to the structure that is served from a main or transports sewage from the structure that is served to a main. 
    Tap means a physical connection to a distribution or collection main. 
Sec. 13-1-30. - Occupancy prohibited and connections required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to use or occupy any habitable building in the City unless such building has a system of pipes to provide water and to remove sewage as required by the uniform building and plumbing codes of the City. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to use, excavate, connect to, open, alter, or otherwise disturb any publicly owned water or sewer main. 
(c)  Each building to which water or sewer service, or both, are required shall have its own separate connected water and sewer services, except as otherwise determined by the City. 
Sec. 13-1-40. - Sanitary sewer to premises. 
(a)  Every Septic Systems within the City shall comply with the regulations contained in this Article. 
(b)  All Septic Systems must at all times comply with the federal government and its appropriate agencies, Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment and Tri-County District Health Department standards and regulations as well as all other applicable local laws, rules and regulations. No Septic System shall be constructed or reconstructed until a permit therefor has been secured from the Tri-County District Health Department. 
(c)  When the City Council deems it necessary for the protection of public health that owners of one or more premises connect their premises with the public sewer, at least thirty (30) days' notice in writing shall be given to said owners, by registered mail, notifying them to connect their premises with sewer, the date of the notice to begin as of the date of the registering the same for mailing. If the work of making the connection is not begun within the time period specified in the notice, the city manager shall be authorized to cause the premises to be connected in accordance with the procedures set forth in Part 6, Article 35, of Title 31 of the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
Sec. 13-1-50. - Water supply to premises. 
    No building permit should be issued within the corporate limits of the City until there has been submitted or made available to the Building Official proof that an adequate supply of potable water in terms of quality and quantity for domestic purposes is available at the building site. 
Sec. 13-1-60. - Responsibility of property owners for charges and connections. 
(a)  Owners of properties are responsible for payment of all tap fees, assessments, charges, rates and other fees and user charges set forth in this Article or by resolution of the City Council. The owner may designate another person to whom bills containing water or sewer charges shall be sent. Mailing of a bill for water or sewer charges to any address shall in no way affect the power of the City to enforce payment of charges or to take any other action provided in this Article or authorized by law or equity. 
(b)  The City shall not be required to enlarge or extend its facilities beyond those currently existing and all such enlargements or extensions, when permitted, shall be undertaken or paid for by the owner or developer of the property to be served. 
Sec. 13-1-70. - Perpetual lien upon property. 
    Any nonpayment or delinquency of any fee, rate, charge, penalties, including the cost of collecting them, provided by this Article constitutes a debt due and owing the City, and the City has the right to recover any such debt in the manner provided by law in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until paid, the fees, rates, charges or penalties provided by this Article constitute a perpetual lien on and against the property served, and any such debt that is secured by said lien may be certified by the City Clerk to the Board of County Commissioners of Arapahoe County for collection with the real property taxes. 
Sec. 13-1-80. - Penalty. 
    In addition to the remedies set forth in this Article, any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
CHAPTER 15 - Annexations 
ARTICLE I - Annexation Procedures 

Sec. 15-1-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a procedure to bring land under the jurisdiction of the City in compliance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 15-1-20. - Responsibilities of applicant. 
    In addition to other duties imposed upon all applicants by this Code and the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, all applicants shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  The applicant is responsible for having a representative at all meetings where the request is reviewed. Failure to have a representative present will be cause to have the item withdrawn from the agenda of that meeting. 
(2)  The applicant shall consult with the Community Development Department to discuss any special conditions pertaining to the annexation and to obtain an annexation petition. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 15-1-30. - Preliminary steps. 
(a)  Procedure. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the presentation of any annexation petition to the City Council, the applicant shall submit to the City the annexation petition, the annexation fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00), a minimum of fifteen (15) copies of the master plan and annexation map, and a minimum of five (5) copies of all required supportive information. 
(1)  The Community Development Department shall review all documents submitted for completeness and accuracy. If all documents are complete and accurate, the Community Development Department shall submit the annexation petition to the City Clerk. 
(2)  The City Clerk shall present the annexation petition and a resolution initiating annexation proceedings to the City Council, which shall thereafter establish a date for a public hearing. Upon the establishment of a public hearing date, the City Clerk shall give appropriate notice in accordance with the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, and shall specifically direct copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation procedure by certified mail to the Clerk of the Board of County Commissioners and to the County Attorney of the county wherein the territory is located. Copies of the annexation petition and the resolution initiating the annexation procedure shall also be sent by certified mail to any school district or special district having territory within the annexed area. These copies shall be sent at least twenty-five (25) days prior to the public hearing. 
(3)  Upon acceptance of the annexation petition by the City Council, the Community Development Department shall furnish to the following entities copies of the annexation map and the master plan. The Community Development Department may submit copies of the annexation map and the master plan to additional interested entities as determined by the Community Development Department, in its sole discretion. Such entities shall be advised by the Community Development Department of the scheduled hearing date and shall further be notified that any objections to the annexation and master plan must be submitted to the City in writing no later than seven (7) days after receipt of the annexation map and master plan: 
a.  Telephone companies. 
b.  Franchise utility companies. 
c.  City Engineer. 
d.  Fire Department. 
e.  City Water and Sewer Department. 
f.  Colorado Department of Transportation. 
(4)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the annexation map, master plan and zoning request at a public hearing and shall submit a written recommendation to the City Council. 
(b)  Annexation map. All annexation maps shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. The annexation map shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the annexation. 
(3)  The names, addresses and phone numbers of the applicant and the firm or person responsible for preparing the annexation map. 
(4)  The legal description. 
(5)  Distinction of the boundary that is contiguous to the City and the length of same. 
(6)  Lot and block numbers if the area is already platted. 
(7)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
(8)  Existing and requested zoning and acreage of each requested zone. 
(9)  Ownership of all parcels within and adjacent to the annexation. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the Community Development Department. 
(c)  Master plan. All master plans shall be made with an engineer's scale, minimum scale to be one (1) inch represents one hundred (100) feet, and shall be on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. The master plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of preparation, the scale and a symbol designating true north. 
(2)  The name of the annexation. 
(3)  The names, addresses and phone numbers of the applicant and the firm or person responsible for preparing the master plan. 
(4)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way. 
(5)  Block numbers and lot numbers with approximate dimensions. 
(6)  Proposed gross and net residential density. 
(7)  Existing watercourses with adequate easements for flood control. 
(8)  Designation of all public sites to be reserved and dedicated. 
(9)  Existing two-foot contours. 
(10)  Appropriate certification blocks as directed by the Community Development Department. 
(d)  Supportive information. The following supportive information shall be submitted with the annexation map and master plan: 
(1)  Soils description and limitation. 
(2)  Preliminary utility plan. 
(3)  Mailing addresses of all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the annexation. 
(4)  Affidavit concerning the amount and historical use of all water rights owned. 
(5)  Vicinity map with a radius of one and one-half (11/2) miles, at a minimum scale of one (1) inch represents two thousand (2,000) feet. 
(6)  Statement on community need for proposed annexation and zoning. 
(7)  For all annexations in excess of ten (10) acres, the applicant shall obtain from the school district governing the area to be annexed a statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district, including an estimate of the number of students generated by the proposed annexation and the capital construction required to educate such students. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 17, 2004) 
Sec. 15-1-40. - Annexation impact report. 
(a)  For all annexations in excess of ten (10) acres, the City shall prepare an impact report regarding the proposed annexation not less than twenty-five (25) days before the date of the annexation hearing. One (1) copy of the impact report shall be filed with the Board of County Commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed within five (5) days thereafter. The preparation and filing of the annexation impact report may be waived upon approval of the Board of County Commissioners governing the area proposed to be annexed. 
(b)  The annexation impact report shall include the following: 
(1)  A map or maps of the City and adjacent territory showing the following information: 
a.  The present and proposed boundaries of the City in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
b.  The present streets, major trunk water lines, sewer interceptors and outfalls, other utility lines and ditches and the proposed extension of such streets and utility lines in the vicinity of the proposed annexation. 
c.  The existing and proposed land use pattern in the areas to be annexed. 
(2)  A copy of any draft or final preannexation agreement, if available. 
(3)  A statement of the City's plans for extending or providing for municipal services within the area to be annexed. 
(4)  A statement of the City's plans for the financing of municipal services to be extended into the area to be annexed. 
(5)  A statement identifying all existing districts within the area to be annexed. 
(6)  A statement of the effect of the annexation upon the school district governing the area to be annexed, as is more fully set forth in Subsection 15-1-30(d)(7) above. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 15-1-50. - Consideration of annexation ordinance. 
    Upon the submission of documentation in accordance with this Chapter and upon compliance with the notice and hearing requirements as set forth in the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, as amended, the City Council may consider the approval of an ordinance annexing the subject property to the City. In the event the City Council considers and disapproves such ordinance, no similar request may be heard for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 15-1-60. - Final submission. 
    In the event the City Council approves an annexation ordinance, the applicant shall submit to the Community Development Department two (2) Mylars of the final annexation map and two (2) Mylars of the master plan within ten (10) days of the effective date of the annexation ordinance. 
(Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
CHAPTER 16 - Zoning 
ARTICLE I - General Zoning Provisions 

Sec. 16-1-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Chapter and unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular; the word shall is mandatory and the word may is permissive; the words used or occupied include the words intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied ; and the word lot includes the words plot or parcel . 
    Accessory use or structure means a detached subordinate structure located on the same zone lot with the principal building, the use of which is customary and incidental to the use of the principal building. Examples of accessory uses include, but are not limited to private garages, storage sheds, playhouses, gazebos and agricultural or livestock structures, where permitted. Swimming pools and tennis courts (when not enclosed) shall not be considered accessory structures, except for setback requirements. 
    Approved safety pool cover means a manually or power-operated safety pool cover that meets all of the performance standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) either in effect as of the effective date hereof or as those standards may be revised in the future. 
    Attached parking structure means a structure designed and used for parking, housing or garaging of motor vehicles and attached to the principal structure on a lot. 
    Basement means any interior floor area having a ceiling height of at least six (6) feet and surrounded by an exterior wall that is not exposed more than four (4) feet above the adjacent finished grade. See Figure 10-1 and Figure 10-2. 
    Basement, walkout means any interior floor area on the same level as a basement, having a ceiling height of at least six (6) feet and surrounded by an exterior wall that is exposed by more than four (4) feet above the adjacent finished grade. See Figure 10-1 and Figure 10-2. 
Figure 10-1: Measurement of basement and walkout basement areas - Plan View

Figure 10-2: Measurement of basement and walkout basement areas - Side Elevation View

    Berm means a mound, pile, hill or bank constructed of soil or rock or a combination of earth materials and other suitable building material as approved by the Building Inspector exceeding three (3) feet in height as measured from the preconstruction grade, usually constructed for the purpose of noise mitigation, privacy, surface drainage control or landscaping amenity. Also referred to as an earthen berm. 
    Buildable area means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
    Building envelope means the three-dimensional (3-D) space within which a structure may be built on a lot and which is defined by maximum height regulations and minimum yard requirements. 
    Building Inspector means that person charged with the responsibility of administering the building code for the City. 
    Building permit means a written document granting permission to construct, erect, repair or alter structures in accordance with the building and zoning codes of the City in effect at the time the application for the permit is filed. 
    Bulk plane . See Section 16-16-180 of this Chapter. 
    Church means a structure, together with its accessory structures and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which structure, together with its accessory structures and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
    Clinic, medical and dental means a structure in which a group of physicians, dentists or physicians and dentists and allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of carrying on their professions. The clinic may include a dental or medical laboratory and facilities for operation of an ambulatory surgical center as licensed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and environment, but it shall not include or be used for inpatient care or operating rooms for major surgery except insofar as such care or surgery is allowed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment in an ambulatory surgical center. 
    Column means a sporadic structural support pillar used in the construction of a fence, each of which pillars, if more than one (1), is not closer than six (6) feet from another if such column exceeds the height limit of the fence. 
    Construct shall apply equally to the construction, reconstruction, structural alteration, placement, erection or movement of any structure. 
    Detached parking structure means a structure designed and used for parking, housing or garaging of motor vehicles and not attached to the principal structure on a lot. 
    Dwelling, mobile home means a detached residential dwelling unit designed, after fabrication, for transportation on streets or highways on its own wheels, or on a flatbed or other trailer, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities and the like. A travel trailer is not to be considered a mobile home. 
    Dwelling, single-family means a detached residential dwelling unit other than a mobile home, designed for and occupied by one (1) family only on a stable and permanent basis. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons meeting the definition of a family, including permanent improvements and provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Enclosure means a fence, wall or other barrier that regulates access to a swimming pool. 
    Family means one (1) or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit, related by blood, marriage or adoption; or not more than three (3) unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit; provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a family or families. 
    Fence means a structure that serves as an enclosure, barrier, screen or boundary, or that serves to mark a boundary, enclose a piece of land or divide a piece of land into distinct portions and that usually consists of wood, metal, wire, vinyl, masonry, stone or other manufactured material. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) . See Section 16-16-190 of this Chapter. 
    Foot-candle means a unit of light quantity or density when the foot is the unit of measure. One (1) foot-candle (fc) equals one (1) lumen per square foot of area. 
    Footprint means the sum measured in square feet of the area of all impervious surfaces contained within the lot lines, except the driveway area, and except the area of all unenclosed recreational uses. 
    Gate means a part of a fence that can be readily moved to block an entrance or passageway. 
    Guardhouse means a structure and associated parking area and gates owned by a homeowners' association, or by the respective owners of separate lots or other parcels of land in some form of lawful joint ownership, in a subdivision or area within the City's boundaries, for the benefit of that subdivision or area's residents, which is used for the exclusive purpose of monitoring access to private streets. A guardhouse is not a private club. 
    Guesthouse means an accessory structure which may be occupied by members of the family occupying the dwelling or domestic servants, and provided that no rental or commercial use of such a structure is permitted. Guests not members of the family are limited to temporary occupancy only. 
    Height of structure means the vertical distance measured from the natural grade at the midpoint of the structure to the highest point of the roof surface. 
    Home occupation means a use which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use for dwelling purposes and does not change the character or exterior appearance of the dwelling. 
    Land includes any area covered by water, in addition to the ordinary definition of the word land. 
    Landscape features means natural features that include: lawns, trees, plants, other natural materials such as rock and wood chips and decorative landscaping features, including but not limited to sculptures, sidewalks, fountains, ponds, mailbox structures or trellises. Landscape features shall not be considered accessory structures. 
    Lot means a parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. A lot shall have frontage on an improved public street or on an approved private street, and may consist of: 
a.  A single lot of record; 
b.  A portion of a lot of record; 
c.  A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record or of portions of lots of record; or 
d.  A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; 
provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this Chapter. 
    Lot frontage means the portion nearest the street. For plats hereafter approved, in the case of lots bordering two (2) or more streets, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall select the side which is to be the front yard. The Building Inspector shall select the front yard on such lots in existing subdivisions. 
    Lot, gross area means the net lot area plus that portion of the area of adjoining public rights-of-way calculated by multiplying the length of the lot line fronting on such public right-of-way by thirty (30) feet; or that portion of the width of such right-of-way measured from the right-of-way centerline to the lot line, whichever calculation results in the lesser area. Gross lot area shall include the area where adjoining public rights-of-way intersect, but such area shall only be counted once. 
    Lot line means the property lines of a lot, which lines are shown on a subdivision plat approved by the City or held valid by a court of competent jurisdiction, or, absent such subdivision plat, as described by a valid deed held by the owner of the lot described therein. 
    Lot measurements. 
a.  Depth of a lot means the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 
b.  Width of a lot means the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard. 
    Lot, net area means the area of a lot contained within the lot lines, and excluding adjacent public right-of-way and any other area outside the lot lines. 
    Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
    Natural grade means the grade of a lot undisturbed by construction techniques such as adding or removing fill, landscaping or berming. If the natural grade has been disturbed prior to a proposed development, the City Manager shall establish the natural grade based on the best available information. 
    Nonprofit institution means a public or nonprofit private school, church or other place of worship. 
    Nonprofit recreational facility means nonprofit golf courses, parks, playgrounds, polo fields, swimming pools, tennis courts, paddle tennis courts and similar nonprofit uses. 
    Office means any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not commercially manufactured, processed, created, displayed, exchanged or sold. 
    Person means an individual, joint venture, estate, receiver, syndicate, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, corporation, this City and any other municipality, district or other political subdivision or officer thereof. 
    Preconstruction grade means the elevation of the ground surface in its natural or historic state at a given point, before grading, grubbing or other form of man-made alteration. 
    Private club means a building operated for the benefit of the members and not for profit and not open to the general public. A private club is not a guardhouse. 
    Property line. See the definition of lot line. 
    Public buildings means any building open to the general use, participation or enjoyment of the public and owned or operated by a governmental entity or agency thereof. Public buildings shall also include churches. 
    Public recreational facility means a recreational facility for the use of the general public, including golf courses, parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar recreational uses. 
    Recreational path means paths used by the public for activities such as walking, jogging, bicycling and horseback riding. However, no such path shall be used by motorized vehicles other than maintenance or public safety vehicles. 
    Recreational use or structure means swimming pools, tennis and other courts when not enclosed. Once enclosed, they shall be considered accessory structures. Setback requirements in each zone district shall apply. 
    Residence means all interior area except the attic area where the attic peaks at six (6) feet or less in height, and except basements. Residence shall include one hundred percent (100%) of a walkout basement's area. 
    Residential and resort hotel means a building or associated group of buildings designed for the entertainment of transients as guests for compensation, the residents of which are not predominately permanent (in the sense of continuous year-round tenancy) and do not have exclusive possession and control of the rented facilities; and the conveniences and facilities of which include, but not by way of limitation, public dining areas, meeting rooms and facilities, retail outlets, room service and housekeeping and maid services. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the rooms available for rent shall have cooking facilities. 
    Retail use means an establishment for the retail sale of goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental and related to the sale of such goods or merchandise, including eating and drinking establishments. 
    Retailer , unless otherwise specifically defined, means the person engaged in the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities directly to the consumer. 
    Short-term rental means the renting or leasing of a single-family dwelling unit for a period of less than ninety (90) consecutive days, other than a house exchange for which there is no payment. 
    Sight triangle means the triangular area bounded on two (2) sides by the edge of pavement lines and a line joining points along said lines fifty (50) feet from the point of the edge of pavement line intersection. Nothing shall be constructed, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half (21/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the adjacent streets. 
    Street line means the right-of-way line of a street. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, swimming pools and tennis courts. 
    Swimming pool or pool means a body of water having a depth at any point in excess of two (2) feet in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or other container located outdoors and used, or intended to be used, for public, semipublic or private swimming by adults or children. Swimming pool includes in-ground and aboveground structures and includes, but is not limited to hot tubs, spas, portable spas and nonportable wading pools. 
    Text amendment means any amendment to the text of this Chapter or any section thereof initiated by the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 16-2-40(a) of this Chapter. 
    Tract, guardhouse means a piece, plot or parcel of land established by a survey, plat or deed, held in common ownership, on which is located a guardhouse. 
    Travel home or trailer means a vehicular portable structure built on a chassis, either towed or self-propelled, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight (8) feet. 
    Yard means that portion of any land or lot on which no structure or improvement other than fences, walls, driveways, sidewalks, utility boxes or equipment, or landscape features can be constructed or placed. Patios, decks, porches or impervious surfaces not permitted in this definition may not be constructed or placed in the yard. 
    Yard, front means that portion of a yard between the front lot line and the structure, and between the two (2) side lot lines, the depth of which shall be the least distance between the front lot line and the structure. 
    Yard, rear means that portion of a yard between the rear of a structure and a rear lot line, and between the two (2) side lot lines, the depth of which shall be the least distance between the structure and the rear lot line. 
    Yard, side means all the yard between the front and rear yards, the width of which shall be the least distance between the side lot line and the structure. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-1-1; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 9, 1981; Ord. 16, 1986; Ord. 1, 1989; Ord. 4, 1989; Ord. 3, 1991; Ord. 3, 1999; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 2, 2000; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 13, 2000; Ord. 17, 2000; Ord. 1, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 12 2, 2003; Ord. 01 1, 2007; Ord. 07 1, 2011; Ord. 9 2, 2011; Ord. 7 2, 2012; Ord. 9 1, 2012; Ord. 4 1, 2015 ; Ord. 5 2, 2016) 
Sec. 16-1-20. - Interpretation, minimum requirements. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this Chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully City-adopted regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. The City will not consider, interpret or apply deed restrictions or covenants unless the City is a party to or beneficiary of them. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-1-2; Ord. 9 1, 2013) 
ARTICLE II - Administration and Enforcement 

Sec. 16-2-10. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
(a)  The City Manager shall administer and enforce this Chapter. He may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the City Council may direct. 
(b)  If the City Manager finds that any of the provisions of this Chapter are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order the discontinuance of illegal use of land or structures, the removal of illegally constructed structures or the discontinuance of any illegal construction being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this Chapter to ensure compliance with or prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Prior code 6-2-1; Ord. 7, 1989; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-2-20. - Building permits and certificates. 
    No structure or earthen berm shall be constructed without a permit therefor, issued by the Building Inspector. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, Chapter 18 of this Code and any other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Prior code 6-2-2; Ord. 7, 1989) 
Sec. 16-2-30. - Fees. 
    Until provided otherwise by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be charged for any application or appeal filed with the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
(2)  A fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be charged for any application for rezoning or for amendment to the official zoning map. An additional fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) calculated at maximum density permitted in the requested zone district shall be charged when more than one (1) unit is to be created by the rezoning. These fees are nonrefundable, and no fee shall be charged for initial zoning at the time of annexation of property. 
(3)  A fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per lot or unit shall be charged for any application or appeal filed with the City Council for an amendment to or construction within the floodplain boundaries as set forth in Article XVI of this Chapter. 
(4)  The applicant shall also pay all costs incurred for required certified notices. The City shall pay publication and posting expenses relating to said applications. 
(5)  A cash payment in lieu of land dedication agreed to by the City under Section 17-3-30 of this Code shall be paid in full before issuance of a building permit for construction upon a lot to which such cash payment relates. 
(6)  Rezoning costs. 
a.  The applicant for rezoning, as set forth in Paragraph (2) above, shall also pay for planning and engineering review services and other consultant fees, including, without limitation, legal fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City and made necessary as a result of said application. The applicant shall make an initial deposit into a non-interest-bearing escrow account held by the City at the time the application is filed with the City. The amount of this initial deposit shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each unit of increased density. The City shall have the right and authority to make disbursements from said escrow account at its sole discretion to cover the City's costs and expenses for planning and engineering review services, attorney and other consultant fees and other costs and expenses incurred with regard to said application. Any balances remaining in the escrow account following approval, denial or withdrawal of said application shall be returned to the applicant without interest. In the event said funds are exhausted before final disposition of said application, the applicant shall make a supplemental deposit to said escrow account in a reasonable amount to cover future costs and expenses, as determined by the City Manager, based on past expenditures. Failure to make necessary supplemental deposits shall cause the application process to cease until the required deposits are made. The City Manager, with cause, may reduce the amount of the initial escrow deposit; however, the applicant shall remain responsible for the actual cost of the planning and engineering review services and other consultant fees, including, without limitation, legal fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City. 
b.  If the City incurs costs and expenses beyond the amount deposited with the City and the applicant does not pay those costs and expenses within ten (10) days after written notice from the City, then, in addition to the other remedies the City may have, the City shall be entitled to a lien on the property that is the subject of the application, or the City may elect to certify the assessed costs and expenses to the office of the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. Such lien shall be perfected and foreclosed upon in accordance with applicable state laws. Nothing herein shall authorize the City to charge the applicant for costs and expenses the City incurs as a result of litigating a matter against the applicant or against a third party. 
(Prior code 6-2-3; Ord. 7, 1989; Ord. 1, 1991; Ord. 1, 1994; Ord. 8, 1998; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 18, 2004) 
Sec. 16-2-40. - Amendments. 
(a)  Amendments to zoning map and text amendments. Amendments to this Chapter or any section thereof (a text amendment) may be initiated by the City Council or by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Amendments to the official zoning map for a specific parcel, lot or property (a rezoning) may be initiated by application from a property owner seeking to rezone such owner's property in the City or by City Council by making application therefor on such a form as the Planning and Zoning Commission may prescribe. 
(1)  Rezoning application. A rezoning application shall be filed with the Community Development Department, together with payment of the applicable fee. The following application materials are required for an application for rezoning: 
a.  Description of the land area to be rezoned and the requested new classification, along with a sketch, to scale, showing the boundaries of the area requested to be rezoned, along with the existing zoning on all adjacent sides of the area. 
b.  A statement of justification for the rezoning, including discussion of such of the following conditions as are applicable: 
1.  Change in area conditions; 
2.  Error in original zoning; 
3.  Conformance to the Master Plan for the area; and 
4.  Suitability of the site to the proposed use. 
c.  Description and sketches, if available, of structures or uses proposed if rezoning is granted, along with a description of uses within two hundred (200) feet of the boundary of the proposed area of change, in all directions, and the effect of the proposed use upon the adjacent areas. 
d.  Time schedule for any contemplated new construction or uses. 
(2)  Text amendment application. The City Council may amend any provision of this Chapter in its sole legislative discretion, subject to the limitations of the Colorado statutes that affect home rule municipalities and the Colorado and United States Constitutions. 
(b)  Referral to Planning and Zoning Commission. All applications for text amendments shall be referred to and considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission at a duly noticed meeting. All applications for rezonings shall be referred to and considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission at a duly noticed public hearing as prescribed in Section 16-2-40(c). The Planning and Zoning Commission shall examine the rezoning proposal or text amendment and its conformity to the intent of this Chapter and to the City's master plan. A recommendation shall then be made to the City Council, along with reasons therefor. 
(c)  City Council public hearing process. 
(1)  The City Council shall hold a public hearing before any rezoning or text amendment is enacted through adoption of an ordinance by the City Council. Public notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior thereto, in one (1) newspaper with general circulation in the City and describing generally the matters involved in the proposed text amendment or rezoning. 
(2)  For rezonings, in addition to newspaper publication, the applicant shall send written notices of the public hearing to all property owners located within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet from all points on the perimeter of the subject property. Said notice must contain a typewritten identical copy of that notice required to be posted in the Village Center, and shall be mailed by certified mail and regular U.S. mail at least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled public hearing. In addition, any proposed rezoning must be advertised by a posted notice at least two (2) feet by three (3) feet in size and with a caption "NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING" or similar language, with each letter of the caption at least two (2) inches in height, containing the same data as above, posted continuously for at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and located on the subject property in a conspicuous location clearly visible from an adjoining roadway, if practical. 
(3)  The standard for compliance with the notice provisions of this Section shall be substantial compliance. The City Manager shall determine if substantial compliance with these provisions has been demonstrated and that administrative decision shall be final and binding. In the event the City Manager determines that the notice does not meet the substantial compliance standard, such noticed hearing shall be vacated and the matter re-noticed. 
(d)  Enactment. Such an amendment to be enacted shall receive the affirmative vote of the majority of the membership of the entire City Council. 
(e)  Certification of the amendment. If an amendment should receive the required vote for adoption by the City Council, a certified copy of the amendment shall then be filed with the City Clerk. Rezonings shall be documented on the City's official zoning map. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-2-4; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 12, 1985; Ord. 4, 1993; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 5 1, 2016) 
Sec. 16-2-50. - Complaints regarding violations. 
    Whenever a violation of this Chapter occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the City Manager, who shall properly record such complaint, promptly investigate and take action thereon as provided by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; Ord. 16, 1980; prior code 6-2-5; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-2-60. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code. Each day an offense continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any structure, land or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from instituting, and the City shall have the authority to institute, any other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent or remedy any violation, including but not limited to seeking injunctive or other judicial relief. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-2-6; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-2-70. - Merger of nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  Merger of lots required. 
(1)  Where two (2) or more contiguous lots of record are under identical ownership upon or after the effective date of this Section (February 25, 2001, hereinafter the "Effective Date"), and all, one (1) or more of such contiguous lots fails to conform to the applicable minimum lot area requirement for such lots, all such contiguous lots of record shall be merged and considered for the purpose of this Chapter and of Chapter 17 of this Code as a single and undivided lot. The merger of lots required by this Section shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the ownership parcels depicted on the property ownership maps prepared by the County Assessor's office dated December 31, 2000, ("Assessor's Ownership Maps") as supplemented and amended by the accompanying "Owners Report, Full Report, Report by Tax Authorities" dated February 25, 2001, prepared by the County Assessor's office. The County Assessor's ownership maps and accompanying owner's report are available for public inspection during normal business hours at the City Hall, 2450 East Quincy Avenue, Cherry Hills Village, Colorado. Where, following the merger of lots in accordance with this Section as depicted on the County Assessor's ownership maps, the merged lot fails to conform to the minimum lot area requirement for such lot in the applicable zone district, such merged lot shall be further subject to merger with other contiguous lots of record under identical ownership in a manner consistent with this Section. 
(2)  The merger of lots required by this Section shall be subject to the following: 
a.  No merger of lots in accordance with this Section shall result in the location of more than one (1) existing and lawfully established single-family residential dwelling unit on a merged lot. Where a merger would otherwise result in more than one (1) existing and lawfully established single-family residential dwelling unit to be located on a merged lot, the merger of lots required by this Section shall result in the creation of the largest possible lot for each existing single-family residential dwelling unit. 
b.  No merger of lots in accordance with this Section shall result in the merger of two (2) or more lots that, prior to merger, each conform to at least one hundred percent (100%) of the minimum lot area requirement for such lots in the applicable zone district. 
c.  Where, by the application of this Section, a lot of record that fails to conform to the applicable minimum lot area requirement for such lots could be merged with more than one (1) lot conforming to at least one hundred percent (100%) of the applicable minimum lot area for such lot, the following criteria shall govern in determining which of such conforming lots shall be merged with the lot that fails to conform to the applicable minimum lot area requirement: 
1.  The conforming lot sharing the greatest percentage of contiguity with a lot that fails to conform to the applicable minimum lot area requirement shall be merged; 
2.  Where the application of Subparagraph 1 above fails to determine the appropriate manner of merging lots, the smallest of the conforming lots shall be merged with the lot that fails to conform to the applicable minimum lot area requirement; 
3.  Where the application of Subparagraphs 1 and 2 above fails to determine the appropriate manner of merging lots, then the conforming lot with the greatest frontage upon a public street shall be merged with the lot that fails to conform to the applicable minimum lot area requirement; 
4.  Where the application of Subparagraphs 1, 2 and 3 above fails to determine the appropriate manner of merging lots, then the easternmost conforming lot shall be merged with the lot that fails to conform to the applicable minimum lot area requirement; or 
5.  Where the application of Subparagraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 above fails to determine the appropriate manner of merging lots, then the northernmost conforming lot shall be merged with the lot that fails to conform to the applicable minimum lot area requirement. 
(b)  Administrative determination and appeal. Any owner of a lot of record subject to the merger of such lot as required by this Section shall be entitled to a written administrative determination from the City concerning the application and effect of this Section upon the owner's lots. A request for an administrative determination from the City must be made in writing, signed by the owner, and shall include a copy of the owner's deed for each of the owner's contiguous lots of record. Such administrative determination shall be subject to appeal to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals in accordance with Subsection 16-3-30(a) below. 
(c)  Variances and exemptions authorized. 
(1)  Variance. Any owner of property subject to the merger of lots required by this Section may request that the Board of Adjustment and Appeals grant a variance for such property from the strict application of this Section. A request for a variance shall be applied for and processed in accordance with Sections 16-3-70 and 16-3-80 below, except that the application requirements of Subsection 16-3-70(b)(5)b below shall require a description of evidence supporting the necessary findings to be made pursuant to this Subsection. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may grant a variance from the strict requirements of this Section and permit the merger of lots into a different configuration than required by this Section where the Board of Adjustment and Appeals finds the following: 
a.  The variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the affected property; 
b.  The variance will advance the intent of this Section by merging nonconforming or substandard lots into larger or conforming lots; and 
c.  One (1) of the following: 
1.  The lot created by the strict application of this Section would be illogical due to lot configuration or topography; 
2.  The application of this Section would reduce the size of a tract or parcel of land recognized upon the effective date of this Section as a discrete taxable tract or parcel by the County Assessor's office upon which a single-family residential dwelling unit was lawfully established and is currently existing; 
3.  The merger of lots as required by this Section would result in the location of immovable lawfully established structures, including, but not limited to, barns, water wells and garages, which are accessory to a lawfully established single-family residential dwelling unit to be located on different lots; 
4.  The merger of lots as required by this Section would significantly and adversely diminish the protection and preservation of significant established and healthy vegetation, wildlife habitat or foraging areas or natural resources including, but not limited to, water resources or wetlands. 
d.  The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may impose reasonable conditions upon the approval of any variance including, but not limited to, requiring the owner to apply for and receive approval of a lot consolidation, minor lot adjustment or other form of subdivision necessary or desirable to document the merger of property and the variance granted by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
(2)  Exemption. Any owner of property subject to the merger of lots required by this Section may request that the City Council grant an exemption for such property from the application of this Section. A request for an exemption shall be made in writing submitted to the City Manager and shall detail the specific reasons for the requested exemption. The owner shall be entitled to a public hearing upon such request, and written notice of the date and time of the public hearing shall be mailed or delivered by the City to the owner not less than seven (7) days before the date of the public hearing. The City Council may grant an exemption from the requirements of this Section where the owner establishes that: 
a.  Either: 
1.  The application of this Section will deprive the owner of all reasonable economic use of the lot that is created by the application of this Section; or 
2.  The application of this Section unreasonably and substantially impairs enforceable rights of the owner; and 
b.  A variance to the strict application of this Section as authorized by Subparagraph (3)a above could not be granted which would alleviate or eliminate the condition of Subparagraph a1 or a2 above cited by the owner as the basis for the special exception. A special exception granted by the City Council pursuant to this Subsection shall be made by resolution and such resolution shall be effective upon recordation in the records of the County Clerk and Recorder. 
(d)  Later subdivision, consolidation and lot adjustment permitted. The merger of lots in accordance with this Section shall not preclude the owner's application for, and the City's approval of: 
(1)  A subdivision of such newly created lot where the application and subdivision plat conform to all other applicable provisions of this Chapter and Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(2)  A lot consolidation plat evidencing the merger of lots required by this Section where such application and plat conforms to all other applicable provisions of this Chapter and Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(3)  A minor adjustment of lot lines for any newly created lot where such application and plat conforms to all other applicable provisions of this Chapter and Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(Prior code 6-2-7; Ord. 2, 2001) 
Sec. 16-2-80. - No sale to create substandard parcels. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, convey, transfer, dispose of or otherwise divide any property within the City where such sale, conveyance, transfer, disposition or other division would result in, create or leave a lot or parcel of land that fails to meet the minimum lot area established for such property by the applicable zone district. In addition to any other remedy available to the City, the City shall not recognize or permit the use of a lot or parcel created in violation of this Section, unless and until such lot or parcel is properly consolidated with other lots or subdivided and meets all applicable requirements of this Chapter and Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(b)  This Section shall not apply to the sale, conveyance, transfer, disposition, division or dedication of property to the City that is subject to and accepted by the City, for the purpose of providing land for a public use such as, but not limited to, park, open space, trail, right-of-way, utility access and drainage management. 
(Prior code 6-2-8; Ord. 2, 2001; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-2-90. - No transfer without legal subdivision. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, convey, transfer, dispose of or otherwise divide any property within the City where such sale, conveyance, transfer, disposition or division would divide a lot of record into two (2) or more parcels of land. In addition to any other remedy available to the City, the City shall not recognize or permit the use of a parcel of land created in violation of this Section, unless and until such parcel of land is lawfully subdivided in accordance with Chapter 17 of this Code and meets all applicable requirements of this Chapter. 
(b)  This Section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any division of land resulting from the foreclosure of a deed of trust, mortgage or other security interest recorded prior to the effective date of this Section; 
(2)  Any division of land ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to the law of eminent domain; 
(3)  Any division of land that is to be created by a contract concerning the sale of a part or parcel of such land where the contract is expressly contingent upon the purchaser's obtaining final approval from the City of a subdivision plat accurately describing such division of land pursuant to Chapter 17 of this Code and such approval is granted by the City; or 
(4)  The sale, conveyance, transfer, disposition, division or dedication of property to the City that is subject to and accepted by the City, for the purpose of providing land for a public use such as, but not limited to, park, open space, trail, right-of-way, utility access and drainage management. 
(Prior code 6-2-9; Ord. 2, 2001) 
ARTICLE III - Board of Adjustment and Appeals 

Sec. 16-3-10. - Establishment. 
(a)  The term Board, as used in this Article, shall mean the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall consist of five (5) members and one (1) alternate member. The City Council may from time to time appoint a member of the City Council to serve as a member of the Board. At the time of such appointment, the City Council may designate the length of the City Council member's term on the Board. The alternate member may attend and participate in all meetings of the Board, but shall vote only in the event that one (1) of the members is absent or abstains from considering a specific application. Subject to the City Council's designation of the length of the term of any City Council member appointed to the Board, members and alternate members shall be appointed by the City Council for overlapping terms of three (3) years each. Terms of office shall expire on the third Tuesday of May in each respective year. 
(b)  The Board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the conduct of its affairs consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and Chapter 18 of this Code. The chairperson, or in the chairperson's absence the vice chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(c)  Subject to the approval of the City Council, the Board may adopt rules governing all of its proceedings subject to and consistent with the provisions of Section 16-3-80 of this Article. 
(Prior code 6-3-1; Ord. 5, 1999) 
Sec. 16-3-20. - Authority. 
    The Board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals under this Chapter and Chapter 18 of this Code except where this authority is specifically granted to the City Council in Article XIX of this Chapter; requests for variances under this Chapter except where this authority is specifically granted to the City Council in Articles XVIII and XX of this Chapter; requests for special exceptions under this Chapter where authorized; and applications brought pursuant to the nonconformance provisions of Article XIV of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 6-3-2; Ord. 13, 2000; Ord. 11 5, 2003) 
Sec. 16-3-30. - Appeals. 
(a)  The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the City Manager in the administration of this Chapter and Chapter 18 of this Code. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made; where the Board finds that the City Manager acted: 
(1)  Without clear and convincing evidence to support the order, requirement, decision or determination; or 
(2)  Beyond the City Manager's authority. 
(b)  Except where specifically provided otherwise, all questions of administration and enforcement of this Chapter and Chapter 18 of this Code shall first be presented to the City Manager. Questions shall be presented to the Board only on appeal from the decision of the City Manager. 
(c)  Appeals made to the Board must be made in writing and filed with the City Manager within thirty (30) days following the action or decision from which the appeal is taken. 
(d)  An appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination made by the City Manager shall stay all proceedings unless the City Manager certifies that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. 
(Prior code 6-3-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-3-40. - Special exceptions. 
    The Board may authorize special exceptions as the Board is specifically authorized by the terms of this Chapter with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this Chapter and the Master Plan; and the Board shall deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Chapter and the Master Plan. No special exception shall be authorized unless the Board finds all of the following: 
(1)  The special exception is compatible with provisions of the Master Plan and complies with this Chapter. 
(2)  There is adequate ingress and egress to property that is the subject of the special exception and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe. 
(3)  There are adequate off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the items in Subsection (2) above. 
(4)  There will be no noise, odor or adverse economic effects from the special exception on adjoining properties and properties generally in the zone district. 
(5)  There is adequate provision for refuse and service areas. 
(6)  There is adequate provision for utilities, with reference to locations, availability and compatibility. 
(7)  There is adequate provision for screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions and character. 
(8)  Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting will not produce glare, impede traffic safety or create a negative economic effect on the neighborhood. 
(9)  The special exception is compatible and in harmony with surrounding properties and other property in the zone district. 
(10)  The applicant has complied with all applicable Code requirements and met all applicable Code criteria contained in other Chapters of this Code. 
(Prior code 6-3-2) 
Sec. 16-3-50. - Variances. 
(a)  The Board may authorize variances from the requirements of this Chapter subject to terms and conditions fixed by the Board. A variance from the terms of this Chapter shall be considered an extraordinary remedy, and the conditions set forth below are intended as limitations on the Board's power to authorize variances. 
(b)  No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds all of the following: 
(1)  The applicant would suffer an exceptional and unnecessary hardship as a result of the application of this Chapter, which hardship is not generally applicable to other lands or structures in the same zone district because of the unusual configuration of the applicant's property boundaries, because of unique circumstances related to the location of existing structures thereon, or because of the existence of exceptional topographic conditions thereon. 
(2)  There are no design alternatives or alternative locations for structures that would obviate the need for the requested variance or would reduce the amount of the variance required. 
(3)  The enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter deprives the applicant of rights enjoyed by a majority of the other properties in the same zone district under the terms of this Chapter. 
(4)  The need for the variance does not result from the intentional, reckless or grossly negligent actions of the applicant or his agent, a violation of any provision of this Code, or a previously granted variance. 
(5)  Reasonable protections are afforded adjacent properties. 
(6)  The requested variance will not cause an undesirable change in the character of the neighborhood or have an adverse effect on the physical or environmental conditions of the surrounding property. 
(7)  The variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land or structure. 
(8)  The reasons set forth by the applicant justify the granting of the variance. For purposes of making this finding, the Board may not consider issues of inconvenience or aesthetics. 
(9)  The granting of the variance will: 
a.  Observe the spirit of this Chapter; 
b.  Secure the public safety and welfare; and 
c.  Ensure that substantial justice is done. 
(c)  In granting any variance, the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Chapter and the Master Plan and particularly the standards set forth in this Section. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter and punishable under Section 16-2-60 of this Chapter. 
(d)  Under no circumstances shall the Board grant a variance to allow a use not authorized under the terms of this Chapter in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Chapter in said district. Also, neither a nonconforming use of neighboring lands or structures in the same district, nor a permitted or nonconforming use of lands or structures in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(e)  Every variance shall transfer and run with the land. 
(f)  The granting of any variance shall not constitute or be construed as a precedent, ground or cause for any other variance. 
(g)  Unless otherwise expressly provided by a written resolution of the Board granting a variance, every variance shall be limited in its effect as follows: 
(1)  A variance shall only authorize the specific improvement described in the application for variance subject to such conditions affecting such improvement as may be imposed by the Board. 
(2)  A variance shall be initially effective for a period of one (1) year commencing upon the date the variance is granted by the Board. A variance shall expire and be void in the event that a building permit is not issued prior to the expiration of the one-year time period for the improvement authorized by the variance. The City Manager may approve an extension of the initial one-year time period for an additional one (1) year where the City Manager finds that: a) the applicant requested an extension in writing prior to the initial one-year expiration date and just cause exists; and b) the extension would not adversely affect or harm adjacent property owners. 
(3)  Following the construction of the improvement authorized by the variance, the variance shall remain effective only during such period of time that the specific improvements described in the application for variance exists. Repairs and cosmetic alteration of the improvement shall be permitted subject to applicable requirements imposed by uniform building or safety codes, provided that such repair or alteration does not increase or enlarge the improvement beyond the scope of the improvement approved by the Board. The destruction of the improvement by any cause or for any reason whatsoever other than destruction by act of God shall cause the variance to expire and be void. 
(Prior code 6-3-2; Ord. 5, 1999; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 1 3, 2004) 
Sec. 16-3-60. - Nonconforming applications. 
    The Board may hear and decide applications brought pursuant to nonconformance provisions of Article XIV of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 6-3-2; Ord. 5, 1999) 
Sec. 16-3-70. - Applicant requirements and setting hearings. 
(a)  No matter shall be set for a hearing before the Board until the applicant: 
(1)  Has been afforded a preapplication hearing with the City Manager, if so requested by the applicant. 
(2)  Submits five (5) copies of an application on the City-provided form to the City Manager. 
(3)  Pays the application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(4)  Makes a deposit of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) into a non-interest-bearing account in accordance with Section 16-3-90 below. 
(5)  Meets in at least one (1) prehearing conference with the City Manager, which conference may result in amendments or corrections to the application. 
(6)  Submits within thirty (30) days of the final prehearing conference twelve (12) copies of the application or revised application as applicable, including and addressing the City Manager's comments made as a result of the prehearing conferences. 
(b)  The official application form must contain the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number and facsimile number. 
(2)  The address of the property. 
(3)  The legal description of the property. 
(4)  The provision of the section of this Code from which the variance is being requested, or the City Manager's order, requirement, decision or determination for which an appeal is taken. 
(5)  Reasons for filing an appeal, request for variance, special exception or request pursuant to the nonconformance provisions of Article XIV of this Chapter. 
a.  Requests for special exceptions must describe the evidence supporting the necessary findings to be made by the Board under Section 16-3-40 above. 
b.  Requests for variances must describe the evidence supporting the conditions under which a variance can be granted, contained in Subsections 16-3-50(b)(1) through (b)(9) above. 
c.  Requests pursuant to the nonconformance provisions of Article XIV of this Chapter must describe the evidence supporting the necessary findings to be made by the Board under the applicable provisions of Article XIV of this Chapter. 
(6)  Applications pursuant to Section 16-14-20 of this Chapter for authorization of construction on nonconforming lots shall include: 
a.  A copy of a legal survey or plat showing the net lot area, lot lines, roads and all easements of record. 
b.  A complete title and platting history of the lot prepared by a professional title examiner or licensed attorney. 
c.  Records indicating any common ownership with abutting lots. 
d.  Proof of compliance with the Rehabilitation Authority (if applicable). 
e.  Site plan showing the size, location and use of all existing and proposed improvements or construction, with dimensions to property lines showing setbacks. The plan shall show all other existing or proposed structures or improvements on the site, including the location and size of vegetation, if applicable. 
f.  Plans of the proposed building, including elevations, and proposed utilities. 
g.  Calculations of the square footage of the footprint of the existing and proposed improvements, and square footage of any replacement or enlarged residence. 
(7)  Applications pursuant to Section 16-3-50 of this Chapter for a variance shall include: 
a.  A site plan showing the size, location and use of all existing and proposed improvements on the property subject to the variance request with dimensions to property lines showing setbacks. 
b.  Any other information deemed sufficient by the City Manager to illustrate the location, size and scope of the requested variance. Such information may include, but may not be limited to: (i) a survey or plat showing the net lot area, lot lines, roads, utilities and all easements of record for the property subject to the variance request; and (ii) a general illustration of improvements upon adjacent properties that may be affected or impacted by the development authorized by any requested variance. 
(8)  Any other information deemed by the City Manager or Board of Adjustment and Appeals as pertinent to the application and that addresses issues raised during the review process. 
(c)  At least ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing date, the applicant shall send notice of the time, place and subject matter of the public hearing by certified mail to the owners of all adjacent properties. The applicant shall obtain the names of said owners from the last preceding real property tax roll of the County Assessor's office. The applicant shall also give public notice of any hearing by posting for not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the original hearing date a notice at the Village Center and a sign notice on the subject property, said sign to bear a caption "NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING" or similar language, with each letter of the caption at least two (2) inches in height, to contain a general description of the nature of the relief sought, and to be located on the site, if practical, in a conspicuous location clearly visible from an adjoining public roadway. 
(Prior code 6-3-3; Ord. 5, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 1 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 7 19, 2004; Ord. 15 1, 2010) 
Sec. 16-3-80. - Hearing procedures and action. 
(a)  All hearings before the Board shall be open to the public. 
(b)  All evidence and testimony shall be presented publicly. The Board may take notice of, and may consider, any relevant facts within the personal knowledge of a member of the Board which are publicly stated into the record. 
(c)  The Board shall cause a record of its proceedings to be prepared, which shall include all documents and physical evidence considered in each case, together with minutes of the proceedings. All evidence and testimony presented shall be considered by the Board in reaching its decision. Minutes shall state the grounds for each decision, and shall indicate by name the maker and second of each motion and the vote on each motion. The record of proceedings shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
(d)  For requests for variances, special exceptions and those brought pursuant to nonconformance provisions of Article XIV of this Chapter, the Board shall make specific findings set forth in Section 16-3-40 above for special exceptions; Section 16-3-50 above for variances; and the applicable provisions of Article XIV of this Chapter for nonconformance applications. 
(e)  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any order, requirement, decision or determination of the City or to approve an application on any matter upon which the Board has been granted jurisdiction. Any decision of the Board shall be subject to review by a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Prior code 6-3-4; Ord. 5, 1999) 
Sec. 16-3-90. - Land development account. 
    Persons applying for variances; special exceptions, appeals from City Manager orders, requirements, decisions or determinations; relief pursuant to Article XIV of this Chapter; or other relief which the Board or City Manager has the authority to grant shall pay for planning and engineering review services and other consultant fees, including, without limitation, legal fees and other direct expenses incurred on behalf of the City and made necessary as a result of said applications. The applicant shall make an initial deposit into a non-interest-bearing escrow account held by the City at the time the application is filed with the City. The amount of this initial deposit shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). The City shall have the right and authority to make disbursements from said escrow account at its sole discretion to cover the City's cost for planning and engineering review services, attorney and other consultant fees and other direct expenses incurred with regard to said application. Any balance remaining in the escrow account at the conclusion of said application, such as approval, denial or withdrawal, shall be returned to the applicant without interest. In the event said funds are exhausted before completion of said application, the applicant will make a supplemental deposit to said escrow account in an amount determined by the City Manager. Failure to make necessary supplemental deposits shall cause the application process to cease until the required deposits are made. 
(Prior code 6-3-5; Ord. 5, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 20, 2004; Ord. 15 1, 2010) 
ARTICLE IV - Districts and Map 

Sec. 16-4-10. - Official zoning map adopted. 
(a)  The City is hereby divided into the following categories of zones or districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereof, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. 
R-1 21/2-Acre Residential District 
R-2 11/4-Acre Residential District 
R-3 1-Acre Residential District 
R-3A Variable Lot Residential District 
R-4 1/2-Acre Residential District 
R-5 16,000-Square-Foot Residential District 
O-1 Open Space, Park and Recreation Area District 
O-2 Open Space, Conservation and Historic Area District 
C-1 Community District 
C-2 Limited Commercial District 
(b)  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and bear the seal of the City under the following words: This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 16-4-10 of the Municipal Code of the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, together with the effective date thereof. 
(c)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and Articles IV and VIII of the City Charter, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be made on the official zoning map after the amendment has been approved by the City Council, together with an entry on the official zoning map as follows: On (date) by official action of the City Council, the following changes were made in the Official Zoning Map: (brief description of nature of change), which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. 
(d)  No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
(e)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the office of the City Clerk shall be the final authority as the current zoning status of land and structures in the City. 
(f)  In the event the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested by the city clerk, and bear the seal of the City under the following words: This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map of the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, as adopted in Section 16-4-10 of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-4-1; Ord. 1, 1996; Ord. 3, 1996; Ord. 17, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 6 2, 2016) 
Sec. 16-4-20. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following City limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Subsections (1) through (4) herein shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(6)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by Subsections (1) through (5) herein, the Building Inspector shall reasonably interpret the district boundaries, subject to appeal to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
(Prior code 6-4-2) 
Sec. 16-4-30. - Application of district regulations. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, the regulations set by this Chapter within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly and particularly to each class or kind of land and structure. 
(b)  Except as provided in Article XIV of this Chapter, no structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be constructed, unless in conformity with all of the regulations of this Chapter. 
(c)  No part of a yard or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any structure for the purpose of complying with this Chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other structure. 
(d)  No yard or lot shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the initial ordinance codified herein shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Chapter. 
(e)  All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City shall be zoned following the procedures outlined in Section 31-12-101, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-4-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE V - R-1, 21/2-Acre Residential District 

Sec. 16-5-10. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 District: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings: single-family dwellings, provided that short-term rental of a single-family dwelling unit shall be prohibited. Solicitation, advertising or rental of a single-family dwelling unit for the purpose of holding a party, special event, social gathering, wedding or similar use shall be considered a commercial use of the property and is prohibited. 
(2)  Agriculture: agricultural, including nurseries, raising of livestock and poultry, and orchards, provided that no such agricultural use shall be permitted if offensive or injurious because of odor, noise or other nuisances. The normal odors, noises and other side effects of animal keeping shall not be considered nuisances except as provided in Chapter 7, Article II of this Code. Commercial activities such as greenhouses, nurseries, fur farms, truck gardens, farms operated for the disposal of garbage, animal kennels or stables, shall not be permitted; except that a maximum of two (2) horses, not owned by the resident of the involved property, may be boarded and stabled on that property, without such boarding and stabling being regarded as a commercial activity. 
(3)  Nonprofit institutions: nonprofit institutions, provided that such use may be approved, expanded or increased only in accordance with Article XIX of this Chapter, and further provided that: 
a.  No such institution shall maintain any facility for the repose of human remains other than a noncommercial facility located entirely inside the general perimeter of the principal structure of such institution and limited to the ashes of cremated persons; and 
b.  No such school, or such church or other place of worship, shall regularly conduct or permit on its premises activity of a commercial nature and not of essentially educational or religious character, whether or not a fee or admission is charged for participation in or attendance at such activity. 
(4)  Water containment: wells, filter beds, irrigation canals, water supply tanks (other than elevated water tanks) and flood control reservoirs. 
(5)  Utility stations: electric substations, gas regulator stations and water or sewerage pumping stations, provided that no public business office and no repair or storage facilities are maintained, and further provided that such stations are attractively designed, constructed and maintained and include appropriate screen planting and maintenance thereof to fit the character of the district. Plans for construction of structures for such uses shall be approved (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld) by the City Council, with the advice of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(6)  Recreational paths: recreational paths. 
(7)  Accessory structures: accessory structures or uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that no such use shall be permitted if offensive or injurious because of odor, noise or other nuisance. Outside toilets or water closets are prohibited. 
(8)  Home occupations (limitations on permitted home occupations): any home occupation operated in a single-unit dwelling may be operated only if it complies with all of the following conditions: 
a.  The home occupation is operated in its entirety within the single-unit dwelling and only by the persons maintaining a dwelling therein. 
b.  The home occupation does not have an exclusive entrance from outside the dwelling unit. 
c.  The home occupation does not display or create outside the building any external evidence of the operation of the home occupation except that one (1) sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, nonilluminated, and mounted on the wall of the principal structure, is permitted. 
d.  The home occupation does not have any employees or regular assistants not residing in the single-unit dwelling. 
e.  The home occupation is not conducted in an accessory structure. 
f.  No article may be sold or offered for sale from the premises. This restriction shall not apply to occasional garage sales, the sale of a single used car, the sale of a litter of animals and other similarly noncontinuous and nonrepeated transactions. 
(9)  Satellite dish antennas: antennas that are one (1) meter or less in diameter or equivalent, as determined by the Community Development Director, subject to all requirements of Subsections 16-16-150(a) through (c) of this Chapter. Antennas between one (1) and four (4) meters in diameter, [subject to all requirements of Section 16-16-150] and the following: 
a.  A maximum of three (3) wall- or roof-mounted antennas shall be allowed per lot. 
b.  Stand-alone antennas shall be considered accessory structures, subject to the permitted number of accessory structures for the applicable zone district. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-5-1; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 12, 1985; Ord. 7, 1992; Ord. 13, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 19 1, 2010; Ord. 9 2, 2012) 
Sec. 16-5-20. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in the R-1 District: guardhouse; wireless communication facilities; satellite dish antennas that exceed the number and size limitations set forth in Paragraph 16-5-10(9) above. 
(Prior code 6-5-1-1; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 08 1, 2007; Ord. 19 2, 2010) 
Sec. 16-5-30. - Area and dimensional requirements. 
(a)  Height regulations. No structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height as measured from the natural grade at the midpoint of the structure to the highest point of the roof surface. In addition, no structure shall have more than two (2) floors above finished grade; provided however, that a walk-out basement shall not be counted as a floor for the purpose of this restriction. No structure shall be less than one (1) story above the ground except swimming pools, tennis courts and similar structures. Chimneys may be built to a height of five (5) feet above the highest point of the roof. This Section with respect to chimneys and antennas shall apply only to structures installed or constructed subsequent to March 15, 1994, the date of amendment of this Section. 
(b)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area is two and one-half (21/2) acres (such area may include adjoining public rights-of-way to the centerlines, but such measurement shall not exceed thirty [30] feet from the property line and shall not include the Highline Canal or other irrigation canals under separate ownership). Lots of record at the time the thirty-foot right-of-way restriction was added shall not become nonconforming. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements. 
Dwellings Public Buildings Minimum front yard 75 feet 200 feet Minimum side yard 50 feet 200 feet Minimum rear yard 50 feet 200 feet  
(d)  Minimum dwelling area. The ground floor area of a dwelling hereafter constructed shall not be less than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet measured on the outside walls; and no more than two hundred (200) square feet of the aggregate area of an attached garage and other attached accessory structures may be included in such area. The area included within breezeways, carports or other structures not completely enclosed by walls shall not be included in computing the area of any such dwelling. 
(e)  Bulk plane. No structure shall exceed the bulk plane requirements set forth in Section 16-16-180 of this Chapter. 
(f)  Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The above grade floor area on a lot shall not exceed the maximum floor area ratio set forth in Section 16-16-190 of this Chapter. 
(g)  Accessory structures. 
(1)  Only three (3) accessory structures and/or recreational uses shall be permitted. The total area of all the accessory structures shall not exceed one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet as set forth in Subsection (d) above. No accessory structure and/or recreational use shall be constructed within seventy-five (75) feet of the front lot line or twenty-five (25) feet of any rear lot line or side lot line. 
(2)  If the legal lot size for a parcel of land is five (5) acres or larger, said lot shall be entitled to accessory structures and square footage as set forth in the table below: 
Minimum Lot Area Number of Structures Allowed Maximum Square Footage Allowed 5 acres 4 1,800 10 acres 5 2,250 15 acres 6 2,700 20 acres 7 3,150  
(h)  Yards. For plats hereafter approved, in the case of lots bordering on two (2) or more streets, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall select the side which is to be the front yard. The Building Inspector shall select the front yard on such lots in existing subdivisions. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-5-2; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 12, 1985; Ord. 3, 1991; Ord. 3, 1994; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 9 3, 2011) 
ARTICLE VI - R-2, 11/4-Acre Residential District 

Sec. 16-6-10. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 District: any use permitted in the R-1, 21/2-Acre Residential District. 
(Prior code 6-6-1-1; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-6-20. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in the R-2 District: guardhouse; wireless communication facilities; satellite dish antennas that exceed the number and size limitations set forth in Paragraph 16-5-10(9) of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 6-6-1-1; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 08 2, 2007; Ord. 19 3, 2010) 
Sec. 16-6-30. - Area and dimensional requirements. 
(a)  Height regulations. The height regulations of the R-1, 21/2-Acre Residential District in Subsection 16-5-30(a) of this Chapter shall apply to this District. 
(b)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area is one and one-quarter (11/4) acres (such area may include adjoining public rights-of-way to the centerlines, but such measurement shall not exceed thirty [30] feet from the property line and shall not include the Highline Canal or other irrigation canals under separate ownership). Lots of record at the time the thirty-foot right-of-way restriction was added shall not become nonconforming. The height regulations of the R-1, 21/2-Acre Residential District shall apply to this District. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements. 
Dwellings Public Buildings Minimum front yard 75 feet 200 feet Minimum side yard 40 feet 200 feet Minimum rear yard 40 feet 200 feet  
(d)  Minimum dwelling area. The ground floor area of a dwelling hereafter constructed shall not be less than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet measured on the outside walls; and no more than two hundred (200) square feet of the aggregate area of an attached garage and other attached accessory structures may be included in such area. The area included within breezeways, carports or other structures not completely enclosed by walls shall not be included in computing the area of any such dwelling. 
(e)  Bulk Plane. No structure shall exceed the bulk plane requirements set forth in Section 16-16-180 of this Chapter. 
(f)  Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The above grade floor area on a lot shall not exceed the maximum floor area ratio set forth in Section 16-16-190 of this Chapter. 
(g)  Accessory structures. Only three (3) accessory structures and/or recreational uses shall be permitted. The total area of all the accessory structures shall not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet as set forth in Subsection (c) above. No accessory structure and/or recreational use shall be constructed within seventy-five (75) feet of the front lot line or twenty-five (25) feet of any rear lot line or side lot line. 
(h)  Yards. For plats hereafter approved, in the case of lots bordering on two (2) or more streets, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall select the side which is to be the front yard. The Building Inspector shall select the front yard on such lots in existing subdivisions. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-6-2; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 12, 1985; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 9 3, 2011) 
ARTICLE VII - R-3, 1-Acre Residential District 

Sec. 16-7-10. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the R-3 District: any use permitted in the R-1, 21/2-Acre Residential District. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-7-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-7-20. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in the R-3 District: guardhouse; wireless communication facilities; satellite dish antennas that exceed the number and size limitations set forth in Paragraph 16-5-10(9) of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 6-7-1-1; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 08 3, 2007; Ord. 19 4, 2010) 
Sec. 16-7-30. - Area and dimensional requirements. 
(a)  Height regulations. The height regulations of the R-1, 21/2-Acre Residential District in Subsection 16-5-30(a) of this Chapter shall apply to this District. 
(b)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area is one (1) acre (such area may include adjoining public rights-of-way to the centerlines, but such measurement shall not exceed thirty [30] feet from the property line and shall not include the Highline Canal or other irrigation canals under separate ownership). Lots of record at the time the thirty-foot right-of-way restriction was added shall not become nonconforming. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements: 
Dwellings Public Buildings Minimum front yard 50 feet 200 feet Minimum side yard 25 feet 200 feet Minimum rear yard 25 feet 200 feet  
(d)  Minimum dwelling area: The ground floor area of a dwelling hereafter constructed shall not be less than one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet measured on the outside walls; and no more than two hundred (200) square feet of the aggregate area of an attached garage and other attached accessory structures may be included in such area. The area included within breezeways, carports or other structures not completely enclosed by walls shall not be included in computing the area of any such dwelling. 
(e)  Bulk Plane. No structure shall exceed the bulk plane requirements set forth in Section 16-16-180 of this Chapter. 
(f)  Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The above grade floor area on a lot shall not exceed the maximum floor area ratio set forth in Section 16-16-190 of this Chapter. 
(g)  Accessory structures: Only three (3) accessory structures and/or recreational uses shall be permitted. The total area of all the accessory structures shall not exceed six hundred fifty (650) square feet as set forth in Subsection (c) above. No accessory structure and/or recreational use shall be constructed within fifty (50) feet of the front lot line or twenty-five (25) feet of any rear lot line or side lot line. 
(h)  Yards. For plats hereafter approved, in the case of lots bordering on two (2) or more streets, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall select the side which is to be the front yard. The Building Inspector shall select the front yard on such lots in existing subdivisions. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-7-2; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 12, 1985; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 9 3, 2011) 
ARTICLE VIII - R-3A, Variable Lot Residential District 

Sec. 16-8-10. - Permitted and interim uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the R-3A District: Any use permitted in the R-1, 21/2-Acre Residential District except churches, schools and agriculture. 
(b)  Interim uses. If a parcel is currently being used for agricultural crops or grazing, the use may continue up to a period of one (1) year from the final plat approval or to the point that construction commences unless otherwise extended by City Council. 
(Prior code 6-11-1; Ord. 1, 1996; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-8-20. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in the R-3A District: guardhouse; wireless communication facilities; satellite dish antennas that exceed the number and size limitations set forth in Paragraph 16-5-10(9) of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 6-11-1-1; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 08 4, 2007; Ord. 19 5, 2010) 
Sec. 16-8-30. - Eligibility for R-3A zoning. 
    To be eligible for R-3A zoning, the land must meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The land shall consist of a minimum of forty (40) contiguous acres; or a minimum of twenty-five (25) contiguous acres including credit toward minimum lot size for adjoining rights-of-way; and 
(2)  At the time of application for rezoning to R-3A, the land shall be zoned in a classification that allows single-family residential use in minimum lot sizes smaller than one (1) acre; allows use as a residential and resort hotel; or consists primarily of lots that have been determined by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, under Section 16-14-10 of this Chapter, to be legally nonconforming lots smaller than one (1) acre, provided that in no case shall more than one (1) residence previously have been constructed on land within the contiguous acreage proposed for zoning as R-3A. 
(Prior code 6-11-2; Ord. 1, 1996; Ord. 4, 1997) 
Sec. 16-8-40. - Density. 
    Maximum gross site density shall not exceed one and one-half (11/2) single-family dwelling units per acre, exclusive of any adjacent rights-of-way outside of the R-3A Zone District. 
(Prior code 6-11-3; Ord. 1, 1996) 
Sec. 16-8-50. - Lot area. 
    Lot areas may vary in size, but the minimum lot area shall be sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet net lot area (not including adjoining public rights-of-way to the centerlines thereof, or the Highline Canal or other irrigation canals under separate ownership). In determining the size of a proposed lot other than the sixteen-thousand-square-foot lot, the area of the lot may include adjoining public rights-of-way to the centerlines, but the measurement shall not exceed thirty (30) feet from the property line, and the right-of-way area shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total gross lot area. 
(Prior code 6-11-4; Ord. 1, 1996) 
Sec. 16-8-60. - Height. 
    The thirty-foot height regulations of the R-1, 21/2-Acre Residential District shall apply. 
(Prior code 6-11-5; Ord. 1, 1996) 
Sec. 16-8-70. - Yard requirements. 
    The following setbacks and yard requirements shall apply: 
Minimum Lot Area Front Setback Side Setback Rear Setback Lot Coverage 1 21/2 acres 75 feet 50 feet 50 feet 20 percent 11/4 acres 75 feet 40 feet 40 feet 20 percent 1 acre 50 feet 25 feet 25 feet 20 percent 1/2 acre 25 feet Total 30 feet minimum 15 feet 25 feet 30 percent 16,000 square feet 25 feet Total 15 feet (zero lot line allowed) 25 feet 30 percent  
1 Lot coverage delineates the percent of the lot which may be covered by the primary structure. 
(Prior code 6-11-7; Ord. 1, 1996) 
Sec. 16-8-80. - Buffer requirement. 
(a)  An R-3A lot, any portion of which is within one hundred (100) feet of existing platted lots of a larger minimum lot size than the proposed R-3A lot, shall be separated from the adjoining lots by a one-hundred-foot buffer area which may be credited as setback. 
(b)  An R-3A lot, any portion of which is within fifty (50) feet of unplatted residential zone districts that require a larger minimum lot size than the proposed R-3A lot, shall be separated from the adjoining zone district by a fifty-foot buffer area which may be credited as setback. 
(c)  R-3A lots which are adjacent to public rights-of-way existing at the time of adoption of the initial ordinance codified herein shall provide a buffer of at least fifty (50) feet adjacent to said public right-of-way. 
(d)  Uses within buffers in the R-3A, Variable Lot Residential District: 
(1)  One-hundred-foot buffers pursuant to Subsection (a) above and fifty-foot buffers pursuant to Subsection (c) above: Uses within these buffers are limited to a permanent landscaped area which may include landscape amenities such as trees, plants and trails. These buffer areas must be free of all other improvements, buildings or structures. 
(2)  Fifty-foot buffers pursuant to Subsection (b) above: Uses within this buffer are limited to landscape amenities (such as trees, plants and trails), fences, walls, driveways, patios and decks. This buffer must be free of all other improvements, buildings and structures. 
(e)  Buffer requirements shall not apply where property in a neighboring residential zone district, platted or unplatted, is in use, at the time of platting of the R-3A lots, as, or in conjunction with operation of, a church or school, or where the adjacent public rights-of-way border property in use, at the time of platting, as, or in conjunction with the operation of, a church or school. 
(f)  A buffer established pursuant to Subsection (c) above may be removed in accordance with the procedures outlined in Chapter 17, Article III, Division 4 of this Code, unless such buffer was used as a credit against the land dedication requirements at the time of final platting. Such buffer removal request shall be made by all property owners within the subdivision that are subject to the buffer and accompanied by written approval of the request by all property owners contiguous to the entire length of the buffer being removed. 
(g)  Removal of a buffer established pursuant to Subsection (c) above shall not be deemed to change the building envelope for any lot as originally established with said buffer. 
(Prior code 6-11-8; Ord. 1, 1996; Ord. 4, 1997; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 1 1, 2010; Ord. 7 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-8-90. - Accessory structures. 
    The following limitations on accessory and/or recreational structures shall apply: 
Minimum Lot
Area Number of
Structures Area of
Structures Front Setback Side Setback Rear Setback 21/2 acres 3 1,100 square feet 75 feet 25 feet 25 feet 11/4 acres 3 750 square feet 75 feet 25 feet 25 feet 1 acre 3 650 square feet 50 feet 25 feet 25 feet 1/2 acre 3 500 square feet 25 feet 15 feet 15 feet 16,000 square feet 2 500 square feet 25 feet 7.5 feet (zero lot line allowed) 7.5 feet  
(Prior code 6-11-9; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 11 1, 2009) 
Sec. 16-8-100. - Relationship to subdivision. 
    All contiguous property within an R-3A District must be comprehensively and concurrently subdivided in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the City contained in Chapter 17 of this Code. 
(Prior code 6-11-10; Ord. 1, 1996; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE IX - R-4, 1/2-Acre Residential District 

Sec. 16-9-10. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the R-4 District: any use permitted in an R-1, 21/2-Acre Residential District except agriculture. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-8-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-9-20. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in the R-4 District: guardhouse; wireless communication facilities; satellite dish antennas that exceed the number and size limitations set forth in Paragraph 16-5-10(9) of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 6-8-1-1; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 08 5, 2007; Ord. 19 6, 2010) 
Sec. 16-9-30. - Area and dimensional requirements. 
(a)  Height regulations. No structure shall exceed thirty (30) feet in height as measured from the natural grade at the midpoint of the structure to the highest point of the roof surface. In addition, no structure shall have more than two (2) floors above finished grade; provided however, that a walk-out basement shall not be counted as a floor for the purpose of this restriction. No structure shall be less than one (1) story above the ground except swimming pools, tennis courts and similar structures. Chimneys may be built to a height of five (5) feet above the highest point of the roof. This Section with respect to chimneys and antennas shall apply only to structures installed or constructed subsequent to March 15, 1994, the date of amendment of this Section. 
(b)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area is one-half (1/2) acre (such area may include adjoining public rights-of-way to the centerlines, but such measurement shall not exceed thirty [30] feet from the property line, and shall not include the Highline Canal or other irrigation canals under separate ownership). Lots of record at the time the thirty-foot right-of-way restriction was added shall not become nonconforming. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements. 
Dwellings Public Buildings Minimum front yard 25 feet 200 feet Minimum side yard Sum of 2 side yards at least 30 feet; no individual side yard less than 10 feet 200 feet Minimum rear yard 25 feet 200 feet  
(d)  Minimum dwelling area. The ground floor area of a dwelling hereafter constructed shall not be less than one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet measured on the outside walls; and no more than two hundred (200) square feet of the aggregate area of an attached garage and other attached accessory structures may be included in such area. The area included within breezeways, carports or other structures not completely enclosed by walls shall not be included in computing the area of any such dwelling. 
(e)  Bulk Plane. No structure shall exceed the bulk plane requirements set forth in Section 16-16-180 of this Chapter. 
(f)  Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The above grade floor area on a lot shall not exceed the maximum floor area ratio set forth in Section 16-16-190 of this Chapter. 
(g)  Accessory structures. Only two (2) accessory structures and/or recreational uses shall be permitted. The total area of all the accessory structures shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet as set forth in Subsection (c) above. No accessory structure and/or recreational use shall be constructed within twenty-five (25) feet of the front lot line or fifteen (15) feet of any rear lot line or side lot line. 
(h)  Yards. For plats hereafter approved in the case of lots bordering on two (2) or more streets, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall select the side which is to be the front yard. The Building Inspector shall select the front yard on such lots in existing subdivisions. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-8-2; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 12, 1985; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 11 2, 2009; Ord. 9 3, 2011) 
ARTICLE X - R-5, 16,000-Square-Foot Residential District 

Sec. 16-10-10. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the R-5 District: any use permitted in the R-1, 21/2-Acre Residential District except agriculture. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-9-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-10-20. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in the R-5 District: guardhouse; wireless communication facilities; satellite dish antennas that exceed the number and size limitations set forth in Paragraph 16-5-10(9) of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 6-9-1-1; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 08 6, 2007; Ord. 19 7, 2010) 
Sec. 16-10-30. - Area and dimensional requirements. 
(a)  Height regulations. The height regulations of the R-4, 1/2-Acre Residential District in Subsection 16-9-30(a) of this Chapter shall apply to this District. 
(b)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area is sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet net lot area (not including adjoining public rights-of-way to the centerlines, or the Highline Canal or other irrigation canals under separate ownership). 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements. 
Dwellings Public Buildings Minimum front yard 25 feet 200 feet Minimum side yard Sum of 2 side yards at least 15 feet; no individual side yard less than 71/2 feet 200 feet Minimum rear yard 25 feet 200 feet  
(d)  Minimum dwelling area. The ground floor area of a dwelling hereafter constructed shall not be less than one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet measured on the outside walls. No more than two hundred (200) square feet of the aggregate area of an attached garage and other attached accessory structures may be included in such area. The area included within breezeways, carports or other structures not completely enclosed by walls shall not be included in computing the area of any such dwelling. 
(e)  Bulk Plane. No structure shall exceed the bulk plane requirements set forth in Section 16-16-180 of this Chapter. 
(f)  Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The above grade floor area on a lot shall not exceed the maximum floor area ratio set forth in Section 16-16-190 of this Chapter. 
(g)  Accessory structures. Only two (2) accessory structures and/or recreational uses shall be permitted. The total area of all the accessory structures shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet as set forth in Subsection (c) above. No accessory structure and/or recreational use shall be constructed within twenty-five (25) feet of the front lot line or seven and one-half (71/2) feet of any rear lot line or side lot line. 
(h)  Yards. For plats hereafter approved, in the case of lots bordering on two (2) or more streets, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall select the side which is to be the front yard. The Building Inspector shall select the front yard on such lots in existing subdivisions. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-9-2; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 9 3, 2011) 
Article XI - O-1 and O-2, Open Space Districts[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 6 1, adopted August 16, 2016, repealed former art. XI,  16-11-10-16-11-40 and enacted a new Art. XI,  16-11-10-16-11-40 and 16-11-110-16-11-130. Former art. XI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Prior code 6-10-1; Ord. 17, adopted in 2000; Ord. 9, adopted in 2003; Ord. 08, adopted in 2007; and Ord. 2, adopted in 2012. 

Division 1 - O-1: Open Space, Park and Recreation Area District 

Sec. 16-11-10. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the O-1 District: 
(1)  Unimproved open space. 
(2)  Bridle and pedestrian paths. 
(3)  Growing and preservation of trees and other nursery stock. 
(4)  Protection of watercourses and watersheds from erosion and floods. 
(Ord. 6 1, 2016) 
Sec. 16-11-20. - Uses permitted as special exceptions. 
    The following uses are permitted as special exceptions by the City Council, provided that such uses may be approved, expanded or increased only in accordance with Article XX of this Chapter: 
(1)  Private clubs. 
(2)  Public and nonprofit recreational facilities. 
(3)  Grazing of livestock, provided that no such use shall be permitted if offensive or injurious because of odor, noise or other nuisance. 
(4)  Irrigation canals, lakes and similar uses. 
(Ord. 6 1, 2016) 
Sec. 16-11-30. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in the O-1 District: wireless communication facilities. 
(Ord. 6 1, 2016) 
Sec. 16-11-40. - Area and dimensional requirements. 
    Requirements specified in Subsections 16-5-30(a) through (f) of this Chapter shall apply to the O-1 Open Space, Park and Recreation Area District. 
(Ord. 6 1, 2016) 
Division 2 - O-2: Open Space, Conservation and Historic Area District 

Sec. 16-11-110. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this Article is to establish a new zoning district that promotes conservation values and historic preservation of properties owned or leased by the City and provides for development, maintenance and operation of such properties consistent with the Master Plan and semi-rural character of Cherry Hills Village. 
(Ord. 6 1, 2016) 
Sec. 16-11-120. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the O-2 District: 
(1)  Unimproved open space and wildlife habitat. 
(2)  Bridle and pedestrian paths and trails. 
(3)  Irrigation canals, ponds and similar uses. 
(4)  Agricultural uses and facilities, including conservation of agricultural resources and structures, and equestrian uses and facilities, when operated by a nonprofit entity, including keeping, raising and boarding livestock and horses. 
(5)  Single-family dwellings and caretaker's dwellings associated with historic use of properties or maintenance operations of properties. 
(6)  Community, educational, cultural and recreational facilities and activities. 
(7)  Museums, public libraries and galleries when operated by a nonprofit entity. 
(8)  Government and nonprofit offices. 
(Ord. 6 1, 2016) 
Sec. 16-11-130. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in the O-2 District: wireless communication facilities. 
(Ord. 6 1, 2016) 
ARTICLE XII - C-1, Community District 

Sec. 16-12-10. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the C-1 District: 
(1)  Governmental (including special district) structures. 
(2)  Public libraries and museums when not operated for profit. 
(3)  Post office. 
(4)  Churches, as defined in Section 16-1-10 and further defined and restricted in Subsection 16-5-10(3) of this Chapter 
(5)  Satellite dish antennas: antennas that are one (1) meter or less in diameter or equivalent, as determined by the Community Development Director, or up to three (3) antennas between one (1) and four (4) meters in diameter. All satellite dish antennas shall meet all requirements of Subsections 16-16-150(a) through (c) of this Chapter. Satellite dish antennas more than one (1) meter in diameter shall additionally meet all requirements of Subsections 16-16-150(d) and (e) of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-12-1; Ord. 12, 1987; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 19 8, 2010) 
Sec. 16-12-20. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in the C-1 District: wireless communication facilities; satellite dish antennas that exceed the number and size limitations set forth in Paragraph 16-12-10(5) above. 
(Ord. 08 8, 2007; Ord. 19 9, 2010) 
Sec. 16-12-30. - Height regulations. 
(a)  No structure shall be less than one (1) story above the ground, nor shall it exceed thirty (30) feet in height measured from the natural grade at the midpoint of the structure to the highest point of the roof surface. 
(b)  Radio and television antennas may be built to a reasonable height not to exceed fifty (50) feet above the ground measured vertically. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-12-2; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 08 8, 16, 2007) 
Sec. 16-12-40. - Minimum lot area and yard requirements. 
(a)  Minimum lot area. One (1) acre (such area may include adjoining public rights-of-way to the centerlines, but such measurement shall not exceed thirty [30] feet from the property line and shall not include the Highline Canal or other irrigation canals under separate ownership). Lots of record at the time the thirty-foot right-of-way restriction was added shall not become nonconforming. 
(b)  Minimum yard requirements. No structure shall be located less than fifty (50) feet from any street line or less than twenty (20) feet from any nonstreet property line. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-12-3; Ord. 12, 1985; Ord. 08 8, 2007) 
ARTICLE XIII - C-2, Limited Commercial District 

Sec. 16-13-10. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the C-2 District: 
(1)  Office structures. 
(2)  Medical and dental clinics. 
(3)  Satellite dish antennas: antennas that are one (1) meter or less in diameter or equivalent, as determined by the Community Development Director, or up to three (3) antennas between one (1) and four (4) meters in diameter. All satellite dish antennas shall meet all requirements of Subsections 16-16-150(a) through (c) of this Chapter. Satellite dish antennas more than one (1) meter in diameter shall additionally meet all requirements of Subsections 16-16-150(d) and (e) of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 6-13-1; Ord. 1, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 19 10, 2010) 
Sec. 16-13-20. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses in the C-2 District: retail uses (the provisions and procedures relating to conditional uses found in Article XVIII of this Chapter shall supply); wireless communication facilities; satellite dish antennas that exceed the number and size limitations set forth in Paragraph 16-13-10(3) above. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; Prior code 6-13-2; Ord. 1, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 08 9, 2007; Ord. 19 11, 2010) 
Sec. 16-13-30. - Height regulations and minimum yard requirements. 
(a)  Height regulations. No structure shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height measured from the natural grade at the midpoint of the structure to the highest point of the roof surface. No structure shall be less than one (1) story above the ground. Chimneys and roof-mounted mechanical equipment may be built to a height of five (5) feet above the highest point of the roof. 
(b)  Minimum yard requirements. No structure shall be located less than ten (10) feet from any property line. New construction shall maintain a setback of twenty-eight (28) feet from the back of the curb adjacent to Hampden Avenue (U.S. 285). 
(Prior code 6-13-3; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 1, 2002; Ord. 08 17, 2007) 
ARTICLE XIV - Nonconforming Provisions 

Sec. 16-14-10. - General. 
(a)  Purposes. The purpose of this Article is to provide for the control, improvement and termination of uses or structures which do not conform to the regulations of this Chapter for the district in which they are located. The protection afforded owners of property under this Article exists only in order to permit the continuance of a legal non-conforming use of land, structure or lot to the extent necessary to safeguard the investment of the property owner. The specific purposes of requiring certification and licensure of legal non-conforming short term rental use of properties are to: (1) ensure the safety of guests and occupants of short term rental properties through compliance with building code requirements applicable to transient residential occupancy; (2) maintain the stability of the rural, residential character of the City; and (3) mitigate the negative effects that short term rentals pose within residential neighborhoods in terms of trash, parking and noise issues. 
(b)  Application. Subject to the provisions of this Article, any use of land, structure, or lot which does not meet the requirements of this Chapter shall be lawful only if one or more of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The use of land was legally established and maintained at the time of adoption of the initial ordinance codified herein or of any amendment causing nonconformance, thereby constituting a non-conforming use. For purposes of this section, "legally established and maintained" means compliance with each of the following criteria: (i) the use of land was, at time of commencement in compliance with all applicable federal, state and City regulations; (ii) the financial investment in the use or property improvements must be of a substantial nature so as to warrant protection under this Article; (iii) the use is not accessory to the primary or principle use; and (iv) the use of property is determined to be legally established and maintained by City administrative certification as set forth in subsection (d) of this Section 16-14-10. The casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or structures shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a non-conforming use. The existence of a non-conforming use on a portion of a lot or parcel of land shall not be construed to establish a non-conforming use on the entire lot or parcel of land. 
(2)  Any structure or portion of a structure which was not legally established and maintained but has existed unmodified for more than twenty (20) years; or 
(3)  Any lot which was not so legally established but on which a residence was located prior to September 6, 1987. 
(c)  Burden of proof. In any administrative or judicial proceeding wherein it is claimed that a structure, lot or use is allowed as a non-conforming use, the party asserting that such non-conforming status exists shall have the burden of providing proof of the same by a preponderance of the evidence. Evidence of legal non-conforming use shall show that the criteria in subsection (b) (1) above have been met and may include the following: approved permits, copies of applicable zoning, building or other code provisions in effect at the time of establishment of legal nonconformity; leases; and verified affidavits of persons with personal knowledge of the circumstances of the use. 
(d)  Non-conforming use certification. To establish a legal non-conforming use, the owner or designated representative of the owner must apply for and obtain a non-conforming use certification from the Community Development Director. The application for legal non-conforming certification shall include: (1) proof of ownership of the property; (2) evidence of reasonable financial investment in the improvements on the property necessary to operate the claimed non-conforming use; (3) narrative explanation of the claimed non-conformity; (4) documentation of the date that the use/activity commenced and evidence of continuous operation for each successive year; (5) any judicial determinations affirming legal non-conforming use status; and (6) a site plan including boundaries of the property, total area of the property, use and dimensions of all existing buildings and structures including setbacks, dimensioned parking lay-out, north arrow and scale, and precise location and limits of use to be certified. The Community Development Director shall deny any certification if it appears that the evidence presented does not show the existence of a prior legal non-conforming use by a preponderance of the evidence in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection (b) (1) above. Any certification issued by the Community Development Director shall include a detailed description of the specific use constituting a non-conforming use for the property. 
(Prior code 6-14-1; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 4 2, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-14-20. - Nonconforming lots. 
(a)  Building permits may be authorized for construction on lots that are lawful by virtue of having been legally established and maintained at the time of adoption of the initial ordinance codified herein or any amendment causing nonconformance, subject to all requirements of this Chapter. 
(b)  No lot may be subdivided or reduced in size in such a way that it would be or become nonconforming, or cause any structure, lot space or use to be or become nonconforming. No permit shall be issued for any property or lot created by such a subdivision or reduction in violation of this Subsection. 
(Prior code 6-14-2; Ord. 3, 1999; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 5 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-14-30. - Alterations or expansions to structures containing nonconforming uses. 
    No structure, conforming or nonconforming, containing a nonconforming use shall be structurally altered or expanded in any way that would increase the degree or area of the nonconforming use. The following changes or alterations may be made without the approval of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals to a structure, conforming or nonconforming, containing a nonconforming use: 
(1)  Repair to a structure that is ordered by any authorized public official to make it safe; 
(2)  Maintenance repairs needed to keep the structure in good condition; and 
(3)  Any structural alteration that would reduce the degree or area of the nonconforming use or that would change the use to a conforming one. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-14-3) 
Sec. 16-14-40. - Alterations or expansions to nonconforming structures containing conforming uses. 
    A nonconforming structure containing a conforming use may be structurally altered or expanded without approval of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals if the alteration is contained entirely within the building envelope of the lot, or the alteration is limited to an interior remodel or maintenance repairs needed to keep the structure in good condition, and all alterations otherwise meet the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 6-14-4; Ord. 12, 2000) 
Sec. 16-14-50. - Restoration of damaged nonconforming structure or structure containing a nonconforming use. 
    Any structure containing a nonconforming use that is destroyed by fire or any other cause to the extent of more than seventy-five percent (75%) of its replacement cost on the date of destruction may not be reconstructed except as a conforming structure and conforming use. If less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the replacement cost of a structure containing a nonconforming use, or any portion of a nonconforming structure, is destroyed, the structure may be reconstructed, but not so as to extend or expand the nonconforming use or the nonconforming portion of the nonconforming structure. 
(Prior code 6-14-5; Ord. 12, 2000) 
Sec. 16-14-60. - Discontinuance of nonconforming use. 
    No land or structure or portion thereof used in whole or in part for a non-conforming use that remains idle or unused for a continuous period of six (6) months, whether or not any equipment, fixtures, improvements or facilities are maintained, shall again be used except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which such land or structure is located. 
    A certification of non-conforming use issued by the Community Development Director shall be invalid and void in the event that a certified non-conforming use is discontinued for a continuous period of six (6) months. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-14-6; Ord. 4 3, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-14-70. - No change or expansion of nonconforming use, structures. 
(a)  A non-conforming use may be maintained and continued, provided there is no expansion in the area or volume occupied or devoted to such non-conforming use, and further provided there is no increase in intensity of such non-conforming use except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  A non-conforming use of land or of a structure shall not be changed to another non-conforming use, except with the approval of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals, in granting or denying such an application or in conditioning approval of such application, shall consider the degree of incompatibility of the present and proposed uses, the interests of the applicant and of neighboring property owners and the objectives of the City's Master Plan and this chapter. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-14-7; Ord. 4 4, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-14-80. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Maintenance. Except as provided in Subsection (b) below, any nonconforming sign in any district may be maintained, so long as such sign is kept in a state of good repair and is not relocated, replaced or structurally altered. 
(b)  Removal. Any sign in any residential district that is nonconforming for any reason must conform with this Chapter within five (5) years after passage of the initial ordinance codified herein, or shall be removed. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-14-8) 
Sec. 16-14-90. - Legal nonconforming short-term rental of a single-family dwelling. 
(a)  General requirements. Any short term rental of a single family dwelling seeking certification as a non-conforming use and operating within the City shall comply with the requirements in this Section. 
(b)  Certification. The owner of property operated as a short term rental must submit an application to the Community Development Director for legal non-conforming use certification as set forth in Section 16-14-10(d) above within sixty (60) days of February 8, 2015. Any property owner may seek an extension of up to thirty additional days for submission of application upon good cause shown. 
(c)  License requirement. An annual short term rental license issued by the City is required to operate a legal non-conforming short term rental of a single family dwelling. Upon receiving a legal non-conforming use certification, an owner of a short term rental shall apply for a short term rental license and bring the property into compliance with all building code and licensing requirements set forth in this subsection (c) within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of certification of legal non-conforming use status. The Community Development Director may grant requests for extensions of time up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days to comply with such requirements upon a finding that the necessary improvements cannot be completed within the 180 days due to scope of improvements or other good cause shown by the owner. The following licensing requirements shall be met as a condition of license issuance and continued operation of a certified non-conforming short term rental property within the City: 
(1)  The owner of the non-conforming short term rental shall provide the City with a copy of each short term rental lease at least five (5) business days in advance of the rental period, along with the information required in subsections (c)(10) and (c)(11) below. 
(2)  Unless otherwise further limited in the non-conforming use certification, the maximum number of overnight occupants for any short term rental period allowed shall not exceed the number of occupants that can be accommodated by the available off-street parking and shall not exceed two (2) occupants per bedroom up to a maximum of ten (10) occupants. 
(3)  All parking shall occur off-street on a paved driveway or in a garage. There shall be a minimum of one (1) parking space per bedroom. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in the City building code, single family dwellings used for short term rentals shall be considered a "Residential Group R-3 Boarding House" occupancy due to the transient nature of occupancy and shall be subject to applicable building code regulations adopted by the City, as may be amended. The structure and the property shall be brought into compliance for Residential Group R-3 Boarding House occupancy under the International Building Code, as adopted by the City, except that Chapter 13, entitled Energy Efficiency, Chapter 14, entitled Exterior Walls, and Chapter 16, entitled Structural Design, of the International Building Code shall not apply, as a condition of issuance of a license to operate a legal non-conforming short term rental use. 
(5)  By operating short term rentals of a single family dwelling, the owner agrees to authorize, at a minimum, annual on-site inspections by appropriate building, fire and zoning officials to ensure compliance with these licensing requirements. 
(6)  Properties and structures in which short term rentals occur shall comply with all applicable City ordinances and regulations including but not limited to zoning, noise, nuisance, lighting and building codes. 
(7)  Short term rental properties shall not be altered to change the residential character or outside appearance of the property through the use of paint colors, materials, signage or lighting, or by the addition or alteration of accessory structures, recreational structures/uses or garages. 
(8)  Short term rentals shall have a designated local property manager that resides or is physically located within sixty (60) miles of the short term rental property and is available by phone twenty-four (24) hours a day to respond to tenant and neighborhood questions and concerns. The owner is required to provide to the City updated contact information of the local property manager, including address and telephone number. 
(9)  Solicitation, advertising or rental of a single family dwelling for the purpose of holding a party, special event, social gathering, wedding or similar use is prohibited. 
(10)  Prior to occupancy of each short-term rental of a single-family dwelling, the owner shall provide to the City's Community Development Department the name and home address of each occupant and relation of each occupant in order to confirm compliance with the City's definition of single family. Prior to occupancy, the owner shall also provide to the City a written acknowledgment signed by the primary adult occupant of the short term rental that such occupant: 
(i)  he or she is legally responsible for compliance by of all occupants of the short term rental or their guests with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the property; 
(ii)  shall cooperate with City officials to determine compliance with this section; and 
(iii)  shall provide identification of all occupants upon reasonable request of any City official. 
(11)  The owner shall provide the City with evidence of payment of all applicable taxes and fees, including applicable state sales tax for each period of short term rental use. 
(d)  Licensing Fees; Revocation. Application and licensing fees shall be set forth by City Council resolution. In accordance with the procedures set forth in Article I, Chapter 6 of the Municipal Code, the City may revoke a short term rental license if the owner, operator, tenants or guests of a short term rental property violate any provision of this Code or these licensing requirements. If a license is revoked, an owner or operator may not apply for a new license within 90 days of the effective date of revocation. 
(e)  Continued operation during certification and licensure. During the period in which the owner is actively seeking licensure for operating a short term rental, the owner shall be permitted to use the property for short term rentals pursuant to fully executed leases or rental agreements in effect as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section derived, provided that any such short term rental may not be relied on to assert that a legal non-conforming use is not discontinued in accordance with Section 16-14-60. 
(f)  Violation. It is unlawful for any person to use or allow the use of property in violation of this Section. Penalties for violations of this Section shall be as provided in Sections 16-2-60 and 1-4-20 of this Code. 
( Ord. 4 7, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-14-100. - Variances by Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit an applicant denied a building permit or relief under this Article from applying for a variance under the provisions of Sections 16-3-10 through 16-3-70 above. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-14-9, Ord. 4 5, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-14-110. - Fees. 
(a)  Persons applying for building permits or other consideration pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall pay for planning and engineering review services and other consultant fees, including, without limitation, legal fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City and made necessary as a result of said application. The applicant shall make an initial deposit into a non-interest-bearing escrow account held by the City at the time the application is filed with the City. The amount of this initial deposit shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). The City shall have the right and authority to make disbursements from said escrow account at its sole discretion to cover the City's cost for planning and engineering review services, attorney and other consultant fees, and other costs and expenses incurred with regard to said application. Any balances remaining in the escrow account following approval, denial or withdrawal of said application shall be returned to the applicant without interest. In the event said funds are exhausted before final disposition of said application, the applicant shall make a supplemental deposit to the escrow account in a reasonable amount to cover future costs and expenses as determined by the City Manager, based on past expenditures. Failure to make necessary supplemental deposits shall cause the application process to cease until the required deposits are made. The City Manager, with cause, may reduce the amount of the initial escrow deposit; however, the applicant shall remain responsible for the actual cost of the planning and engineering review services, and other consultant fees, including, without limitation, legal fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City. 
(b)  If the City incurs costs and expenses beyond the amount deposited with the City and the applicant does not pay those costs and expenses within ten (10) days after written notice from the City, then, in addition to the other remedies the City may have, the City shall be entitled to a lien on the property that is the subject of the application, or the City may elect to certify the assessed costs and expenses to the office of the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. Such lien shall be perfected and foreclosed upon in accordance with applicable state laws. Nothing herein shall authorize the City to charge the applicant for costs and expenses the City incurs as a result of litigating a matter against the applicant or against a third party. 
(Prior code 6-14-10; Ord. 8, 1998; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 21, 2004; Ord. 15 2, 2010; Ord. 4 6, 2015 ) 
ARTICLE XV - Signs and Outdoor Advertising Devices 

Sec. 16-15-10. - Sign Code generally. 
    This Article is intended to regulate the erection and maintenance of both permanent and temporary signs within the City. Subject to certain exemptions provided by this Article and for temporary signs, all permanent signs require the issuance of a permit from the City to ensure conformance with the standards of this Article. Temporary signs meeting all requirements of this Article are allowed without first obtaining a permit. Regardless of the permanent or temporary nature of the sign, certain signs specified by this Article are prohibited throughout the City. 
(Ord. 18 2, 2002) 
Sec. 16-15-20. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the following words have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building lot means any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record, that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purposes of transfer of ownership. 
    Commercial sign means a sign that identifies, advertises or directs attention to a business or is intended to induce the purchase of goods, property or service, including, without limitation, any sign naming a brand of goods or service and real estate signs, as further defined below. 
    Directional sign means a sign that directs the movement or placement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on a building lot. 
    Entry sign means a permanent sign located at a point of entry to a property from a public right-of-way. 
    Grade means the elevation of the ground at the common boundary line of the street right-of-way and the property closest to the location of the sign. 
    Ground sign means a sign supported by poles, uprights or braces extending from the ground or an object on the ground, but not attached to any part of any building. 
    Illuminated sign means a sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting, either by lights on or in the sign or directed toward the sign. 
    Nonconforming sign means a sign existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified herein which could not be built under the terms of this Article. 
    Permanent sign means a sign that is neither a temporary sign as defined by this Section nor a sign prohibited within the City by Section 16-15-30 below. 
    Post means to erect, attach or affix in any manner, including without limitation nailing, tacking, tying, taping, gluing, pasting, painting, staking, marking or writing. 
    Public right-of-way means the entire area between property boundaries: which is owned by a government, dedicated to public use or impressed with an easement for public use; which is primarily used for pedestrian or vehicular travel; and which is publicly maintained, in whole or in part, for such use; and includes without limitation the street, gutter, curb, shoulder, sidewalk, sidewalk area, parking or parking strip, planting strip and any public way. 
    Roof sign means any sign posted on or attached to or that extends or protrudes above the lowest elevation point of a roof, typically identified by the existence of a gutter, eave, overhang, soffit, parapet or other similar structural or building element. 
    Searchlights means any artificial light source used in a manner that attracts public attention or is intended to attract public attention by illuminating a building, use or activity, whether temporary or permanent. Searchlights do not include lawfully permitted or authorized lighting of parks, school or institutional playing fields or parking areas, provided that such lighting meets any illumination standards or requirements imposed by this Code. 
    Sight triangle means on a corner lot in any residential district, the triangular area bounded on two (2) sides by the edge of pavement lines and a line joining points along said lines fifty (50) feet from the point of the edge of pavement line intersection: 

Nothing shall be constructed, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and one-half (21/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the center line grades of the adjacent streets. 
    Sign means any writing, pictorial representation, illustration, decoration (including any material used to differentiate sign copy from its background), landscaping form, emblem, symbol, design, trademark, banner, flag, pennant, captive balloon, streamer, spinner, ribbon, sculpture, statute or any other figure or character that: 
a.  Is a structure or any part thereof (including the roof or wall of a building); or 
b.  Is written, printed, projected, painted, constructed or otherwise placed or displayed upon or designed into landscaping or a structure or a board, plate, canopy, awning, marquee or vehicle, or upon any material object or device whatsoever; and 
c.  By reason of its form, color, wording, symbol, design, illumination, or motion attracts or is designed to attract attention to the subject thereof or is used as a means of identification, advertisement or announcement or political or artistic expression or decoration; but 
d.  Landscaping constitutes a sign only to the extent that it is planted, trimmed, graded, arranged or installed in such a manner as to convey an explicit commercial message. 
    Sign height means the vertical distance from grade to the highest point on the sign structure. 
    Sign permit means a building permit issued for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration or moving of any sign, issued pursuant to the building and zoning code of the City. 
    Sign structure means any supports, uprights, braces and framework of the sign which does not include any portion of the sign message. 
    Surface area means,for all signs other than a wall sign, the area of a sign measured by determining the sum of the frame, face, nonstructural trim or other component parts not used for support. For a wall sign, the area is measured by determining the sum of the area of the smallest single continuous rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of the individual letters, symbols and/or characters. 
    Temporary sign means a sign that: 
a.  Is typically constructed from nondurable materials, including paper, cardboard, cloth, plastic or wallboard; 
b.  Does not constitute a structure subject to the City's Building Code and Zoning Code provisions. 
    Wall sign means a sign attached flat or flush against a wall which comprises a structural and supporting exterior component of a lawfully existing structure or building. A wall sign may not extend more than eighteen (18) inches beyond the surface of the wall to which it is attached. A wall sign shall not extend above the height of the wall to which it is attached, and no part or portion of a wall sign shall be located on or above the lowest point of any roof, parapet or gutter. A wall sign may extend into a required setback. 
(Ord. 18 2, 2002) 
Sec. 16-15-30. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  The following signs and sign designs are prohibited and within all zone districts of the City: 
(1)  Any sign not expressly permitted by or conforming with this Article. 
(2)  Any permanent sign for which a permit has not been issued. 
(3)  Animated or moving signs, including any sign for which all or any part or attachment moves, swings, rotates, flashes or twirls. 
(4)  Signs covered or painted in whole or in part with light-reflecting paint. 
(5)  Signs attached to trees. 
(6)  Inflated or floating objects, balloons, dirigibles or any similar type of object or sign designed to utilize air pressure, gas or wind in its display. 
(7)  Flashing or blinking signs or flashing or blinking illumination sources. 
(8)  Signs whose apparent purpose is the conveyance of information regarding goods, services, opportunities, events or actions that are unrelated to and not available at the premises on which the sign is located. 
(9)  Portable signs or wheeled signs. 
(10)  Roof signs. 
(11)  Search lights. 
(12)  Signs painted on fences or buildings. 
(13)  Vehicles used for sign purposes. Signs painted on, or attached to, a motor vehicle parked adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be considered to be functioning as an illegal sign unless such vehicle is used on a daily basis for business trips or commuting to and from work, or both. 
(b)  The following signs are prohibited within all zone districts of the City. The City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, may immediately remove any of the following signs found by the City Manager to be in violation of this Subsection: 
(1)  Signs posted on public property; within public rights-of-way; on public street medians, islands or parkways; attached to traffic control devices or traffic control signs and fixtures; or attached to utility equipment, poles and wires. 
(2)  Signs protruding or projecting over, into, through or within the airspace over any public right-of-way. 
(3)  Signs which materially impede vision at street intersections. A sign shall be presumed to materially impede vision if located within the sight triangle. 
(4)  Any sign found by the City Manager to be hazardous by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidated condition or obsolescence such that the sign creates an imminent hazard to the public health or safety. Such hazardous signs are declared a nuisance and unlawful. 
(5)  Signs designed, shaped and/or painted to mimic, simulate or represent official traffic control devices, such as but not limited to stop signs, yield signs, caution signs or speed limit signs. 
(Ord. 18 2, 2002) 
Sec. 16-15-40. - Permanent signs. 
(a)  Permit required. Before any permanent sign governed by the provisions of this Article is erected, displayed, altered, relocated or reconstructed, an application for approval of such sign shall be submitted to the City and a sign permit issued by the City Manager in accordance with this Section. 
(1)  Application. Any owner may apply for a permit to authorize the erection and maintenance of a sign permitted by this Section by submission of a written application for such permit, accompanied by a detailed description of the sign to allow the City Manager to determine the location, size, dimensions, form of illumination and type of construction of the sign. 
(2)  City Manager's decision. Within ten (10) days following the date of the delivery of an application, the City Manager shall review the application and: 
a.  Approve the application and issue the permit; 
b.  Deny the application for specific reasons; or 
c.  Request from the applicant additional information necessary to render a decision to approve or deny. 
Any decision by the City Manager shall be made in writing. Any denial may be appealed by the applicant in accordance with Section 16-3-30 of this Chapter. 
(3)  Standards for approval. The City Manager shall approve any application which meets the following criteria: 
a.  The application is sufficient to reasonably describe the location, size, dimensions, form of illumination and type of construction of the proposed sign; 
b.  The proposed sign will conform to all requirements of this Chapter; and 
c.  The proposed sign will conform to all applicable requirements of the zone district in which the sign is located. 
(b)  Authorized permanent signs: The following signs shall be authorized as permanent signs upon issuance of a sign permit in accordance with this Section: 
(1)  Within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3A, R-4 and R-5 Zone Districts: 
a.  Residential lot: 
1.  One (1) permanent sign not exceeding one (1) square foot in size and attached to the principal residential structure is allowed to announce the existence of a lawful home occupation. 
2.  Signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in size reasonably and customarily associated with residential use such as the name of the occupant and signs of a cautionary or directional nature. 
b.  Residential subdivision entrances: Two (2) permanent signs at each entry into a platted subdivision from a public right-of-way. Such signs shall be located within an easement, outlot or on a lawfully existing permanent fence or structure owned or controlled jointly by the owners of lots within the subdivision or by a homeowners' association. Such signs shall not exceed a total of twenty-five (25) square feet of surface area per entry and may be no more than eight (8) feet in height. 
c.  Nonprofit institutions, private clubs, public recreational facilities and nonprofit recreational facilities. 
1.  One (1) permanent sign not exceeding three (3) square feet of exposed surface area for each face or a total of six (6) square feet of surface area and three (3) feet in height located within ten (10) feet of the main entrance to the property. 
2.  One (1) permanent sign for each institution, club or facility. The sign shall not exceed a total of twenty five (25) square feet of surface area and eight (8) feet in height. 
3.  Not more than ten (10) signs containing information such as the parking locations and signs of danger, caution or directional nature. No sign shall exceed two (2) square feet. 
4.  Not more than six (6) special event signs, each sign not greater than eight (8) square feet of surface area, displayed during periods of special or occasional activities conducted on the property. Such signs shall not be displayed for more than fourteen (14) days and shall be removed within five (5) days of the end of the special event. Only four (4) special event sign permits may be issued for any property in any one (1) calendar year. 
(2)  Within the C-1, C-2 Zone Districts: 
a.  Within the C-1, Community Zone District: One (1) sign not to exceed six (6) square feet is allowed for each lot. 
b.  Within the C-2, Limited Commercial Zone District: 
1.  One (1) sign not to exceed six (6) square feet is allowed for each tenant. 
2.  Two (2) ground signs not to exceed eighteen (18) square feet each are allowed on any parcel zoned C-2. 
(c)  Design standards for permanent signs: In addition to the prohibitions imposed on sign design, form, style and character provided by Subsection 16-15-30(b) above, all permanent signs shall be designed and maintained in accordance with the following standards: Artificial illumination shall be permitted only for subdivision entry signs and ground signs. Illumination shall be provided only from a concealed and focused light source directed in a manner that prevents illumination beyond the face or surface area of the sign. If illuminated, the light source shall be turned off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise the following morning. 
(Ord. 18 2, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 6 3, 2016) 
Sec. 16-15-50. - Permanent sign permit exemptions. 
    The following signs are exempt from permitting requirements imposed by Section 16-15-40 above and shall be authorized in all zone districts. Such signs are declared to have a minimal impact on the public and do not generally create traffic, safety or other hazards. 
(1)  Any sign erected by the City acting in its governmental capacity, including but not limited to traffic control signs and signs identifying public places such as parks, trails and public buildings. 
(2)  Any traffic control sign erected by the Colorado Department of Transportation (CDOT) within a public right-of-way owned or controlled by CDOT. 
(3)  Not more than two (2) flags located on any one (1) platted lot, parcel or tract of land. A flag shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in size. Flagpoles shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(4)  A sign identifying the address of a property. 
(5)  Signs in the nature of holiday decorations, clearly incidental and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday. Such signs may be of any type, number, area, height or animation so long as they do not advertise or identify a product or a business and are located so as not to conflict with traffic regulatory devices or traffic safety. 
(6)  Signs located wholly within a building and not visible from any point within a public right-of-way. 
(7)  One (1) sign incorporated into the design or architecture of a building for the purpose of memorializing the building's construction, such as but not limited to the building name, owner and date of erection, provided that such sign does not exceed twelve (12) square feet in size. 
(8)  Signs attached to and associated with scoreboards located or and immediately adjacent to athletic fields owned and controlled by private or public schools, provided that no such sign shall be used for the purpose of commercial advertisement. 
(9)  Signs incorporated into and made part of a bus bench lawfully located within the public right-of-way, provided that such signs do not exceed twenty five (25) square feet in size and provided that no such signs shall be used for the purpose of commercial advertisement. 
(10)  Signs incorporated into and made part of a public transit shelter or public bus stop shelter lawfully located within a public right-of-way, provided that such signs do not exceed two (2) panels each measuring not more than twenty five (25) square feet in surface area and provided that no such signs shall be used for the purpose of commercial advertisement. 
(Ord. 18 2, 2002) 
Sec. 16-15-60. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Temporary signs permitted in all zone districts. Temporary signs may be posted on property in all zones of the City, subject to the following requirements and those applicable provisions stated elsewhere in this Article: 
(1)  The total square footage for all temporary signs posted on a lot, property or parcel shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet, with no individual sign face exceeding six (6) square feet in surface area, provided that property within the C-2, Limited Commercial Zone District may erect a sign which sign shall not exceed the dimensions of four (4) feet by eight (8) feet. 
(2)  No temporary sign shall obstruct or impair access to a public sidewalk, public or private street or driveway, traffic control sign, bus stop, fire hydrant or any other type of street furniture, or otherwise create a hazard, including a tripping hazard. 
(3)  A temporary sign shall be designed to be stable under all weather conditions, including high winds. 
(4)  No temporary sign shall be illuminated. 
(5)  A temporary sign shall only be posted with the consent of the property owner or occupant. 
(6)  A temporary sign may be posted for a period of up to ninety (90) days, at which time the sign shall be removed or replaced with a new sign. 
(7)  A temporary sign shall not advertise or promote any commercial enterprise or event not conducted on the same building lot. 
(b)  Removal requirements for temporary commercial signs: In addition to the requirements stated above, temporary commercial signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  A temporary real estate sign shall be removed within five (5) days after the sale or occupancy of the property. 
(2)  All other commercial temporary signs, including those announcing yard sales and special events to occur on one (1) or more particular dates, shall be removed within five (5) days of the conclusion of the sale or event that the sign is promoting. 
(c)  Removal or replacement of signs: It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property upon which a temporary sign is posted to permit, condone, maintain or authorize the posting of such temporary sign where the removal or replacement of such sign is required by this Article. Upon the failure of the owner or occupancy to remove or replace the temporary sign in accordance with this Article, the City Manager is authorized to enter upon private property and remove any temporary sign posted in violation of this Article. In addition, temporary signs posted on private property in violation of this Article shall be deemed a public nuisance, and the City Manager may remedy and abate such nuisance in accordance with this Code. 
(Ord. 18 2, 2002) 
Sec. 16-15-70. - Variances. 
    The owner of any property may seek a variance to the strict application of this Article in accordance with Article III of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 18 2, 2002) 
Sec. 16-15-80. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Any sign that as of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified herein does not comply with the provisions of this Article shall be deemed legally nonconforming. 
(b)  Any sign that is destroyed by fire or any other inadvertent, accidental or otherwise uncontrollable cause to the extent that more than seventy five percent (75%) of its replacement cost on the date of destruction may not be reconstructed except as a conforming sign. 
(c)  Any sign that is destroyed by fire or any other inadvertent, accidental or otherwise uncontrollable cause to the extent that less than seventy five percent (75%) of its replacement cost on the date of destruction may be reconstructed, but not so as to expand the area or number of the original sign. 
(d)  Any sign that has reached the end of its economic and/or useful life which is to be replaced voluntarily by the property or sign owner shall be replaced in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 18 2, 2002) 
Sec. 16-15-90. - Penalty. 
    It shall be an offense and unlawful for any person being the owner, agent or occupant of, or having under his control any building, lot or premises to erect, install, construct, maintain, authorize or otherwise allow any prohibited or unauthorized sign in violation of this Article. Each calendar day that such violation exists shall be a separate offense and violation of this Article. 
(Ord. 18 2, 2002) 
ARTICLE XVI - Supplementary District Regulations 

Sec. 16-16-10. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    (a) For every structure hereafter used, occupied or constructed, off-street parking areas shall be provided and shall contain adequate space for access, parking, vehicle and pedestrian circulation, and loading and unloading. Such parking areas shall be located on the same lot as, or lots adjoining, the structure that they serve, and permitted as an accessory use to the structure. Adjoining lots include lots that are separated by a public right-of-way of not more than sixty (60) feet. The following table establishes the minimum parking stall space and aisle dimensions for full size and compact automobile spaces. Within parking areas of twenty (20) spaces or more, a maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the required parking spaces may be designated as compact. Areas included in driveways or otherwise required to move cars in and out of parking spaces shall not be considered to meet off-street parking space requirements. Parking requirements shall apply to all districts. Parking lots with more than five (5) spaces must be striped in accordance with the following standards: 
Standard Parking Space Compact Parking Space Handicapped Parking Space Width 9 feet 8 feet 12 feet Length 18 feet 16 feet 20 feet  
Aisle Configuration Width One-way - parking angle 00 - 45 12 feet One-way - parking angle 46 - 89 18 feet One-way - parking angle 90 24 feet Two-way (any angle) 24 feet  
(b)  Where more than one (1) use is conducted on a single lot, parking shall be required for each use, even though one (1) use is accessory to the other. The following types of uses shall require the following off-street parking spaces for both principal and accessory uses. Uses not listed shall require the same parking spaces as the nearest similar use, as may be reasonably determined by the Community Development Director, subject to appeal to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, or to the City Council in accordance with Article XIX of this Chapter. 
Use No. of Spaces Dwellings, each unit 2 Auditoriums, churches or other places of assembly   With fixed seats - per 3 fixed seats 1   Without fixed seats - per 100 square feet 1 Offices and clinics, per 300 square feet 1 Private club or nonprofit recreational facility   Per 4 persons at maximum occupancy, and 1   Per golf course hole, and per tennis court, and 2   Per employee on maximum shift 2 Retail outlet, per 200 square feet 1 Restaurants, eating or drinking places, per 4 seats 1 Schools: Elementary, nursery, junior high, per classroom 1   Plus spaces per 10 children 1   Plus per 300 square feet of office 1 Schools: High, per classroom 1   Plus spaces per 5 students 1   Plus per 300 square feet of office 1   Plus per 3 dormitory rooms 1  
(c)  Parking reduction. The City Manager, or City Council pursuant to approval under Article XX of this Chapter, may grant a parking reduction up to fifty percent (50%) of the required parking if the City Manager or City Council finds: 
(1)  The parking needs of the use will be adequately served; and 
(2)  If joint use of the parking areas is proposed, varying time periods of use will accommodate proposed parking needs, and the applicant has provided adequate assurances that the time periods of use will not change; and 
(3)  If grass or other non-hardened surface area parking is proposed, the use has a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of required parking complying with the hard-surface requirements set forth in Section 16-16-10(d)(2) below and the use of grass or other natural, non-hardened areas is solely to accommodate overflow, special event or other similar temporary, peak parking demands, provided that the applicant has agreed to enter into a written mitigation agreement with the City to address the use and maintenance of any such natural off-street parking areas, including but not limited to the establishment of monthly or annual usage limits, inclement weather usage restrictions, re-seeding and re-vegetation requirements, watering or irrigation requirements, and conditions designed to limit the amount of mud or debris tracked onto adjacent City rights-of-way, including but not limited to the required installation of a vehicle tracking control (VTC) system. 
(d)  Off-street parking areas serving public, semipublic, commercial or other nonresidential uses: 
(1)  Adequate access: Shall have adequate access to a public street or other thoroughfare. 
(2)  Surface requirements: Off-street parking areas shall be hard-surfaced with asphalt, concrete or porous surfacing engineered to support the weight of vehicles but permitting grass to grow through. Off-street parking areas for which a written mitigation agreement has been entered into pursuant to Section 16-16-10(c)(3) above may be located on natural, non-hardened surfaces. Any natural area approved for parking shall be exempt from the landscaping, striping and lighting requirements of this Section and Section 16-16-20. 
(3)  Distance to property or street line: Shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to a property or street line for parking on the same lot as the principal structure, and not closer than twenty (20) feet to a property or street line for parking on any lot adjoining a principal structure. 
(4)  Screening: The City shall require screening with landscaping and plant materials between off-street parking and uses on neighboring properties which, in the City's opinion, require buffering for visual, privacy, noise or aesthetic reasons. Landscaping may take the form of densely planted trees and shrubs, berms and other landforms or fences. 
(5)  Required minimum landscaping: In addition to the screening required by paragraph (4), an area or a combination of areas equal to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total hard-surfaced parking lot area shall be landscaped to beautify the area and avoid the appearance of an unbroken expanse of parking surface. The required landscaping must include a minimum ten-foot-wide landscape strip along any street frontage. Any parking area in excess of thirty (30) parking spaces shall require interior landscaped islands. 
(6)  Minimum requirements for plant materials: 
a.  In all cases, a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the required landscaped area must be covered by living material. 
b.  Overall, parking lot landscaped areas shall contain a minimum of two (2) trees and four (4) shrubs per five hundred (500) square feet of landscaped area, plus one (1) additional tree for every fifty (50) feet of parking lot frontage along a public or private street; and these additional trees must be placed along the street frontage. Each island must contain a minimum of one (1) tree and four (4) shrubs. One (1) additional tree may be substituted for each four (4) shrubs required herein. 
c.  Minimum size of trees and shrubs shall be as required in Table 1: 
TABLE 1 
Size and Type of Plant Minimum Allowable Plant Size for New Landscaping Ornamental trees 2-inch caliper Deciduous trees 1.5-inch caliper Evergreen trees 6 feet tall Shrubs 5-gallon container  
(7)  Landscaping plans: 
a.  Parking lot plans submitted to the City shall contain details of the landscaping provided, including types and sizes of plant materials. Such plans shall be reviewed and improved by the City Manager. Consideration shall be given to views of the parking lot from adjacent properties, as well as adjacent roadways. All required landscaping shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  Landscaping shall be planted and maintained in a neat, clean and healthy condition by the owner and shall include proper irrigation, pruning, mowing and weeding. An owner will promptly cure or replace damaged or dead landscaped material. Failure to perform regular maintenance of landscaping such as weeding, pruning, mowing, replacement of dead material, etc., shall be considered a violation of this Section. 
(8)  Compliance: No existing building shall be deemed nonconforming because its parking lot or required parking lot landscaping area does not meet the requirements of this Section; however, in the event that building additions, or site improvements requiring a building permit and effecting an increase in the number of parking spaces available, are made after the effective date of the initial ordinance codified herein, the entire site must be brought into compliance with this Section simultaneously with the building additions or site improvements. 
(Prior code 6-15-1; Ord. 13, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 1-4, 2007; Ord. 5, 1,2, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-16-20. - Lighting of parking areas for public, semipublic, commercial or other nonresidential areas. 
(a)  Plans for lighting of parking areas for nonresidential uses must be submitted to the Community Development Department and receive a building permit prior to installation. The following standards shall apply to such lighting plans and installations: 
(1)  Lights shall be so oriented and shielded that the source of illumination (bulb or direct lamp image) is not visible in a direct line of sight from any portion of the other property. Lights must be arranged so as not to cast a plainly visible shadow on such other property or create an unreasonable risk to the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on a street or public property. 
(2)  In any event, the maximum horizontal illumination at the property line at ground level shall not exceed two-tenths (0.2) foot-candle. It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under Paragraph (1) above that the maximum horizontal illumination at the property line at ground level does not exceed two-tenths (0.2) foot-candle. 
(3)  Conformance required by January 1, 2003. All lighting of parking areas for public, semipublic, commercial or other nonresidential areas shall conform to the requirements of Paragraphs (1) and (2) above on or before January 1, 2003. Failure to meet all requirements of Paragraphs (1) and (2) above by January 1, 2003, shall constitute a violation of this Section. The City Manager may grant in writing an extension of such deadline for conformance, not to exceed one (1) year, upon a demonstration by the owner that improvements necessary to bringing the property into conformance have been both scheduled and budgeted but completion of the improvements cannot reasonably be achieved by January 1, 2003. Failure to bring any property into conformance with a deadline approved by the City Manager shall constitute a violation of this Section. 
(4)  Lighting fixtures shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height, inclusive of any base or support, measured from the parking lot surface. Any lighting fixture damaged to the extent of more than seventy-five percent (75%) of replacement cost must be brought into conformance with this standard upon replacement or repair. 
(5)  Lights shall be off between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise the next day. The City Manager may, upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, grant an exception to the lighting curfew required by this Section for events that extend past the lighting curfew. Lights left on for these purposes shall nevertheless comply with the requirements of Paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) above. 
(b)  Within ten (10) days following installation of the lighting authorized by the building permit, the permittee shall notify the Building Inspector who shall promptly inspect said lighting. Granting of a lighting permit shall not prevent or prejudice subsequent enforcement at any time of provisions of this Section where lighting fails to meet any such provision. 
(Prior code 6-15-2; Ord. 13, 2000) 
Sec. 16-16-30. - Visibility at intersections. 
    On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be constructed, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and one-half (21/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines fifty (50) feet from the point of the intersection. 
(Ord. 2, 1970; prior code 6-15-3) 
Sec. 16-16-40. - Fences. 
    Fences are permitted on legally established lots as defined in Section 16-1-10 of this Chapter, and are permitted on legally established nonconforming lots as defined in Section 16-1-10 and in Article XIV of this Chapter subject to compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Section is to accommodate the reasonable fencing needs of residents in a manner that preserves the semi-rural character of the Village, including the preservation of open space and view corridors. 
(2)  Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions shall be applicable: 
    Front faade line means a line generally perpendicular to the side property lines emanating from the outer wall of the faade of the house at the point closest to the front property line. 

    Public trail for the purpose of this Section, means any area included in a publicly dedicated bridle path, trail or similar pedestrian easement but excludes trails or sidewalks located within road rights-of-way and on-street designated trails. 
(3)  Height and opacity. Fences in residential zone districts shall be subject to the following height and opacity standards. Standards that apply are indicated by an "X." If more than one fence requirement applies, the more restrictive shall apply as determined by the Community Development Director. 
Fence Location/Height and Opacity Standard R-1 R-2 R-3 R-3a R-4 R-5 (1) In Building Envelope: 
Fences located outside of the minimum yard areas except for fences located between the front property line and front faade line.  6 ft. maximum height and up to one hundred percent (100%) solid. X X X X X X (2) Between Front Faade Line and Front Property Line 1 : 
Fences located between the front property line and the front faade line, except fences located adjacent and generally parallel to highways owned by the state or designated arterial roads which may be alternatively constructed as provided in sections (5) or (6) of this table.  4 ft. maximum height and no more than fifty percent (50%) solid when viewed at an angle perpendicular to the fence. X X X X  No fence allowed. X X (3) Minimum Rear or Side Yards Not Adjacent to Public Roads: 
Fences located between a rear or side property line and the minimum rear or side yard setback line, except fences located adjacent to a public trail, public park, or public open space.  6 ft. maximum height and up to one hundred percent (100%) solid. X X X X X 6 ft. maximum height and no more than fifty percent (50%) solid when viewed at an angle perpendicular to the fence. X (4) Minimum Rear or Side Yards Adjacent to Public Roads: 
Fences located between a rear or side property line and the minimum rear or side yard setback line except fences located adjacent and generally parallel to highways owned by the state or designated arterial roads which may be alternatively constructed as provided in sections (5) or (6) of this table.  Generally parallel to a public road: If exceeding 4 ft. in height, up to a maximum height of 6 ft., fence shall be no more than twenty-five percent (25%) solid when viewed at an angle perpendicular to the fence; or fences 4 ft. or less in height shall be no more than sixty percent (60%) solid when viewed at an angle perpendicular to the fence. X X X X  Generally parallel to a public road: 4 ft. maximum height and up to one hundred percent (100%) solid; or greater than 4 ft. in height up to a maximum height of 6 ft. if no more than fifty percent (50%) solid when viewed at an angle perpendicular to the fence; or greater than 4 ft. in height up to a maximum of 6 ft. and greater than fifty percent (50%) solid when viewed at an angle perpendicular to the fence subject to setback and landscaping requirements of Subsection (4) below. X X  Generally perpendicular to public road: 6 ft. maximum height and up to one hundred percent (100%) solid. X X X X X  Generally perpendicular to public road: 6 ft. maximum height and no more than fifty percent (50%) solid when viewed at an angle perpendicular to the fence. X (5) Fences Adjacent to State Highways: 
Fences located in the minimum yard areas that are generally parallel to highways owned by the State.  8 ft. maximum height and up to one hundred percent (100%) solid subject to setback and landscaping requirements of Subsection (4) below. X X X X X X (6) Fences Adjacent to Designated Arterial Roads: 
Fences located in the minimum yard areas that are generally parallel to South Clarkson Street or East Happy Canyon Road.  6 ft. maximum height and up to one hundred percent (100%) solid subject to the setback and landscaping requirements of Subsection (4) below. X X X X X X (7) Parallel to Public Trails, Parks, or Open Space: 
Fences located within the minimum yard area generally parallel and adjacent to a public trail, public park, or public open space, except fences located between and front faade line and front property line.  6 ft. maximum height and no more than forty percent (40%) solid when viewed at an angle perpendicular to the fence. X X X X X X (8) Surrounding Sports Courts, Tennis Courts, and other Outdoor Recreational Uses: 
Fences associated with a legally established sport court, tennis court or other outdoor recreational use.  10 ft. maximum height and no more than twenty-five percent (25%) solid when solid when viewed at an angle perpendicular to the fence, except that a wind screen and other similar barriers may be applied to the fence. X X X X X X  
1 On lots bordering two or more streets the front property line shall be determined pursuant to Subsection 16-5-30(h) or based on the orientation of the front of the house as determined by the Community Development Director. 
(4)  Fence setback and landscape requirements. Fencing subject to minimum setback and landscaping requirements in Subsection (3) above must comply with either Subsection 1. or 2. below: 
a.  Select any two (2) of the following: 
1.  Set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from the edge of pavement of an adjacent paved roadway or forty (40) feet from the center line of any adjacent unpaved roadway. 
2.  Landscape the area between the roadway and the fence with trees of a size set forth in Paragraph 16-16-10(d)(6) above and at a density of one (1) tree for every twenty (20) feet to thirty (30) feet of fence as determined by the City Manager given the type and planting size proposed. Any area of City right-of-way proposed to be utilized for tree planting must be approved by the City Manager. 
3.  Cover at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the fence roadside surface area with vegetation immediately adjacent to the fence surface. A planting plan submitted to the City Manager showing how the twenty-five percent (25%) requirement will be met after three (3) growing seasons will be required. 
b.  Indent areas of the fence and plant at least two (2) trees or evergreen shrubs of a size set forth in Paragraph 16-16-10(d)(6) above in each such areas. These indentations shall be fifteen (15) feet to twenty-five (25) feet in width and at least four (4) feet in depth, and must comprise at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total fence length. 
(4)  Gates. Not more than two (2) gates that provide for ingress and egress from a vehicular right-of-way to a front yard may exceed the otherwise applicable height limitations for the fence so long as the height of each gate is not more than four (4) feet greater than the applicable height limitations for the fence, each gate is not more than eighteen (18) feet in width, and each gate is not more than twenty-five percent (25%) solid when viewed from an angle that is perpendicular to the gate. A gate that provides for ingress and egress to a yard other than a front yard may exceed the otherwise applicable height limitations for the fence so long as the height of the gate is not more than two (2) feet greater than the applicable height limitations for the fence and the gate is not more than four (4) feet in width and not more than one (1) such gate exists on or along any single property line. 
(5)  Utility stations. Fences may be constructed for utility stations as permitted in this Chapter, provided that such fences do not exceed eight (8) feet in height and are not more than fifty percent (50%) solid. 
(6)  Measurement of height. When measuring the height of a fence, it shall be the vertical distance between the natural grade, or from the grade of an approved overlot grading plan, to the height of the fence. Neither a column nor a light fixture attached to a column shall be included within the calculation of the height of a fence so long as the height of the column, or combination of the height of the column and the light fixture, is not more than two (2) feet greater than the otherwise applicable height limitations for the fence. Where fences and berms are constructed one (1) upon the other, the height of such fences or berms shall be measured as the sum of the individual units. 
(7)  Visibility at intersections. Fencing and associated landscaping must conform with Section 16-16-30 above concerning visibility at intersections. Landscaping must be maintained in a neat, clean and healthy condition by the owner of the property as provided in Paragraph 16-16-10(d)(7) above. 
(8)  Replacement of nonconforming fences. Any existing fence that is replaced shall comply with the regulations as set forth in this section. Any repair of more than twenty-five percent (25%) of a fence along any individual front, side or rear lot line of a property within a twenty-four-month period shall constitute a replacement. 
(9)  Fencing for retail, office or medical or dental clinics in the C-2 zone district shall be subject to the Conditional Use review and approval procedures in Article XVIII of this Chapter. 
(10)  Fencing for nonprofit institutions, private clubs or private recreational facilities shall be subject to the review and approval procedures in Article XX of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 2, 1, 2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. 2, Series 2016, 1, adopted February 2, 2016, repealed the former Section 16-16-40, and enacted a new Section 16-16-40 as set out herein. The former Section 16-16-40 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the prior code 6-15-4; Ord. 8, 1989; Ord. 15, 1989; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 6 1, 2003; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 03 1, 2006; and Ord. 01 2, 2007. 
Sec. 16-16-50. - Exterior lighting. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this Section is to accommodate the reasonable lighting needs of residents in a manner that preserves the semi-rural character of the City and the qualities associated with this character, including the ability to view stars against a dark sky, while protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the community. The City Council finds that these regulations are necessary in order to: 
(1)  Promote safety and security; 
(2)  Preserve the semi-rural character of the community; 
(3)  Reduce the amount of nighttime light pollution; 
(4)  Reduce offensive light glare and light trespass onto adjacent properties and rights-of-way; 
(5)  Conserve energy; and 
(6)  Promote appropriately designed and installed outdoor lighting. 
(b)  Lighting requirements. 
(1)  All exterior lights shall include fixtures that fully shield the light source so that light is not emitted above the horizontal plane of the fixture unless otherwise specified in this Section. 
Examples of Fully Shielded Fixtures

(2)  Each light fixture shall not exceed a maximum output of one thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens (approximately equivalent to a one-hundred-watt incandescent bulb) unless otherwise specified in this Section. 
(3)  All exterior lights shall be designed and oriented in a way to minimize glare and light spill onto adjacent lots, streets and rights-of-way. Exterior lights shall not be allowed to shine directly onto abutting residential lots or in any manner that creates a hazard to adjacent properties or to pedestrian or vehicular traffic on adjacent streets and rights-of-way. 
(4)  Landscape and architectural accent lighting. Lighting used exclusively to illuminate landscape elements, such as trees, bushes, sculptures and fountains, and lighting used exclusively to illuminate building facades and structures as accent lighting shall be turned off from 11:00 p.m. to sunrise the following day. Landscape and architectural accent lighting may include up-lighting as long as such lighting is shielded and the bulb is not visible by a direct line of sight from an adjacent property or right-of-way. 
(5)  Recreation use lighting. Lights associated with accessory or recreational uses or structures exceeding twelve (12) feet in height shall be turned off between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise the following day. Light fixtures may exceed an output of one thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens as long as the light source is not directly visible from adjoining lots or streets or results in a light level greater than two-tenths (0.2) foot-candles when measured at the ground level of an adjoining property line. 
(6)  Motion-detected security lighting. Unshielded spotlights activated by a motion sensor shall be allowed with a maximum output of two thousand eight hundred (2,800) lumens (approximately equivalent to a one-hundred-fifty-watt incandescent bulb). The light shall only be activated by movement located on the property on which the light is located and go off within five (5) minutes after the detected motion ceases. 
(c)  Exceptions. The standards of this Section shall not apply to the following types of lighting: 
(1)  Seasonal and holiday lighting displays, not to exceed forty-five (45) days per calendar year. 
(2)  Up-lighting of flags when the light source is shielded from the sides. 
(3)  Sign illumination as set forth in Article XV of this Chapter. 
(4)  Outdoor lights associated with an approved permit for a nonprofit institution, private club, public recreation facility or nonprofit recreational facility, as set forth in Article XX of this Chapter. 
(5)  Outdoor lights associated with an approved major event permit, as set forth in Article XXI of this Chapter. 
(6)  Lighting required by an adopted building code of the City. 
(7)  Municipal lighting installed for the benefit of public health, safety and welfare, including but not limited to traffic control devices, streetlights and construction lights. 
(8)  Lighting of parking areas for public, semipublic, commercial or other nonresidential areas, as set forth in Section 16-16-20 of this Article. 
(d)  Nonconforming lights. Light fixtures in existence prior to the date of enactment of the ordinance codified herein shall be deemed conforming and exempt from the requirements of this Section, except as set forth in Subsection (e) below. Such existing light fixtures shall be so oriented and shielded so that they do not shine directly onto any part of another lot, street or public property. A light shall be deemed to shine directly onto other property if the source of illumination (bulb or direct lamp image) is visible in a direct line of sight from any portion of the other property and the light is sufficiently strong to cast a plainly visible shadow on such other property or create an unreasonable risk to the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on a street or public property. 
(e)  Procedures for new development. For all new residences and proposals to increase the square footage of a residence by fifty percent (50%) or more, all lighting on the property shall meet the requirements of this Section. In order to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Section, the following documents shall be submitted with the application for a building permit: 
(1)  A site plan indicating the proposed location of all outdoor lighting fixtures. 
(2)  A schedule describing each typical illumination device, light fixture, lamp, shield and support. This description may include, but is not limited to, manufacturer's catalog cuts and drawings, lamp types and lumen outputs. 
(3)  Other information deemed necessary by the City Manager, or his or her designee, to document compliance with the provisions of this Section. 
(Prior code 6-15-5; Ord. 13, 2000; Ord. 11 1, 2010) 
Sec. 16-16-60. - Enclosure of swimming pools. 
    Every swimming pool shall at all times be equipped with at least one (1) of the following safety features: 
(1)  A fence or wall having the following characteristics: 
a.  A minimum vertical height of not less than forty-eight (48) inches; 
b.  A maximum vertical clearance from the ground to the bottom of the fence or wall of two (2) inches; 
c.  Gaps or voids, if any, shall not allow passage of a sphere equal to or greater than four (4) inches in diameter; 
d.  An outside surface free of protrusions, cavities or other physical characteristics that would serve as handholds or footholds that could enable a child to climb over; and 
e.  Any access gates through the enclosure must open away from the swimming pool and must be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching device placed no lower than forty-eight (48) inches above the ground. 
(2)  An approved safety pool cover that meets current ASTM standards and is capable of being closed and secured manually in the event of power loss. One (1) copy of the current ASTM performance standards shall be available at the City Clerk's office. 
(3)  The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall not grant a variance to any requirement contained in this Section. 
(Prior code 6-15-6; Ord. 2, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-16-70. - Temporary uses and structures. 
(a)  Subject to issuance of a temporary permit as provided by Subsection (b) below, the City may authorize the temporary uses and temporary structures only as identified in this Section. 
(1)  Construction yard or construction building. A lot or portion of a lot may be used for the storage of construction materials and/or a temporary building may be used as a construction office or for construction material storage within any zone district of the City, provided that the following standards are met: 
a.  The construction yard or construction building shall be located only upon the same lot where the related construction activity is to be undertaken. 
b.  The construction yard or construction building shall be permitted only where a building permit has been issued and remains effective and valid for the lot upon which the yard or building is located. 
c.  The construction yard or construction building shall conform to all applicable requirements of this Code, including but not limited to minimum lot standards for the zone district in which the yard or building is located. 
(2)  Temporary residential sales office. A temporary residential sales office for the sole purpose of the sale of lots and/or homes shall be permitted upon any lawfully existing lot in any zone district of the City, provided that the following standards are met: 
a.  Use of the temporary office shall be limited to only the sale of homes or lots within the same platted subdivision in which the office is located. 
b.  The final plat of the subdivision in which the temporary office is located must include a minimum of ten (10) sites or vacant lots at the time of issuance of the permit for a temporary office. 
c.  The temporary office, if a manufactured building, shall not be greater than eight hundred (800) square feet in size, designed for office use and inspected and approved for occupancy by the Building Inspector. The sales office may be located within an existing unsold and vacant residence. When initially situated, the sales office shall not abut a lot that is improved with an occupied residential structure. 
d.  The temporary office shall conform to all applicable requirements of this Code, including but not limited to minimum lot standards for the zone district in which the office is located. 
(3)  Temporary trailers for certain uses. A mobile trailer or mobile structure may be used as a temporary location for activities conducted by a nonprofit institution or a private club (as such uses are defined by Section 16-1-10), any federal or state governmental agency, or special district created in accordance with Title 31, C.R.S., provided that the following standards are met: 
a.  The temporary trailer or structure shall be located upon property both owned and operated by a nonprofit institution, private club, federal or state governmental agency, or special district. 
b.  The use of the temporary trailer or structure shall be limited to uses that may be lawfully conducted by the nonprofit institution, private club, federal or state governmental agency, or special district in accordance with this Code. 
c.  The temporary trailer or structure is necessary to enable the continued delivery of services by the nonprofit institution, private club, federal or state governmental agency, or special district during construction, remodeling or renovation of buildings owned by the nonprofit institution, private club, federal or state governmental agency, or special district. 
d.  A building permit has been issued to the nonprofit institution, private club, federal or state governmental agency, or special district for construction, remodeling or renovation, and the permit is effective and valid during the term of use of the temporary trailer or structure. 
e.  The mobile trailer or structure shall conform to all applicable requirements of this Code, including but not limited to minimum lot standards for the zone district in which the trailer or structure is located. 
(4)  Exempt uses and structures. Temporary uses and temporary structures conducted or operated by the City shall be permitted upon any property and within any zone district of the City and shall be exempt from permitting requirements of this Section. 
(b)  Permit process for temporary uses and structures. 
(1)  Applications for a permit for a temporary use or temporary structure authorized by Subsection (a) above shall be submitted to the City Manager. 
(2)  An application for a permit for a temporary use or temporary structure authorized by Subsection (a) above shall contain or include the following: 
a.  A completed application in a form approved by the City Manager. 
b.  Payment of a twenty-dollar application and review fee. 
c.  A site plan showing the location of the temporary use and/or structure on the property and all patterns of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The site plan shall demonstrate conformance with all applicable zone district requirements, including but not limited to required yard areas, setbacks and height limitations. 
d.  A statement identifying all potential adverse impacts upon adjacent property caused by the temporary use or structure and methods of proposed mitigation of such impacts. 
e.  A cash deposit, surety bond or letter of credit in a form approved by the City Manager authorizing the City's use of such guarantee to remove the use and structures and restore the site upon the applicant's failure to remove the temporary use or structure. The amount of such guarantee shall be equal to one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the City's estimated removal and restoration costs. 
f.  Where the property upon which the temporary use or structure will be located is not owned by the applicant, a statement of authorization evidencing the owner's consent to the use of the property for the temporary use or structure. 
(3)  The City Manager shall administratively issue a written permit for a temporary use or temporary structure upon a finding by the City Manager that: 
a.  The application proposes a temporary use or temporary structure authorized by this Section. 
b.  The application is complete in accordance with Paragraph (b)(2) above. 
c.  The application will not violate or fail to conform to any applicable requirement of this Code. 
d.  The temporary use or structure will not present an unreasonable adverse impact upon an adjacent residential property; or, by the City Manager's imposition of conditions upon the permit, any adverse impact may be appropriately mitigated. 
e.  No previously issued permit for a temporary use or structure was revoked by the City Manager for the same property within the prior five (5) years. 
(4)  The City Manager is authorized to impose reasonable conditions upon any permit issued in accordance with this Section deemed necessary or desirable by the City Manager to mitigate potential adverse impacts resulting from the temporary use or structure or to ensure the conformance of the use or structure with this Code or state or federal laws. In addition to any conditions imposed by the City Manager, the following standard conditions shall be imposed upon a permit issued in accordance with this Section: 
a.  The City Manager may revoke any permit upon a finding by the City Manager that: 
1.  The permittee failed to comply with any applicable provision of this Code or any condition imposed upon the permit; or 
2.  The use or structure failed or fails to meet the requirements of Paragraphs (a)(1), (2) or (3) above, as applicable. 
b.  The permit shall expire three hundred sixty-five (365) days following the date of permit issuance or at such earlier or later day of expiration as stated in the written permit. 
c.  The permittee shall obtain all required building and other permits prior to commencing the temporary use or locating the temporary structure on the permitted site. 
(5)  A permit for a temporary use or temporary structure issued in accordance with this Section shall be nonrenewable. Continuation of a previously permitted temporary use or temporary structure shall require reapplication for a new permit. 
(6)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit or prohibit the approval of a temporary use or temporary structure if such use or structure is authorized as part of a major event permit or contract approved by the City. 
(Prior code 6-15-7; Ord. 8, 1992; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 5 1, 2004; Ord. 7 22, 2004) 
Sec. 16-16-80. - Storage of travel homes and boats. 
    It is unlawful to park or store travel homes in the front yard area of property or on any public street, highway, road, alley or other right-of-way for a period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) hours. It is lawful to store said travel homes, trailers or boats in other areas of the property if they are located in such a position on the property so as to be reasonably screened from the view of those off the property. Screening may be in the form of fencing, landscaping or other opaque materials. 
(Prior code 6-15-9; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-16-90. - Permanent or moveable trash containers. 
    It shall be permissible for residents to have either moveable or permanent containers for the collection of brush, rubbish, trash, garbage, dung or other substance, so long as they are not offensive or injurious because of odor or other nuisances. Said containers shall have lids which shall remain closed except during the process of being emptied. Said containers shall also be located in such a position on the property so as to be reasonably screened from the view of those off the property. Containers may be set at the edge of the right-of-way for pickup on a temporary basis. Once the containers have been emptied, they must be returned to their storage areas within twelve (12) hours. 
(Prior code 6-15-10; Ord. 16, 1980) 
Sec. 16-16-100. - Construction of berms. 
(a)  The construction of berms is permitted only in accordance with this Section following issuance of a berm permit. 
(b)  Before commencing construction of any berm, the property owner shall submit to the City an application for a berm permit and information deemed sufficient by the City to demonstrate or describe the following: 
(1)  The location of the proposed berm(s); 
(2)  A survey that shows the height of the preconstruction grade of the property along all points of the proposed berm(s); 
(3)  The width, height and length of the proposed berm(s) along all points of the proposed berm(s); 
(4)  A description and source of the materials used to form the berm(s); 
(5)  A description of the type and location of grasses, groundcovers, shrubs, trees and other landscaping materials to be installed on the berm(s); and 
(6)  A description of any potential modification or redirection of the preconstruction or historic surface drainage patterns as the result of the proposed berm(s). 
(c)  The City shall issue a berm permit where the City finds that the proposed berm(s) will meet the following standards and criteria: 
(1)  Except as provided in this Section, berms shall not exceed six (6) feet in height at any point as measured from the preconstruction grade or, if the berm is adjacent to a public street, from the grade of the centerline of an adjacent public street, whichever is less. Berms adjacent to a rear or side lot line and not adjacent to a public street or a private street shall not exceed four (4) feet in height at any point as measured from the preconstruction grade. Berms located within the building envelope of a lot shall not exceed three (3) feet in height and do not require a permit. 
(2)  Nonprofit institutions, public recreational facilities and nonprofit recreational facilities shall comply with all provisions of this Section, except that such entities shall be permitted to have berms of up to ten (10) feet in height as measured at and along the base from the preconstruction grade, provided that no portion of any berm with a height or width greater than that allowed by Subsection (c)(1) or (3) herein shall be within one hundred (100) feet of any lot line. 
(3)  Berms shall not exceed the maximum slope of four (4) units horizontal to one (1) unit vertical (4:1). 
(4)  Except as provided in this Section, berms shall not exceed fifty-two (52) feet in width measured at the base of the berm along the preconstruction grade. Berms adjacent to a rear or side lot line and not adjacent to a public street or a private street shall not exceed thirty-six (36) feet in width measured at the base of the berm along the preconstruction grade. 
(5)  Berms shall be prohibited within any floodplain, unless otherwise authorized by a City-issued floodplain development permit. 
(6)  Grading for berms is prohibited in the City's rights-of-way and easements without first obtaining a right-of-way permit from the City. 
(7)  Berms shall be prohibited within the sight triangle of any intersection. 
(8)  No buildings or structures of any kind or type shall be permitted upon or within any berm. 
(9)  All areas of the berm(s) shall be covered with grasses, groundcovers, rock, mulch or other landscaping materials sufficient to prevent erosion. Such landscaping must be installed within ninety (90) days of completion of the finished grading. 
(10)  Berms shall not be designed to collect, redirect or release surface water upon adjacent property in a manner inconsistent with the historic or preconstruction conditions or applicable law without the written consent of the adjacent landowner. 
(11)  Berms shall be designed with both horizontal and vertical undulations so that the top of the berm undulates and so that the sides of the berm undulate to form a serpentine-like pattern. Vertical undulations shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the maximum height, and horizontal undulations shall be at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the maximum width, all as depicted below. The City shall review berm plans to assure that there are sufficient horizontal and vertical undulations to make the berm appear natural. 

(12)  Berms shall connect into existing grades at their perimeter to ensure that berms appear natural. 
(13)  During construction of the berm and until all landscaping is completed, appropriate erosion control is required. 
(d)  A berm permit shall be valid for ninety (90) days following the date the permit is issued. All work on the site authorized by such berm permit shall be completed within ninety (90) days of the date of issuance thereof; thereafter, said berm permit shall expire and be deemed cancelled. A new permit will be required to complete the work. The new permit fee will be based on the remaining work to be completed. If a new permit is not obtained, the property shall be restored to its preconstruction grade within ninety (90) days. If a new permit is not obtained and the property is not restored to its preconstruction grade within ninety (90) days, the City may initiate the appropriate actions or proceedings in accordance with Section 16-2-60 of this Code. 
(e)  At the time of completion of the berm and prior to final inspection, the property owner shall submit to the City an as-built survey that shows the width, height and length of the finished berm(s) along all points of the berm(s). 
(f)  Variances may be granted to the standards and criteria of this Section in accordance with Section 16-3-50 of this Chapter. 
(g)  The City may impose one (1) or more conditions upon the issuance of a berm permit where such condition(s) are reasonably necessary to implement the requirements of this Code or to protect the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(h)  In addition to any other penalty for violation of this Section as provided in Article IV of Chapter 1 or Section 16-2-60, the City may require the immediate removal of any berm constructed contrary to this Section and reimbursement to the City of any costs associated with such action. 
(Prior code 6-15-11; Ord. 12, 1985; Ord. 12, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 12 1, 2003; Ord. 10 1, 2004) 
Sec. 16-16-110. - Parking structures. 
(a)  No parking structure, attached or detached, above or below ground, other than a garage for the housing of vehicles intended primarily for the transportation of and owned by residents of the structure to which the garage is attached or accessory, shall be permitted in any zoning district unless specifically permitted as set forth in this Section. 
(b)  Detached parking structures may be accessory structures to nonprofit institutions, private clubs, public and nonprofit recreational facilities and other nonresidential structures, provided that such structures meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Height restriction. 
a.  No portion of any such structure fronting on or adjacent to any private or public property line or right-of-way shall exceed eight (8) feet above the midpoint of the structure at natural grade. 
b.  The minimum height above grade called for in this Subsection may be increased to twelve (12) feet above the midpoint of the structure at natural grade if additional fill is placed at a slope no greater than one (1) vertical to three (3) horizontal so that no more than six (6) feet of the structure projects above the revised grade at the parking structure. 
(2)  Screening. The structure shall be screened from view from neighboring properties and rights-of-way by densely planted trees and shrubs, berms and other landforms or fences. 
(3)  Distance from property line. In all cases, no such parking structure shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any property line. 
(4)  Top of structure. For purposes of this Section, the top of the structure is defined as either: 
a.  The top of the roof level of the parking structure; or 
b.  The top elevation of any parapet wall above the floor level, whichever is highest. 
(Prior code 6-15-12; Ord. 17, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-16-120. - Traffic impact studies. 
    In the event of any proposed use or increased or expanded use of property as or by a nonprofit institution, private club, public recreational facility or nonprofit recreational facility, the owner of the property intended for or subjected to such use or increased or expanded use may be required, prior to the issuance of any necessary building permit in connection with such use or increased or expanded use, to prepare at his expense and submit to the City a traffic impact study identifying the volumes and patterns of traffic which may be generated by such use or increased or expanded use and specifying any roadway improvements necessary to render such use or increased or expanded use consistent with public safety. Such traffic impact study and subsequent approval by the City Council, as provided by the applicable Code provision, shall be required whenever, in the opinion of the City Manager, any such use or increased or expanded use does or may be expected to regularly generate in excess of one hundred (100) vehicle trips in any day. Any building expansion or new facility exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet, intended for use by or as a nonprofit institution, private club, public recreational facility or nonprofit recreational facility shall be deemed to require such traffic impact study and subsequent City Council approval of such use or increased or expanded use. All traffic studies shall be accomplished in accordance with the Arapahoe County "Guidelines for Traffic Impact Studies" dated October 1, 1995, and as amended. 
(Prior code 6-15-13; Ord. 13, 2000; Ord. 17, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-16-130. - Wireless communication facilities. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this Section is to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. The City Council finds that these regulations are necessary in order to: 
(1)  Facilitate the provision of wireless communication services to the residents and businesses of the City; 
(2)  Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and siting standards; 
(3)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural standards and setback requirements; 
(4)  Encourage and maximize the use of existing and approved towers, buildings and other structures to accommodate new wireless communication antennas in order to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community; 
(5)  Enhance the ability of wireless communications service providers to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; and 
(6)  Effectively manage wireless communications facilities in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Applicability. The requirements of this Section shall apply to all wireless communication facility applications for base stations, alternative communication facilities and towers. This Section shall not govern any tower or wireless communication facilities owned or operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or used exclusively for receive-only antennas, provided that all other zoning district requirements are met. 
(c)  Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following listed specific words and terms are defined as follows: 
    Co-location means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. 
    Eligible facilities request means any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station as measured from the original tower or base station zoning or siting approval, involving: 
(1)  Co-location of new transmission equipment; 
(2)  Removal of transmission equipment; or 
(3)  Replacement of transmission equipment. 
    Eligible support structure means any existing tower or base station as defined in this Section. 
    Existing means a constructed tower or base station that was reviewed, approved and lawfully constructed in accordance with all requirements of applicable law as of the time of an eligible facilities request, provided that a tower that exists as a legal, non-conforming use and was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this Section. 
    Owner means an individual or entity holding an ownership interest in property that is subject to this Section, as well as any other applicant for approval under this Section who is acting with authority of a record owner. Once any approvals are granted pursuant to this Section, any references to Owner shall also mean operators, managers or any other person or entity authorized by an Owner with responsibility for the approved facilities. Any other such person or entity shall be jointly and severally liable with an Owner for any violations of this Code arising out of the approved facilities. 
    Right-of-way means any public street or road that is dedicated to public use for vehicular traffic except for those rights-of-way owned by the Colorado Department of Transportation within the City limits. Right-of-way excludes any trails or recreational paths used for pedestrian, bicycle, or equestrian use. 
    Site means the specific boundaries of the leased or owned property or specifically defined area of the wireless communication facility subject to review under this Section and any access or utility easements related to the site. For towers, base stations and alternative communication facilities in the public rights-of-way, a site is limited to that area comprising the base of the structure and to associated transmission equipment located on the ground. 
    Substantial change means a modification that substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  For towers located in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten percent (10%) or more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater; or it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower by more than six (6) feet; or it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the tower; or it involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent (10%) larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the tower; or 
(2)  For towers not located in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than ten percent (10%) or by the height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater; or it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the tower at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; or 
(3)  For base stations, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten percent (10%) or more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater; or it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet; or it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent (10%) larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure; or 
(4)  For any eligible support structure, it involves the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or it entails any excavation or placement outside the existing site; or it impairs the concealment elements of the eligible support structure necessary to qualify as an alternative communication facility; or it does not comply with the original application design elements or conditions of approval, including but not limited to colors, textures, surfaces, scale, character and siting, or any approved amendments thereto, subject to the thresholds established in subsections (1)-(4) of this definition. 
(5)  For purposes of determining whether a substantial change exists, changes in height are measured from the original support structure in cases where installations are or will be separated horizontally, such as on building rooftops. In all other circumstances, changes in height are measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved equipment and any modifications that were approved prior to February 22, 2012. 
    Transmission equipment means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
    Wireless communication facilities mean facilities that transmit and/or receive electromagnetic wireless communication signals. It includes antennas, microwave dishes, horns and other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, communication towers or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment buildings, parking area and other accessory development. A wireless communication facility does not include a facility entirely enclosed within a permitted building where the installation does not require a modification of the exterior of the building; nor does it include a device attached to a building, used for serving that building only and that is otherwise permitted under other provisions of the Code. The following types of facilities are included within this definition: 
    Alternative communication facility shall mean a communication facility with an alternative design that camouflages or conceals the presence of antennas or towers such as, but not limited to, artificial trees, clock, light poles, bell towers and steeples. A stand-alone pole in the public right-of-way upon which small cell antenna facilities are installed is considered an alternative communication facility to the extent it meets the camouflage and concealment standards of this Section. 
    Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of wireless communications signals. 
    Base station means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The definition of a base station does not include or encompass a tower as defined herein or any equipment associated with a tower. Base station includes, without limitation: 
(1)  Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this Section, has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. 
(2)  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including Distributed Antenna Systems ("DAS") and small-cell antenna facilities) that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this Section, has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. 
    Base station does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this Section, does not support or house equipment described in subparagraphs (b)(1) or(2) above. 
    Freestanding communication facility means a communication facility that consists of a stand-alone support structure or tower, antennas and accessory equipment. 
    Roof-mounted communication facility means a communication facility that is mounted and supported on the roof or any rooftop appurtenance of a legally existing building or structure. 
    Small cell antenna facility means a communication facility where each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic feet; and primary equipment enclosures are no larger than seventeen (17) cubic feet in volume. The following associated equipment may be located outside of the primary equipment enclosure and, if so located, is not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosure, back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switch and cut-off switch. 
    Temporary mobile wireless communication facility means a wireless communication facility that is capable of being moved and consists of a cellular antenna tower and electronic radio transceiver equipment on a truck or trailer designed to provide expanded cellular network coverage or capacity. 
    Tower means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. 
    Wall-mounted communication facility means a communication facility that is mounted and supported entirely on the wall of a legally existing building, including the walls of architectural features such as parapets, chimneys and similar appurtenances. 
(d)  General requirements/location and design criteria. All wireless communication facilities and sites shall be designed and located using the criteria set forth in this Subsection. The City may withhold approval of any facility that does not meet any of these criteria. 
(1)  Applications must contain an applicant's name, address, general contact telephone number and an emergency number where a representative of the applicant can be contacted twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week. Should any information represented on the application change, the applicant must contact the City in writing and provide the updated information. An applicant for small cell antenna facilities involving multiple individual small cell antenna facilities may submit a consolidated application to the City that covers all individual small cell antenna facilities. 
(2)  Wireless communication facilities should be co-located with other wireless communication facilities or public utilities whenever possible, and to the extent the total facility remains consistent with the scale of the surrounding structures. Alternative communication facilities and small cell antenna facilities shall be consistent, to the extent reasonably feasible, with the size and shape of any pole-mounted wireless communication facilities installed by communications providers on utility poles that are within six hundred (600) feet of the alternative communication facility. 
(3)  The applicant shall (i) demonstrate how the proposed site fits into the overall communication network for the community, to confirm the necessity for the site; (ii) to the extent that it seeks approval to address gaps in coverage or capacity, demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that there are no viable alternatives to remedy gaps in the applicant's network; and (iii) to the extent that the applicant provides services under a license granted by a governmental authority, that a failure to approve the application will result in the applicant's inability to provide the minimum coverage or capacity it is required to provide pursuant to its license and any applicable law. 
(4)  The location and development of wireless communication facilities should, to the maximum extent possible, preserve the existing character of the topography and vegetation. 
(5)  Wireless communication facilities should be designed and located to avoid dominant silhouettes and to preserve view corridors of surrounding areas to the maximum extent possible. 
(6)  The visual impact of the wireless communication facilities shall be mitigated through the use of compatible architectural elements such as: colors, textures, surfaces, scale and character. The facilities shall be screened with vegetation, structures or topographical features. The facility should be integrated to the maximum extent possible, through its location and design, into the natural setting and the structural environment of the area. Accessory equipment in areas of high visibility shall, where possible, be sited below the ridgeline or designed (e.g., placed underground, depressed or located behind earth berms or structures) to minimize its profile. 
(7)  Where possible, wireless communication facilities should be concealed in accessory structures consistent with the architectural scale and character of the area. Ground mounted equipment shall be designed and located, where reasonably feasible, in a flush-to-grade underground equipment vault. The total footprint coverage of a wireless communication facility's accessory equipment shall not exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet. 
(8)  Roof- and wall-mounted facilities shall be architecturally compatible with and colored to match the building or structure to which they are attached. Wall-mounted facilities shall be mounted as flush to the building wall as possible. A wall-mounted facility may encroach a maximum of thirty (30) inches into the required setback for the building to which it is attached, but shall not extend across the property line. Roof-mounted facilities shall only be permitted if the applicant has demonstrated that wall-mounted facilities cannot be installed due to physical or operational infeasibility. 
(9)  Freestanding wireless communication facilities shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable governmental authority. If lighting is required, the City may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. Lighting must be shielded or directed to the greatest extent possible so as to minimize the amount of light falling onto nearby properties, particularly residences. 
(10)  Towers shall be designed to allow for co-location to the maximum extent possible. 
(11)  No portion of any antenna array may extend beyond the property line. 
(12)  Wireless communication facilities should be screened to mitigate visual impacts to the maximum extent practicable. 
(13)  The use of any portion of a wireless communication facility for signs for promotional or advertising purposes, including but not limited to company name, phone numbers, banners, streamers and balloons, is prohibited. The City may require the installation of signage with safety information. 
(14)  Fencing should not be used exclusively (it must be supplemented with vegetation and other things) to screen wireless communication facilities. Security fencing should be of a design which blends into the character of the existing environment. 
(15)  The wireless communication facilities shall be designed, maintained and operated as required by applicable FCC licenses and regulations. 
(16)  All wireless communication facilities shall comply with the setbacks within the zone district applicable to accessory structures or a setback equal to the height of the facilities as measured from the natural grade to the highest point of the wireless communication facility, whichever is greater, unless physical characteristics of the property and the facility allow for placement of the facility pursuant to Paragraph (c)(6) above. On land where the setback is measured from a property line that is not adjacent to residentially zoned property, the setback shall be the setback required for an accessory structure in that zone district. 
(17)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, towers shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height, as measured from the natural grade to the highest point of the wireless communication facility. 
(18)  All owners and operators of wireless communication facilities shall comply with federal regulations for radio frequency emissions. At the time of application for a wireless communication facility, and thereafter at the request of the City upon complaint (but not more than annually), the owner or operator shall submit a project implementation report that provides cumulative field measurements of radio frequency emissions of all antennas installed at the subject site, and that compares the results with established federal standards. If, upon review, or at any time any wireless communication facility within the City is operational, the City finds that the facility does not meet federal regulations, the City may require corrective action within a reasonable period of time, and if not corrected, may require removal of the wireless communication facilities at the owner's expense. Any reasonable costs incurred by the City, including reasonable consulting costs to verify compliance with these requirements, shall be paid by the owner. 
(19)  To ensure the structural integrity of towers and any other freestanding communications facilities upon which other wireless communication facilities may be mounted, the owner of such structure shall ensure that it is of sufficient structural strength to accommodate reasonable co-location, if required, and is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable City building codes and all other applicable codes of the City. In addition to any other applicable standards and requirements, the following shall apply to all structures upon which wireless communication facilities are located: 
a.  Sufficient anti-climbing measures must be incorporated into each facility to reduce potential for trespass and injury. 
b.  No guy wires employed may be anchored within the area in front of any principal building or structure on a parcel. 
c.  All wireless communication facilities shall comply with the power line clearance standards set forth by the Colorado Public Utilities Commission. 
d.  All wireless communication facilities must be structurally designed and physically sited so that they do not pose a potential hazard to nearby residences or surrounding properties or improvements. Any tower or freestanding communication facility shall be designed and maintained to withstand without failure maximum forces expected from wind, tornadoes, hurricanes and other natural occurrences, when the facility is fully loaded with antennas, transmitters, other wireless communication facilities and camouflaging. Initial demonstration of compliance with this requirement shall be provided via submission of a report to the City Manager and/or designee prepared by a structural engineer licensed in the State describing the structure, specifying the number and type of antennas it is designed to accommodate, providing the basis for the calculations done and documenting the actual calculations performed. Proof of ongoing compliance shall be provided upon request. 
If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a wireless communication facility fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of a wireless communication facility, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such facility into compliance with such standards. Upon good cause shown by the owner, the City Manager and/or designee may extend such compliance period not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of said notice. If the owner fails to bring such facility into compliance within said time limit, the City may remove such facility at the owner's expense. 
(20)  The fee and any additional application requirements for wireless communication facilities shall be the same as those for conditional uses contained in Section 16-18-50 of this Code. 
(e)  Approval process. 
(1)  Wireless communication facilities, except eligible facilities requests which are reviewed under subsection (h), may be allowed as accessory structures on private property, or public property owned by an entity other than the City, within all zone districts, if specifically authorized as a conditional use after public hearing by the City Council after recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(2)  Wireless communication facilities, except towers, may be allowed as accessory structures on property owned by the City, in any zone district, if approved by the City Council pursuant to a lease agreement with the wireless communication facility provider. Applications for towers on property owned by the City shall require approval through a conditional use process which includes public hearings. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this Subsection, applications for certain wireless communication facilities may be approved administratively as set forth in this subsection. Applications for alternative communication facilities and wall-mounted communication facilities shall be determined by the City Manager or his or her designee in accordance with the criteria set forth in this Subsection and Section 16-3-40 of this Chapter. Denial of an application may be appealed to the City Council. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this Section, the following procedures shall apply to the use of temporary mobile wireless communication facilities. 
a.  Use of temporary mobile wireless communication facilities for television broadcasts or to increase capacity of a wireless network for major events may be approved through the major event permit process under Article XXI of this Chapter, taking into consideration the general requirements/location and design criteria set forth in Paragraphs (d)(1), (11), (15) and (16) of this Section. 
b.  Use of temporary mobile wireless communication facilities or television broadcast equipment in conjunction with federal, state or local emergencies, natural disasters or similar major public interest events may be approved administratively by the City Manager or his or her designee, subject to reasonable time limitations approved by the City Manager based on the nature, scope and duration of the emergency, disaster or similar public interest event. 
(f)  Wireless communication facilities in public rights-of-way: Subject to the City's permitting process, wireless communication facilities located exclusively within public rights-of-way shall be permitted by administrative action of the City Manager or his or her designee, based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The facilities must be placed on existing poles, upon replacement poles of the same dimensions or upon replacement poles of a dimension that would otherwise be permitted under existing regulations for any utility operating in the City. 
(2)  Any necessary wiring or cabling shall be located within the pole or, if not technically feasible, located within fully enclosed sheathing attached to the pole. Such sheathing shall be of the same color as the pole, shall be limited in size to that necessary to cover the wiring or cabling and may not extend out from the pole more than three (3) inches. 
(3)  The area of the facilities on any pole, other than sheathing enclosing wiring or cabling described in Paragraph (2) above, may not exceed three (3) cubic feet for antenna enclosures and seventeen (17) cubic feet for any primary equipment enclosures, and the facilities add no more than ten (10) feet of additional height to the pole. 
(4)  Any ground equipment shall be buried or screened by landscaping approved by the City. The owner of the facilities shall maintain such landscaping. 
(5)  If an applicant is proposing to add to the total number of poles located in the area impacted by its application, the City may administratively approve the application only if the proposed new pole(s) is located a minimum distance of six hundred (600) feet from any existing or other new pole proposed in the application. If a six hundred (600) feet spacing of poles cannot be achieved in the application, or if the request does not otherwise meet the criteria contained in this Subsection, the request shall require a conditional use permit. 
(g)  Co-location for new towers and other freestanding communication facilities. The shared use of existing towers or other freestanding communication facilities upon which wireless communication facilities can be mounted shall be preferred to the construction of new facilities. As a condition of approval of any tower or other freestanding communication facilities, the applicant shall be required to allow co-location on such facilities in the future if the facility is capable of supporting co-location, the entity wishing to co-locate is willing to pay fair market value for the space and the City requests such co-location. The application for any wireless communication facility involving a new tower or other freestanding communication facility shall include evidence that reasonable efforts have been made to co-locate within or upon an existing wireless communication facility within a reasonable distance of the proposed site, regardless of municipal boundaries. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed wireless communication facility cannot be accommodated on existing facilities due to one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of existing and approved wireless telecommunication facilities, considering existing and planned use for those facilities. 
(2)  The planned equipment, if co-located, would cause radio frequency interference with other existing or planned equipment, or exceed radio frequency emission standards which cannot be reasonably prevented. 
(3)  Existing or approved wireless communication facilities do not have space on which proposed equipment can be placed so it can function effectively and reasonably. 
(4)  Other technical reasons make it impracticable to place the equipment proposed by the applicant on existing facilities or structures. 
(5)  The landowner or owner of the existing wireless communication facility refuses to allow such co-location or requests an unreasonably high fee for such co-location compared to current industry rates. 
(6)  No existing wireless communication facilities upon which the applicant's facilities can be mounted are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(7)  Existing wireless communication facilities are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(8)  Existing wireless communication facilities upon which the applicant's facilities can be mounted do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antennas and related equipment. 
(9)  Any other reason, in the reasonable discretion of the City Manager or his or her designee. 
(h)  Eligible facilities request for existing towers and base stations. This Subsection shall apply to eligible facilities requests for co-location on, or modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station. 
(1)  Review required. No co-location or modification to any existing tower or base station may occur except after a written request from an applicant, reviewed and approved by the City in accordance with this subsection (h). 
(2)  Application. The City shall prepare, and from time to time revise, and make publicly available an application form which shall be limited to the information necessary for the City to consider whether an application is an eligible facilities request. 
(3)  Review criteria. Upon receipt of an application for an eligible facilities request pursuant to this Section, the City shall review administratively such application to determine whether the application meets the following criteria for an eligible facilities request: 
a.  Does not result in a substantial change; 
b.  Does not violate a generally applicable law, regulation or other rule reasonably related to public health and safety and complies with generally applicable building, structural, electrical and safety codes; 
c.  Complies with the original application design elements or conditions of approval, including but not limited to colors, textures, surfaces, scale, character and siting, or any approved amendments thereto, subject to the thresholds established in subsections 1-4 of the definition of substantial change; and 
d.  Complies with concealment elements of the eligible support structure necessary to qualify as an alternative communication facility. 
(4)  Timeframe for review. Subject to the tolling provisions of subparagraph (5) below, within sixty (60) days of the date on which the applicant submits an application seeking approval under this subsection (h), the City shall approve the application unless it determines that the application is not covered by this subsection (h). If the application is not considered an eligible facilities request, then the City shall process the application in accordance with section 16-16-130(e) within applicable timeframes. 
(5)  Tolling of the timeframe for review. The sixty (60) day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement of the City and the applicant, or in cases where the City determines that the application is incomplete. 
a.  To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application. 
b.  The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental written submission in response to the City's notice of incompleteness. 
c.  Following a supplemental submission, the City will notify the applicant within ten (10) days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this Subsection. Subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness. 
(6)  Failure to act. In the event the City fails to act on a request seeking approval for an eligible facilities request under this subsection (h) within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted. Such automatic grant of approval becomes effective when the applicant notifies the City in writing after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed granted. 
(7)  Remedies; Judicial Review. Applicants and/or the City may bring claims related to this Section 16-16-130 of the Code in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(i)  Decision: The decision on whether to approve or deny an application to construct or erect a wireless communication facility shall be in writing, based upon evidence presented to the City. 
(j)  Abandonment/removal of wireless communication facilities: 
a.  At the time of submission of the application for a wireless communication facility, the applicant shall execute an agreement in a form acceptable to the City, to remove all antennas, driveways, structures, buildings, equipment sheds, lighting, utilities, fencing, gates, accessory equipment or structures, as well as any tower or freestanding communication facility used as a wireless communication facility if such facility becomes technologically obsolete or ceases to perform its originally intended function for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. Upon removal, the land shall be restored, including but not limited to the landscaping of exposed soils. 
b.  If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a wireless communication facility fails to comply with any applicable conditions of approval, or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon written notice, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such facility into compliance. If the owner fails to bring such facility into compliance within said thirty (30) days, the City may remove the facility at the owner's expense. 
c.  Any wireless communication facility that is not operated for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days shall be considered abandoned. The City, in its sole discretion, may require any abandoned wireless communication facility to be removed within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner of such abandonment. Upon removal, the site shall be restored or revegetated to blend with the surrounding environment. If such removal is not completed within said ninety (90) days, the City may consider the facility a nuisance under Subparagraph 7-1-30(12)c of this Code, and the City may remove and dispose of the same at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a structure upon which wireless communication facilities are mounted, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the structure. 
(k)  Application to existing wireless communication facilities. Any wireless communication facilities approved on or before September 7, 2015 shall comply with all applicable sections herein with respect to modification of such facilities. 
(Prior code 6-15-14; Ord. 3, 1994; Ord. 5, 1994; Ord. 1, 1995; Ord. 5, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 08 10, 2007; Ord. 6 1, 2009; Ord. 15 1, 2, 2013; Ord. 8 1, 2015 ; Ord. 7 1, 2017 ) 
Sec. 16-16-140. - Television antennas. 
(a)  For purposes of this Section, television antenna means an antenna used for private television reception for a single-family home. 
(b)  A television antenna may extend five (5) feet above the top ridgeline on the house. Television antennas shall in no instance be over thirty-five (35) feet in height as measured from the natural grade to the highest point of the antenna. 
(Ord. 08 11, 2007) 
Sec. 16-16-150. - Satellite dish antennas. 
(a)  Purpose, intent and applicability: The City Council finds that these regulations, to the extent allowable under federal law and specifically 47 C.F.R.  1.4000, are necessary in order to: 
(1)  Provide for the use of satellite dish antennas in the City, subject to certain standards; 
(2)  Protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community; and 
(3)  Minimize adverse visual effects of satellite dish antennas on all residents and property owners within the City in a nondiscriminatory manner through careful design and siting standards. 
This Section shall not govern television antennas, governed by Section 16-16-140 above, or tower or wireless communication facilities, governed by Section 16-16-130 above. 
(b)  Definitions: 
    Nonconforming satellite dish antenna means a satellite dish antenna that was installed prior to the effective date of this Section which could not be installed in its current location under the terms of this Section. 
    Satellite dish antenna means an antenna that is designed to receive one (1) of the following: direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite service; video programming services via multi-point distribution services, including multi-channel multi-point distribution services, instructional television fixed services and local multi-point distribution services; or television broadcast signals; or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals via satellite. 
(c)  All satellite dish antennas shall comply with the standards promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regarding radio frequency emissions. 
(d)  General requirements/location and design criteria. Satellite dish antennas shall: 
(1)  Comply with applicable accessory structure setbacks; 
(2)  Comply with applicable accessory structure height limits, except that wall- or roof-mounted antennas may extend five (5) feet above the highest point of the roof or structure to which it is mounted. 
(3)  Be screened from view from adjacent properties and rights-of-way to the maximum extent possible; and 
(4)  Be located in the rear or side yard of a lot. 
(e)  Wall-mounted facilities shall be mounted as flush to the building wall as possible. 
(Ord. 19 12, 2010) 
Sec. 16-16-160. - Retaining walls. 
    Retaining walls shall be permitted on (i) a legally established lot as defined in Section 16-1-10 of this Chapter and (ii) a lot which has a nonconformance as defined in Section 16-1-10 when that lot is lawful based on the provisions of Section 16-14-10, provided that the retaining wall complies with the following regulations: 
(1)  All retaining walls shall be set back from any lot line a minimum distance calculated using the following formula: the number four (4) multiplied by the height of the retaining wall divided by the number three (3) (the minimum setback = [4 x height of retaining wall] / 3). For tiered retaining walls, the height used to determine the minimum setback shall be the tallest point of the combined height of all tiers and the setback shall be measured from the closest point of the tiered retaining wall to the lot line. 
(2)  For retaining walls located within a building envelope established by this Chapter for a structure or an accessory structure, the maximum height of the retaining wall shall be equal to the maximum height allowed by this Chapter for the structure or accessory structure with which the retaining wall is located. The height of the retaining wall shall be measured from natural grade or finished grade, whichever is more restrictive. Retaining walls must be tiered if they are more than six (6) feet in height measured from finished grade and no individual tier shall exceed six (6) feet as measured from finished grade. 
(3)  For retaining walls located outside of a building envelope for a structure or an accessory structure established by this Chapter, the maximum height of the retaining wall, including the combined height of tiered retaining walls, shall be six (6) feet measured from natural grade or finished grade, whichever is more restrictive. 
(4)  For a fence constructed on top of a retaining wall, the top of the fence shall not exceed six (6) feet measured from the natural grade or finished grade, whichever is more restrictive; provided however, that fences that are parallel and adjacent to highways owned by the State shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height measured from natural grade or finished grade, whichever is more restrictive. This Paragraph does not prohibit guards (as defined in Paragraphs 18-1-20(19) and 18-2-20(20) in Chapter 18 of this Code) when (i) the guard is required by such Building Regulations to be constructed on the top of a retaining wall within the building envelope and (ii) the height of the guard does not exceed the minimum height required for a guard by the Building Regulations. When the Building Regulations require a guard on top of a retaining wall that is over six (6) feet in height, the guard must also be constructed so that it is at least fifty percent (50%) open in its vertical surface as viewed perpendicular to the guard. 
(Ord. 7 2, 2011) 
Sec. 16-16-170. - Preservation of established trees. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this Section is to provide minimum requirements for protecting established trees in order to preserve the semi-rural character of the Village and qualities associated with that character, while protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the community. The City Council finds that these regulations are necessary in order to: 
(1)  Preserve the privacy and value of existing homes; 
(2)  Preserve the semi-rural character of the community; 
(3)  Screen nighttime light pollution from roads and adjacent properties; and 
(4)  Preserve wildlife habitat and shade. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Established tree means a living tree, the trunk of which measures six (6) inches or more in diameter at a height of forty-eight (48) inches above natural grade. Trees with multiple trunks or branches may be measured around a single trunk at a height of not less than six (6) inches above natural grade. These measurements are referred to herein as the caliper size . 
    Large tree means an established tree, the trunk of which is twenty-one (21) inches or larger in caliper size. 
    Medium tree means an established tree the trunk of which is between eleven (11) and twenty (20) inches in caliper size. 
    Small tree means an established tree, the trunk of which is between six (6) and ten (10) inches in caliper size. 
(c)  Tree preservation requirements. 
(1)  Any established tree removed from within the minimum yard or setback area required for a property by Section 16-5-30, 16-6-30, 16-7-30, 16-8-70, 16-9-30, or 16-10-30 of this Chapter, or from within the public right-of-way adjacent to the property: (a) in conjunction with the (i) development of a new residence or (ii) an expansion of an existing residence that increases the square footage of such residence by fifty percent (50%) or more; or (b) within the twelve (12) months preceding the date upon which a building permit application for such development or expansion was submitted, must be replaced in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph (c)(2) below. Notwithstanding the forgoing, if an established tree is listed on the State of Colorado Noxious Weeds Lists A, B or C as designated by Section 35-5.5-108(2)(a), C.R.S. as amended, or in Section 7-4-10 of this Code it may be removed and no replacement tree shall be required. 
(2)  Established trees that have been or will be removed must be replaced as follows: 
a.  Each small tree must be replaced with a new tree with a caliper size of at least two (2) inches; 
b.  Each medium tree must be replaced with a new tree or trees with a total caliper size of at least six (6) inches; and 
c.  Each large tree must be replaced with a new tree or trees with a total caliper size of at least ten (10) inches. 
(3)  All replacement trees shall have a minimum caliper size of two (2) inches at the time of planting. 
(4)  No species of tree shall be planted that is listed on the State of Colorado Noxious Weeds Lists A, B or C as designated by Section 35-5.5-108(2)(a), C.R.S. as amended, or in Section 7-4-10 of this Code. 
(5)  Established trees may be transplanted to another location within the same lot without incurring a replacement requirement. However, if such transplanted trees do not survive until the compliance check required in Paragraph (d)(4) below, they shall be replaced as required by Paragraphs (c)(2) and (3) above. 
(d)  Procedures for development. 
(1)  The property owner shall submit a tree survey that shall include a tree protection plan to the City as part of the building permit application. The tree survey and tree protection plan shall show: 
a.  The location of all established trees, including established trees removed within the past twelve (12) months of the date of submittal of the building permit application, located on the property, in adjacent public rights-of-way and in the vicinity of any other private rights-of-way used for construction access; 
b.  The diameter of all established trees measured in accordance with Paragraph (b)(1) above; 
c.  Certification as to the survey accuracy by a registered professional land surveyor, engineer, landscape architect or architect licensed in the State of Colorado. 
d.  Existing location of all established trees to be preserved, transplanted or removed. 
e.  Proposed location, caliper size and species of replacement and transplanted trees demonstrating a minimum compliance with this Section; 
f.  Measures to protect established trees from being damaged or destroyed during construction. Such measures may include, but are not limited to barriers around trees and tree roots and plans to avoid soil compaction over tree roots. 
(2)  The location of replacement or transplanted trees shall be in conformance with Chapter 11 of this Code and in the general location on the property from where the established trees have been removed. 
(3)  A property owner may apply for an exception to Section 7-4-30 of this Code to retain a dead or dying tree for the purpose of habitat preservation. An excepted tree shall not count towards the replacement requirements outlined in this Section. The application for an exception must include: 
a.  Location and height of the tree; 
b.  The distance to any structure within fifty (50) feet; 
c.  The distance to adjacent properties and rights-of-way; 
d.  Certification by a member of the International Society of Arboriculture or equivalent organization that the tree is not diseased; and 
e.  A mitigation plan indicating how the tree shall be maintained, including but not limited to pruning of dangerous branches, so as not to create a threat to health, safety and welfare. 
The City may reject an application or revoke a previous approval for reasons including but not limited to tree visibility, safety of people or property, risk of disease, adjacent property owner objections or recommendations of City departments. 
(4)  All tree planting requirements listed herein must be completed before a certificate of occupancy is issued. A compliance check will be conducted between twenty-four (24) and thirty-six (36) months after the certificate of occupancy is granted to verify survival and condition of all trees shown on the tree protection plan. The property owner must replace any trees that have not survived within six (6) months following the compliance check based on the requirements of Paragraphs (c)(2) and (3) above. 
(e)  Waiver from replacement requirements. 
(1)  The City Manager may authorize a waiver from the replacement requirements of Paragraph 16-16-170(c)(2) above upon the written request of the applicant that demonstrates that the request meets the requirements of Paragraph 16-16-170(e)(2). 
(2)  No waiver shall be authorized unless: 
a.  The applicant demonstrates that the removal of the established tree is beyond the reasonable control of the applicant; or 
b.  A professional arborist has issued a written recommendation that the established tree be removed because of the poor or unhealthy condition of the established tree; or 
c.  The requested waiver of the replacement requirements (i) affords reasonable protections to adjacent properties and (ii) will not cause an undesirable change in the character of the neighborhood or have an adverse effect on the physical or environmental conditions of the surrounding property. 
(Ord. 6 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-16-180. - Bulk plane. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this Section is to accommodate new construction and additions in residential districts while protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the community. The City Council finds that these regulations are necessary in order to: 
(1)  Preserve views and an open feel; 
(2)  Preserve access to sunlight; 
(3)  Promote privacy; and 
(4)  Reduce looming impacts. 
(b)  Applicability. The bulk plane standards in this Section shall apply to principal and accessory structures in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zone Districts. 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Bulk plane means a plane that begins at a specified starting height above the minimum side and rear yard lines on a lot or parcel, then rises at an angle towards the center of the lot until it reaches the maximum permitted height in the zone district or intersects with a bulk plane rising from another side or rear setback. The starting height for the bulk plane may vary for the front and rear areas of a lot. 
    Angle means the pitch of the bulk plane above a flat, horizontal plane. See Figure 180-1. 
    Front area means the buildable area of the lot closest to the minimum front yard line as shown in Figure 180-2. 
    Front area depth means the horizontal depth of the front area as specified for the zone district in feet from the minimum front yard line towards the rear of the lot along the minimum side setbacks. See Figure 180-2. 
    Front yard line, minimum is the virtual line created by the minimum front yard requirements for a zone district, beyond which structures may not be built. See Figure 180-2. 
    Rear area means the portion of the lot that is not within the front area as specified for the zone district. See Figure 180-2. 
    Rear yard line, minimum is the virtual line created by the minimum rear yard requirements for a zone district, beyond which structures may not be built. See Figure 180-2. 
    Side yard line, minimum is the virtual line created by the minimum side yard requirements for a zone district, beyond which structures may not be built. See Figure 180-2. 
    Starting height means the specified vertical distance above the minimum side and rear setbacks where the bulk plane begins. See Figure 180-1. 
Figure 180-1: Bulk plane - Front Elevation View

Figure 180-2: Bulk plane front and rear areas - Plan View

(d)  Standards by zone district. No building or portion thereof shall be constructed or maintained beyond the bulk plane set forth in Table 180-1 except as provided for in Subsection 16-16-180(f) below. 
Table 180-1: Bulk Plane Standards by Zone District 
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 Front area depth 50' 50' 42' 42' 42' Starting height (front area) 21' 21' 21' 21' 12'6" Starting height (rear area) 12'6" 12'6" 12'6" 12'6" 12'6" Angle (front and rear areas) 40 40 40 40 40  
(e)  Special standards for accessory structures. For zone districts where the minimum side or rear yard for an accessory structure is less than the minimum side or rear yard specified for a primary structure, a special accessory structure bulk plane shall begin at a starting height of twelve (12) feet, six (6) inches above the minimum side and rear yard lines for accessory structures. The special accessory structure bulk plane shall rise at a forty (40) degree angle towards the center of the lot until it reaches the maximum permitted height for the zone district or intersects with the bulk plane that begins at the minimum side or rear yard for the primary structure. 
(f)  Measurement. The starting height for the bulk plane shall be measured from the natural grade along the minimum side and/or rear yard lines using one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  For a lot where the average natural grade does not differ by more than seven percent (7%) along the minimum front, side or rear yard lines: The starting height shall be measured from the points at each minimum side yard line that coincide with the minimum front area depth for the bulk plane as shown in Figure 180-3. 
(2)  For a sloping lot where the average natural grade differs by more than seven percent (7%) along the minimum front, side or rear yard lines: The starting height shall be measured at each of the following points as shown in Figure 180-4: 
a.  The points at each minimum side yard line that coincide with the minimum front yard line; 
b.  The points at each minimum side yard line that coincide with the minimum front area depth for the bulk plane; and 
c.  The points at each minimum side yard line that coincide with the minimum rear yard line. 
Figure 180-3: Bulk plane starting height measurement on a relatively flat lot - Birds-Eye View

Figure 180-4: Bulk plane starting height measurement on a sloping lot - Birds-Eye View

(g)  Encroachments. The following building elements may encroach beyond the bulk plane as specified. 
(1)  Roof overhangs or eaves, provided that they do not extend more than thirty (30) inches horizontally beyond the bulk plane. 
(2)  A rooftop solar system that is flush-mounted to the roof or mounted at up to a fifteen-degree angle measured from a horizontal plane, provided that the roof structure supporting the solar system does not extend beyond the bulk plane. 
(3)  The gable end of a sloping roof form, provided that: 
a.  It does not extend more than eleven (11) feet horizontally beyond the bulk plane including any roof overhang. 
b.  It does not extend more than nine (9) feet vertically beyond the bulk plane. 
c.  It has a maximum width of forty-two (42) feet including any roof overhang. 
(4)  Dormers, provided that: 
a.  The highest point of any dormer is at or below the height of the primary roof ridge. 
b.  The portion of any dormer that extends beyond the bulk plane has a maximum width of twelve (12) feet including any roof overhang. 
c.  The dormer does not extend more than six (6) feet vertically beyond the bulk plane. 
d.  The combined width of all dormers does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the length of the roof on which they are located. 
e.  The space between dormers is not less than six (6) feet. 
f.  The dormer is inset at least three (3) feet from the nearest building wall. 
(5)  Chimneys, provided that: 
a.  The highest point of any chimney does not extend more than five (5) feet vertically beyond the bulk plane. 
b.  The portion of any chimney that extends beyond the bulk plane has a maximum width of six (6) feet including any roof overhang. 
(6)  Wireless communications facilities provided that they conform to the requirements of Section 16-16-130 of this Chapter. 
(7)  Television antennas provided that they conform to the requirements of Section 16-16-140 of this Chapter. 
(8)  Satellite dish antennas provided that they conform to the requirements of Section 16-16-150 of this Chapter. 
(h)  Administrative variances. 
(1)  The City Manager may grant a variance of up to ten percent (10%) above the maximum angle limitations specified in the row entitled "Angle (front and rear areas)" in Table 180-1 of Subsection (d) above up to a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet of additional floor area or additional building coverage, if the City Manager finds all of the following: 
a.  The reasons set forth by the applicant justify the granting of the variance. For the purposes of making this finding, the City Manager may not consider issues of inconvenience or aesthetics. 
b.  Unique physical circumstances or conditions exist, not caused or created by the applicant for the variance, that create the need for the variance, such as, but not limited to, the configuration of the applicant's property boundaries, the location of existing structures on the property or the existence of exceptional topographic conditions on the property. 
c.  The requested variance will not cause an undesirable change in the character of the neighborhood or have an adverse effect on the physical or environmental conditions of the surrounding property. 
d.  The requested variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land or structure. 
(2)  The City Manager may request any reasonable information deemed necessary to evaluate the variance request, including but not limited to an improvement survey, site plan, landscape plan, building elevations and renderings. 
(3)  The City Manager may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for an administrative variance. The variance shall only authorize the specific improvement described in the variance application and shall not constitute or be construed as a precedent, grounds or cause for any other variance. 
(4)  A variance shall be initially effective for a period of one (1) year commencing upon the date the variance is granted. A variance shall expire and be void in the event that a building permit is not issued prior to the expiration of the one-year time period for the improvement authorized by the variance. The City Manager may approve an extension of the initial one-year time period for an additional one (1) year where the City Manager finds that: a) the applicant requested an extension in writing prior to the initial one-year expiration date; b) just cause for the extension exists; and c) the extension would not adversely affect or harm adjacent property owners. 
(5)  Following the construction of the improvement authorized by the variance, the variance shall remain effective only during such period of time that the specific improvements described in the application for the variance exists. Repairs and cosmetic alteration of the improvement shall be permitted subject to applicable requirements imposed by uniform building or safety codes, provided that such repair or alteration does not increase or enlarge the improvement. The destruction of the improvement by any cause or for any reason whatsoever other than destruction by act of God shall cause the variance to expire and be void. 
(6)  The applicant shall, at the time of posting the notice sign described below, be responsible for providing written notice of the variance request to all adjacent property owners, which notice shall include a statement that the City Manager may act upon the variance request after a date certain, as set forth in this Paragraph. Such written notice shall be sent by certified mail with return receipt requested. The applicant shall obtain the names of said owners from the last preceding real property tax roll of the County Assessor's office. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for posting a notice sign on the property. Such notice sign shall be furnished by the City, posted on the applicant's property in a location clearly visible from an adjoining roadway, and shall be posted continuously for fifteen (15) days. Final decision by the City Manager may not take place until the City has received the certified mail and return receipts and the fifteen-day posting period has expired. 
(Ord. 9 4, 2011; Ord. 4 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-16-190. - Floor area ratio. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this Section is to accommodate new construction and additions in residential districts while protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the community. The City Council finds that these regulations are necessary in order to: 
(1)  Protect the semi-rural character of the community; 
(2)  Reduce the impact of the largest new homes and additions on the character of the surrounding neighborhood; 
(3)  Encourage a variety of building forms; and 
(4)  Promote the retention of open space on lots. 
(b)  Applicability. The FAR standards in this Section shall apply to principal and accessory structures in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zone Districts. 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Floor area, above ground means the floor area of rooms, attached garages and other building elements that are located above the surrounding natural grade and are not considered basements or walkout basements as defined in Section 16-1-10 of this Chapter. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the ratio of the total enclosed above-grade floor area of the principal structure on a lot to the total square footage of the net lot area. 
    High volume space means a room, attached garage or other building element with an especially tall ceiling height, such as an entry area with a cathedral ceiling. 
(d)  Standards by zone district. The above grade floor area of principal structures on a lot shall not exceed the maximum floor area ratios set forth in Table 190-1 except as provided for in Subsection 16-16-190(e) below. 
Table 190-1: Floor Area Ratio Standards by Zone District 
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 Floor area ratio (maximum) 0.23 0.23 0.25 0.30 0.30  
(e)  Measurement. Floor area ratio shall be calculated using the total above-grade floor area of the principal structure. 
(1)  For the purpose of calculating maximum allowed floor area ratio, above-grade floor area shall include one hundred percent (100%) of the interior floor area of the following spaces and building elements: 
a.  Rooms, mezzanine, loft and attic spaces where the distance between the floor and the ceiling or roof rafters directly above is greater than six (6) feet but not more that sixteen (16) feet; 
b.  Stairways with a maximum footprint of one hundred (100) square feet; 
c.  Utility areas; 
d.  Attached garages; 
e.  Roofed porches, balconies, loggias and breezeways that are enclosed on more than two (2) sides. 
f.  Walkout basement areas. See Section 16-1-10 of this Chapter. 
(2)  For the purpose of calculating maximum allowed floor area ratio, the floor area of the following spaces and building elements shall be counted at two hundred percent (200%): 
a.  High volume spaces where the distance between the floor and the ceiling or roof rafters directly above is greater than sixteen (16) feet. 
b.  Stairways with a footprint greater than one hundred (100) square feet. 
(3)  For the purpose of calculating maximum allowed floor area ratio, the floor area of the following spaces and building elements shall not be counted: 
a.  Attic areas where the distance between the floor and the roof rafters directly above is six (6) feet or less; 
b.  Accessory structures that are detached from the primary structure; 
c.  Roofed porches, balconies, loggias and breezeways that are not enclosed by solid walls on more than two (2) sides; and 
d.  Basement areas. See Section 16-1-10 of this Chapter. 
(f)  Exceptions. The floor area ratio standard shall not apply on legal lots of record with a net lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less. 
(Ord. 9 4, 2011) 
Sec. 16-16-200. - Utilities. 
    The purpose and intent of this Section is to protect and improve the aesthetics of the City by requiring that new or existing service lines associated with public utilities (telephone, electric service, cable television, gas lines and other similar utilities) be placed underground in conjunction with the construction of all new single family residences, nonprofit institutions, private clubs, public recreational facilities and nonprofit recreational facilities. The burial of new or existing service lines shall also be required when a property owner proposes to undertake a major addition to an existing single family residence, nonprofit institution, private club, public recreational facility or nonprofit recreational facility. For purposes of this section, a major addition shall be defined as the addition or replacement of fifty percent (50%) or more of existing square footage of all structures existing on the lot of record. The obligation to place service lines underground shall not extend to existing overhead transmission or distribution lines that provide service to other properties. Facilities appurtenant to underground facilities or other required equipment may be placed aboveground if the City determines it is necessary. 
( Ord. 1 1, 2015 ) 
ARTICLE XVII - Floodplain Management Regulations 

Sec. 16-17-10. - Legislative authority. 
    This Article for flood prevention and control is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in, among others, Title 24, Article 65.1; Title 29, Article 20; and Title 31, Article 23, C.R.S., and as authorized by the City Charter. 
(Prior code 6-16-1; Ord. 9, 1989) 
Sec. 16-17-20. - Statement of purpose. 
    This Article has been established to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, to minimize flood losses in areas subject to flood hazards so as to minimize future flood blight areas and prolonged business interruptions and to promote the wise use of floodplain areas, with the following purposes intended. 
(1)  To reduce the hazards of floods to life and property through: 
a.  Prohibiting certain uses which are dangerous to life or property in time of flood. 
b.  Restricting uses which would be hazardous to the public health in time of flood. 
c.  Restricting uses which are particularly susceptible to flood damage so as to alleviate hardship and eliminate demands for public expenditures for relief and protection. 
d.  Requiring permitted floodplain uses, including public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges which serve such uses, to be protected against floods by providing floodproofing and general flood protection at the time of initial construction. 
(2)  To protect floodplain occupants from a flood which is or may be caused by their own or other land use and which is or may be undertaken without full realization of the danger, through: 
a.  Regulating the manner in which structures designed for human occupancy may be constructed so as to prevent danger to human life within such structures. 
b.  Regulating the method of construction of water supply and sanitation systems so as to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions. 
c.  Delineating and describing areas that could be inundated by floods so as to protect individuals from purchasing floodplain lands for purposes which are not in fact suitable. 
d.  Ensuring that those who occupy floodplain areas assume responsibility for their actions. 
(3)  To protect the public from the burden of avoidable financial expenditures for flood control and relief by regulating all uses within the floodplain areas so as to produce a method of construction and a pattern of development which will minimize the probability of damage to property and loss of life or injury to the inhabitants of the floodplain areas. 
(4)  To protect the storage capacity of floodplains and to assure retention of sufficient floodway area to convey flood flows which can reasonably be expected to occur by: 
a.  Regulating the filling, dumping, dredging and alteration of channels by deepening, widening or relocating. 
b.  Prohibiting unnecessary and damage-creating encroachment. 
c.  Encouraging uses such as agriculture, recreation and parking. 
(5)  To protect the hydraulic characteristics of the small watercourses, including the gulches, sloughs and artificial water channels used for conveying floodwaters which make up a portion of the urban drainage system by: 
a.  Regulating the filling, dumping and channelization so as to maintain the natural storage capacity and slow flow characteristics. 
b.  Prohibiting encroachment into the small watercourses to maintain their water-carrying capacity. 
c.  Encouraging uses such as greenbelt, open space, recreation and pedestrian and riding trails. 
(Prior code 6-16-2) 
Sec. 16-17-30. - Definitions. 
    The following listed specific words and terms are defined as follows: 
    Appeal means the request for a review of the City Manager's interpretation of any provisions of this Article or a request for an exception. 
    Base flood means a flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The term is used interchangeably with a one-hundred-year flood . 
    Base flood elevation means the water surface elevation of the base flood, in relation to mean sea level. 
    Building means, for the purposes of this Article, a walled or roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with a definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. Channel flow thus is that water which is flowing within the limits of the defined channel . 
    Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) means FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
    Critical facility means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as further defined and specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, effective January 14, 2011, adopted by the Department of Natural Resources, Colorado Water Conservation Board and adopted herein by reference, that, if flooded, may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to construction or substantial improvement of buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the special flood hazard area. 
    Exception is synonymous with the term variance as it relates to the National Flood Insurance Program. It is a grant of relief by the City Council from the requirements of this Article which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Article. 
    Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of land or tidal waters. 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
c.  Any water from a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other body of standing water that temporarily overflows or inundates adjacent lands and which may affect other lands and activities through stage elevation, backwater or increased groundwater level. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of the City, issued as part of the Flood Insurance Study, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the City. 
    Flood Insurance Study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency which contains flood profiles and water surface elevation for various flood frequencies, as well as the boundaries and water surface elevations of the one-hundred-year flood. The report includes the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Study Boundary Map and the Floodway Map. 
    Floodplain means the relatively flat or lowland area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other body of standing water which has been or may be covered temporarily by floodwater. For the purpose of this Article, the floodplain is defined as the area that would be inundated by the base flood, and is used interchangeably with the terms special flood hazard area and flood-prone area . 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half (1/2) foot (six [6] inches). Letters of map revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
    Historic structures means any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a State of Colorado inventory of historic places if the State has an historic preservation program which has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places if the City maintains historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior if Colorado has no such approved programs. 
    Landscaping means any combination of living plants, such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers or grass, and natural features, such as rock, stone, bark chips or shavings. When such landscaping is located in the flood fringe, it shall not be exempt from these regulations if placed in such a manner so as to effectively become a fence or wall. 
    Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) means FEMA's official revision of an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs) or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) means FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this Article. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the initial ordinance codified herein. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is built on a single chassis; four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable; and not designed primarily as a permanent dwelling but rather as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard areas means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
    Structure , as used in this Article, means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, manufactured homes, walls, fences, swimming pools and tennis courts. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, improvement of or addition to a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either: 
a.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
b.  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
For the purposes of this definition substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places. 
    Variance , as used by the National Flood Insurance Program, is synonymous with the term exception. 
    Violation means the failure of the structure or other development to be fully compliant with the City's floodplain management regulations. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Prior code 6-16-3; Ord. 9, 1989; Ord. 12, 2001; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 26 1, 2010; Ord. 17 1, 2013) 
Sec. 16-17-40. - General provisions. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. The provisions of this Article shall apply to all floodplain areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) within the corporate limits of the City. 
(b)  Basis for establishing the floodplain areas. In determining whether any particular real property is located within the floodplain of the City, reference shall be made to the areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Arapahoe County and Incorporated Areas," dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and any revisions thereto. This report and maps, and any revision thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Article. 
(c)  Effect of floodplain regulations. The regulations of this Article shall be construed as being supplementary to the regulations imposed on the same lands by an underlying zoning category, or by any other regulations or requirements. Any underlying zoning shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive than those of this Article. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This Article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or repair any existing easement, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Article and another section or article of this Code, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Article shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection intended to be provided by this Article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur upon occasion or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Article does not imply that the land outside the floodplain areas or land uses permitted within the floodplain areas will always be totally free from flooding or flood damages. Nor shall this Article create a liability on the part of or a cause of action against the City or any officer, employee or appointee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance upon this Article or any administrative decision made thereunder. 
(Prior code 6-16-4; Ord. 9, 1989; Ord. 3, 1995; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 07 1, 2005; Ord. 26 2, 2010; Ord. 17 2, 2013) 
Sec. 16-17-50. - Administration. 
(a)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be authorized by the City Council, after a public hearing, as provided in Subsection 16-17-60(b) below, before construction or development begins within any floodplain area. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City and may include, but are not limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. 
(2)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(3)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed. 
(4)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Subsection 16-17-70(b)(2) below. 
(b)  Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The City Manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement this Article by issuing permits in accordance with its provisions. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator. Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permit applications to determine that all requirements of this Article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review all development permit applications to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
(3)  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of Paragraph 16-17-70(b)(3) below are met. 
(4)  Review and coordinate the issuance of building permits with the requirements of this Article. 
(5)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Subsection 16-17-40(b), the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source as a basis for elevating residential structures to a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood level, and for floodproofing or elevating nonresidential structures to a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood level. 
(6)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE on the City's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (1/2) foot at any point within the City. 
(d)  Information to be obtained and maintained. 
(1)  Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
(2)  For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures: 
a.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed. 
b.  Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Paragraph (a)(4) above. 
(3)  Maintain for public inspection all other records pertaining to the provisions of this Article. 
(e)  Alteration of watercourses. 
(1)  Notify adjacent communities, the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the Urban Drainage and Flood Control District prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(2)  Require that maintenance be provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(f)  Interpretation of FIRM boundaries: Make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the floodplain boundaries. 
(Prior code 6-16-5; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 26 3, 2010; Ord. 17 3, 2013) 
Sec. 16-17-60. - Procedure for development. 
(a)  No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, altered or improved within the floodplain, unless specifically authorized by the City Council as an exception to this Article after a public hearing before it, except as outlined in Subsections (e) and (f) below. No filling or excavation shall be permitted, except upon specific authorization by the City Council. No storage of materials which are buoyant, flammable or explosive, or which in times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, are permitted. No use shall be permitted which would result in any increase in the base flood elevation within the floodway. Those aggrieved by the decision of the City Council, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decisions to the District Court, as provided in Title 31, Article 23, C.R.S. In passing upon any application or appeal, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other Sections of this Article and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage. 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area. 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges. 
(b)  Public hearing. At a public hearing, the City Council, after review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall hear and decide all requests for an exception to allow construction within the floodplain, and shall hear and decide all appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the City Manager in the enforcement or administration of this Article. Any person alleging such an error shall file his appeal to the City Council in writing within thirty (30) days from the determination of the City Manager, in which he shall set forth in detail the basis for such alleged error. 
(c)  Upon consideration of the factors in Subsection (a) above and the purposes of this Article, the City Council may attach such conditions to authorizing construction as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Article. 
(d)  All requests for exceptions shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(2)  Authorization shall not be issued within the one-hundred-year floodplain if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(3)  Authorizations shall be issued only upon a determination that the same is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(4)  Authorizations shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the authorization would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of an authorization will not result in increased floodway elevations, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(5)  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(6)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(e)  Bank stabilization: The City Manager or his or her designee may administratively approve an application for a floodplain development permit that is exclusively for bank stabilization within an existing drainageway. Such approval shall be in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Bank stabilization design shall follow all applicable regulations of the Arapahoe County Stormwater Management Manual (ACSMM) and Urban Drainage and Flood Control District (UDFCD) criteria, as may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  The applicant shall be required to submit a hydraulic analysis, prepared by a professional engineer, for review and approval by the City Engineer. Floodplain hydraulics shall be analyzed in accordance with Section 12.2.6 of the ACSMM, and the applicant shall demonstrate that the bank stabilization will not alter the floodplain boundary or increase base flood elevations. 
(3)  All required permits shall be obtained by the applicant from those applicable federal, state or local governmental agencies before administrative approval will be granted. 
(4)  The applicant shall provide written notification of the request to all owners of property that are adjacent to the bank stabilization request and with floodplain intersecting the property. Such written notification shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(5)  The City Manager or his or her designee may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application or, in the City Manager's reasonable discretion, present the application for review and decision by the City Council at a public meeting. The City Manager's discretion includes, but is not limited to, applications that may negatively impact other properties. The City Council review shall be based on the procedures and criteria outlined in this Subsection. 
(6)  The City Manager or his or her designee may attach conditions to any approval of a floodplain permit for bank stabilization as deemed necessary to further the purpose of this Article. 
(f)  Dredging of ponds and lakes: The City Manager or his or her designee may administratively approve an application for a floodplain development permit that is exclusively for dredging of ponds or lakes within an ineffective flow area. Such approval shall be in accordance with the following procedures and criteria: 
(1)  Dredging procedures shall follow all applicable regulations of the Arapahoe County Stormwater Management Manual (ACSMM), Urban Drainage and Flood Control District (UDFCD) criteria and state dam safety requirements, as may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  The applicant shall be required to submit a hydraulic analysis, prepared by a professional engineer, for review and approval by the City Engineer. The applicant shall demonstrate that the dredging will not alter the floodplain boundary or increase base flood elevations. 
(3)  All required permits shall be obtained by the applicant from those applicable federal, state or local governmental agencies before administrative approval will be granted. 
(4)  The applicant shall provide written notification of the request to all owners of property that are adjacent to the property that is the subject of the request and with floodplain intersecting the property. Such written notification shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(5)  The applicant shall provide documentation satisfactory to the City that the dredging activities are not inconsistent with Colorado law. 
(6)  The City Manager or his or her designee may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application or, in the City Manager's reasonable discretion, present the application for review and decision by the City Council. The City Manager's discretion includes, but is not limited to, applications that may be reasonably considered to negatively impact other properties. City Council proceedings to address the application shall be quasi-judicial, with decisions rendered after considering evidence presented at a public hearing. The City Council review shall be based on the procedures and criteria outlined in this Subsection. 
(7)  The City Manager or his or her designee may attach conditions to any approval of a floodplain development permit for dredging as deemed necessary to further the purposes of this Article. 
(g)  Modification or waiver: The City Council may, at its discretion and in such manner as is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare, modify or waive any of the conditions of this Article if it can be clearly demonstrated that such conditions are not required to protect public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. If such modification or waiver would result in the lowest floor elevation of the structure being below the base flood elevation, the applicant to whom the modification or waiver is granted shall be given written notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(h)  Floodplain Administrator report to Federal Emergency Management Agency: The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal and application actions and report any decisions to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Prior code 6-16-6; Ord. 9, 1989; Ord. 5 1, 2009; Ord. 20 1, 2010; Ord. 26 4, 2010; Ord. 3 1, 2012; Ord. 17 4, 2013) 
Sec. 16-17-70. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General development standards. In all floodplain areas, the following standards are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. All new construction and substantial improvements (including prefabricated buildings) shall: 
a.  Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  Be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(3)  Utilities. 
a.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
b.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
c.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(4)  Subdivision proposals. 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
b.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
c.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for proposed developments, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, that are greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser. 
(5)  Prohibited materials; exception. Earth fill or other materials are not to be used to raise the elevation of the land, unless the fill proposed does not restrict the flow of water and unduly increase flood height and hazard, as determined by the City Council upon recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission based upon an engineering report prepared by a licensed engineer at the expense of the landowner. 
(6)  Compliance. Improvements shall be in compliance with all other requirements, conditions, restrictions and limitations set forth in this Article. 
(7)  Certification of occupancy. No land shall be occupied or used and no building which is hereafter erected, placed, moved or structurally altered shall be used or changed in use until the Building Inspector approves a certificate of occupancy stating compliance with the provisions of this Article. 
(8)  Manufactured homes, trailers. No manufactured homes of a temporary or permanent nature, and no trailers or structures temporarily used during construction of any authorized structures, may be placed in the floodplain. 
(9)  Fencing. Fencing greater than fifty percent (50%) open shall be allowed in the floodplain except that wire mesh, chain link and other like fencing materials greater than fifty percent (50%) open shall be allowed in the floodplain as long as: 
a.  The fencing is generally parallel to the direction of flow; and 
b.  In the opinion of the Community Development Director after review by the City Engineer, or other qualified professional approved by the City, no damming effect will result from the placement of the fence. 
(10)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(11)  Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles in Zone AE shall be on the site for fewer than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use. Recreational vehicles shall not be allowed in Zone AE beyond the one-hundred-eighty-day period. 
(b)  Specific development standards. In all floodplain areas where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Subsection 16-17-40(b) above, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one (1) foot. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure (including barns, garages and other structures not used for human habitation) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
a.  Be floodproofed so that, below one (1) foot above the base flood level, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this Subsection. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in Subsection 16-17-50(d) above. 
(3)  Floodways. Located within the floodplain areas established in Subsection 16-17-40(b) above are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
a.  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, landscaping and other development, are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If Paragraph (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this Section. 
(4)  Properties removed from the floodplain by fill. A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
a.  Residential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) must be elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
b.  Nonresidential construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) must be elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, by designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(5)  Critical facilities. 
a.  Critical facilities generally. Critical facilities shall be subject to the provisions of Rule 6 of the Colorado Water Conservation Board Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, as adopted herein by reference, and exemptions may be authorized by the Floodplain Administrator in accordance therewith. 
b.  Protection for critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be required to meet one (1) of the following: 
1.  Location outside the special flood hazard area; or 
2.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
c.  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the Floodplain Administrator, have continuous noninundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
(Prior code 6-16-7; Ord. 9, 1989; Ord. 12, 2001; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 26 5, 2010; Ord. 17 5, 2013) 
Sec. 16-17-80. - Amendments to floodplain boundaries, regulations. 
    The provisions of this Article and the regulations and restrictions set forth herein may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed only by action of the City Council, and only after a public hearing thereon. The existing boundaries of the floodplain may from time to time be amended, but only by action of the City after a public hearing thereon, and only after presentation to the City Council of competent engineering data and study acceptable to the City Council establishing the basis and justification for such amendment. 
(Prior code 6-16-8; Ord. 9, 1989) 
Sec. 16-17-90. - Fees. 
(a)  Persons applying for a development permit pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall pay for planning and engineering review services and other consultant fees, including, without limitation, legal fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City and made necessary as a result of said application. The applicant shall make an initial deposit into a non-interest-bearing escrow account held by the City at the time the application is filed with the City. The amount of this initial deposit shall be three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). The City shall have the right and authority to make disbursements from said escrow account at its sole discretion to cover the City's cost for planning and engineering review services, attorney and other consultant fees and other costs and expenses incurred with regard to said application. Any balances remaining in the escrow account following approval, denial or withdrawal of said application shall be returned to the applicant without interest. In the event said funds are exhausted before final disposition of said application, the applicant shall make a supplemental deposit to said escrow account in a reasonable amount to cover future costs and expenses, as determined by the City Manager, based on past expenditures. Failure to make necessary supplemental deposits shall cause the application process to cease until the required deposits are made. The City Manager, with cause, may reduce the amount of the initial escrow deposit; however, the applicant shall remain responsible for the actual cost of the planning and engineering review services, and other consultant fees, including, without limitation, legal fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City. 
(b)  If the City incurs costs and expenses beyond the amount deposited with the City and the applicant does not pay those costs and expenses within ten (10) days after written notice from the City, then, in addition to the other remedies the City may have, the City shall be entitled to a lien on the property that is the subject of the application, or the City may elect to certify the assessed costs and expenses to the office of the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. Such lien shall be perfected and foreclosed upon in accordance with applicable state laws. Nothing herein shall authorize the City to charge the applicant for costs and expenses the City incurs as a result of litigating a matter against the applicant or against a third party. 
(Prior code 6-16-9; Ord. 8, 1998; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 23, 2004; Ord. 15 3, 2010) 
ARTICLE XVIII - Conditional Uses 

Sec. 16-18-10. - Legislative purpose. 
    The City Council hereby declares that certain uses of land designated as conditional uses within any zone district may be authorized by City Council subject to compliance with the standards and review and approval procedures set forth in this Article. Such uses may exist within the corporate limits of the City only upon application to and review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council based on findings by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council that: 
(1)  The proposed use is specified as an authorized conditional use within the applicable zone district. 
(2)  The proposed use, at the size and intensity contemplated and at the proposed location, is necessary for the neighborhood immediately benefited by the proposed use and compatible with the surrounding community. 
(3)  The use proposed will not be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity, or to property, improvements or potential development in the vicinity of the proposed use. This determination may, without limitation, be based on: 
a.  The nature of the proposed site, including its size, shape and topography and the proposed size, location and arrangement of structures; 
b.  The accessibility and patterns of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, including the type and volume of such traffic, location of points of ingress and egress and the adequacy of off-street parking and loading, where applicable; 
c.  The degree of conformity with the requirements and conditions listed in Sections 16-18-20 and 16-18-30 below, as applicable; and 
d.  The provisions for landscaping, screening, unobstructed open space, service areas, lighting and signage. 
(4)  The proposed use will comply with the applicable zoning district regulations and all other applicable provisions of this Chapter and of this Code, and will not be inconsistent with the Master Plan. 
(5)  Where an applicant for a proposed conditional use also requests a variance to a standard imposed by this Chapter, the City Council may grant such variance as part of the approval of the conditional use upon a finding that all criteria for approval of a variance are met as set forth by Section 16-3-50. 
(Prior code 6-17-1; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 11 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-18-20. - Requirements and conditions for specific uses. 
(a)  Guardhouses. In addition to meeting all other requirements of this Article, guardhouses are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-3A Zone Districts, subject to the following: 
(1)  Provisions of this Chapter prescribing lot area minimums shall not apply to guardhouse tracts. 
(2)  Provisions of this Chapter permitting accessory structures and prescribing lot and yard width minimums shall not apply to guardhouses. 
(3)  No use or structure shall be considered accessory to a commonly owned private facility use. No use or structure shall be permitted as an accessory use or structure on a guardhouse tract. 
(4)  A guardhouse may only be permitted on guardhouse tracts. 
(5)  All guardhouse tracts shall be located within and entirely surrounded by a private street, or adjacent to a private street. For purposes of this Paragraph, adjacent means having at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the perimeter coincident with the edge of one (1) or more private streets. 
(6)  Unless contained entirely within and surrounded by a private street, all guardhouse tracts shall be separately subdivided parcels. 
(7)  All guardhouse tracts shall be adequate in area to allow for simultaneous parking of one (1) employee vehicle and one (1) service vehicle. 
(8)  There shall be at least four (4) lanes of vehicular access past a guardhouse, including two (2) lanes in and two (2) lanes out. 
(9)  Guardhouses shall be lighted so as to ensure safe vehicular and pedestrian passage. 
(10)  No gate or gate opening/locking mechanism may be permitted unless approved by South Metro Fire and Rescue District. 
(11)  Where a guardhouse is adjacent to a state highway, the City may refer the guardhouse site plan to the Colorado Department of Transportation for review and comment, which comments may be incorporated into any conditions for approval of the guardhouse conditional use permit. 
(12)  In addition to showing the guardhouse, site plans for guardhouses shall show the area for parking and gate structures and shall include dimensions of both. 
(13)  The homeowners' association documents, including, but not limited to, the applicable covenants, conditions and restrictions ("covenants") shall provide, or shall be amended to provide, adequate maintenance and operation of the guardhouse in a form acceptable to the City. The covenants shall state that the City shall have the right, but not the obligation, to enforce the guardhouse maintenance and operation provisions. 
(b)  Retail uses. In addition to meeting all other requirements of this Article, retail uses are permitted in the C-2 Zone District, subject to the following: 
(1)  Landscaping, consisting of grass, trees, shrubs and other appropriate landscaping materials comparable and compatible with surrounding retail and commercial properties shall be provided and continuously maintained in the vicinity of each retail use. 
(2)  The signage requirements found in Subsection 16-15-30 above shall apply. 
(3)  The off-street parking requirements found in Section 16-16-10 above shall apply. 
(Prior code 6-17-2; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 1 3, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
(c)  Wireless communication facilities. In addition to meeting all other requirements of this Article, wireless communication facilities must meet the requirements of Section 16-16-130 of this Chapter 
(d)  Satellite dish antennas. In addition to meeting all other requirements of this Article, satellite dish antennas must meet the requirements of Section 16-16-150 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 6-17-2; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 1 3, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 08 12, 2007; Ord. 19 13, 2010) 
Sec. 16-18-30. - Requirements and conditions for all conditional uses. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as hereinafter provided, no conditional use shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, relocated or otherwise established within the corporate limits of the City without a conditional use permit issued in accordance with the requirements of this Article. 
(b)  Conditional uses. Conditional uses shall, to the maximum extent possible, be located, designed, constructed and operated to minimize impacts upon any adjacent property and land use. 
(c)  Planning and Zoning Commission. All applicable requirements of this Code shall be met and are deemed the minimum required. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall impose such other conditions and limitations as it, in its sole discretion, may determine to be necessary to fulfill the purpose and intent of this Article as stated in Section 16-18-10 above. 
(d)  Termination. Any one (1) of the following shall terminate the right to operate a conditional use: 
(1)  Failure to initiate operation of the conditional use within twelve (12) months from the date approved by the City Council. Upon request of the applicant, and for good cause shown, the City Manager may grant a six-month extension of the approved conditional use, but shall not grant more than two (2) such extensions. 
(2)  Changing to a use permitted by right in the governing zone district. 
(3)  Discontinuance of the conditional use for a period of at least twelve (12) months, except for wireless communication facilities, which are governed by Subsection 16-16-130(g) of this Chapter. 
(4)  Violation of, or failure to comply with, the terms and conditions of the approved conditional use permit after reasonable notice to comply has been given by the City. In addition, the penalties and remedies of Section 1-4-20 of this Code may be applied. 
(e)  Approved plan. Unless a phased development plan is approved with the application, once any portion of the conditional use is utilized, all specifications and conditions pertaining to the conditional use become immediately effective. 
(f)  Reinstatement process: The process for reinstatement of any conditional use that has been terminated under the terms of Subsection (d) above shall be the same as for original approval. 
(Prior code 6-17-3; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 08 13, 2007) 
Sec. 16-18-40. - Procedures. 
    All applications for conditional use permits are subject to the procedures set forth in Sections 16-18-50 and 16-18-60 below. 
(Prior code 6-17-4; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-18-50. - Application procedures. 
    The official application form for a conditional use permit shall be provided by the Community Development Department which shall generally contain the requirements specified below and elsewhere in this Chapter. Actual requirements will be dependent upon the type and nature of the conditional use being requested. An application for a conditional use permit is separate and distinct from any requirement to file an application for a rezoning or a subdivision plat as may be required elsewhere in this Code. An applicant for a conditional use permit may, however, include with the application for conditional use an application for a variance to be considered by the Planning Commission and the City Council together with the conditional use permit application. General application requirements shall include: 
(1)  Supplemental information. The conditional use permit application shall also include the existing land use and a written description of the proposed use detailing the nature of the proposed structure, including its function and, where appropriate, hours of operation and traffic generation. Other requirements as specified in the official application form shall be provided to enable thorough and accurate analysis of the request. 
(2)  Fees. Persons applying for a conditional use permit shall pay for planning and engineering review services and other consultant fees, including, without limitation, legal fees and other direct expenses incurred on behalf of the City and made necessary as a result of said application. The applicant shall pay an initial fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and make an initial deposit of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) into a non-interest-bearing escrow account held by the City at the time the application is filed with the City. The City shall have the right and authority to make disbursements from said escrow account at its sole discretion to cover the City's cost for planning and engineering review services, attorney and other consultant fees and other direct expenses incurred with regard to said application. Any balances remaining in the escrow account at the conclusion of said application, such as approval, denial or withdrawal, shall be returned to the applicant without interest. In the event said funds are exhausted before completion of said application, the applicant will make a supplemental deposit to said escrow account in an amount determined by the City Manager. Failure to make necessary supplemental deposits shall cause the application process to cease until the required deposits are made. 
(3)  Site plan. In addition to the official permit application form, the applicant shall submit a site plan. The site plan shall show all contiguous real property ownership or interests of the applicant. For purposes of this Section, public rights-of-way shall not be considered to interrupt this requirement. A site plan shall include, at a minimum: 
a.  An area map showing existing ownership of the subject property and all abutting property; and showing existing zoning and land use of the subject property and all property lying within five hundred (500) feet; 
b.  Historic, existing and proposed contours expressed in one-foot increments based upon the USGS datum; 
c.  Location of existing improvements, within one-tenth (0.1) foot of actual location; 
d.  Location of proposed improvements; 
e.  Location of existing and proposed streets and City rights-of-way within one-tenth (0.1) foot of actual location; 
f.  Location of existing easements of record within one-tenth (0.1) foot of actual location; 
g.  Adjacent lots; 
h.  Professional land surveyor stamp; 
i.  Landscaping; and 
j.  Parking. 
(4)  Architectural drawings. Typical elevation drawings of each structure included within the site, showing: the architectural style; the general dimensions and gross floor area of each; the specifications of all exterior building materials to be used on each structure, including types of siding and roofing materials and their textures and color; and the location of all mechanical equipment and an indication as to how such equipment will be screened from adjacent properties. 
(5)  Materials required to accompany permit application. If no subdivision of the proposed development site is required, and if it is determined by the City Manager to be in the best interest of the City, one (1) or more of the following may be required: 
a.  A soils report. 
b.  An agreement between the applicant and the City that provides the City with whatever it deems necessary to assure that the proposed facility will be constructed as proposed and that the future operation and maintenance of the facility is properly provided for both as to management and funding. Such agreement may require approval of covenants, escrow deposits, performance and payment bonds or any other method of assurance required by the City. 
c.  Any other information pertinent to the application that addresses issues raised during the review process, or which the applicant feels is necessary. 
(6)  For wireless communication facilities, any of the information required in Subsection 16-16-130(c), (d) or (f) of this Chapter, as applicable. 
(7)  Additional material required. Additional written and graphic materials may be required by the City Manager to accurately establish conformity of an application with the intent and standards of this Article, other applicable provisions of this Code and the Master Plan. 
(8)  Where an applicant for a proposed conditional use permit also requests a variance to a standard imposed by this Chapter, the applicant shall include with the application all information and materials identified in Section 16-3-70 sufficient to permit the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council to review the request for a variance for conformance with the criteria of Section 16-3-50 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 6-17-4; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 11 2, 2003; Ord. 7 24, 2004; Ord. 08 14, 2007; Ord. 15 4, 2010) 
Sec. 16-18-60. - Review procedures. 
    Applications for conditional use permits shall be subject to the following review and approval procedures: 
(1)  Planning and Zoning Commission review procedure. 
a.  Upon receipt of a complete permit application, fee and escrow deposit and after determining that no further information is necessary, the City Manager shall refer the application for conditional use to the Planning and Zoning Commission, by setting the same on the next available Planning and Zoning Commission agenda. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing preceded by public notice thereof as provided in Subsection 16-2-40(c) above. 
b.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine whether the application meets the statement of legislative purpose set forth in Section 16-18-10 above and is based on the evidence and testimony presented at the public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of the application. The Planning and Zoning Commission may table the matter to a date certain pending the provision of further information. 
c.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend conditions other than the minimum requirements and conditions established in Sections 16-18-20 and 16-18-30 above and deemed reasonably essential for the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
d.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider applications for wireless communication facilities in accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 16-16-130 of this Chapter, and may make any recommendations for approval, approval with conditions or denial, consistent with that Section and applicable law. 
e.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to hear and make recommendation to the City Council regarding any requests for variances to this Chapter brought in conjunction with the application process outlined in this Article. In hearing such requests, the Planning and Zoning Commission will utilize the criteria contained in Paragraphs 16-3-50(b)(1) through (9) of this Chapter. 
(2)  City Council review procedure. 
a.  The application for a conditional use permit along with the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendation are considered by the City Council at a public hearing. Notice shall be given of the public hearing pursuant to the requirements of Subsection 16-2-40(c) above. 
b.  The City Council shall determine if the application meets the statement of legislative purpose set forth in Section 16-18-10 above based on the evidence and testimony presented at the public hearing. The City Council may recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of the application. The City Council may table the matter to a date certain pending the provision of further information. 
c.  The City Council may require conditions other than the minimum requirements and conditions established in Sections 16-18-20 and 16-18-30 above and deemed reasonably essential for the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
d.  The City Council shall determine whether applications for wireless communication facilities meet the criteria set forth in Section 16-16-130 of this Chapter, and may approve, approve with conditions or deny any application, consistent with that Section and applicable law. 
e.  The City Council shall have the authority to hear and decide any requests for variances to this Chapter brought in conjunction with the application process outlined in this Article. In hearing such requests, the City Council will utilize the criteria contained in Paragraphs 16-3-50(b)(1) through (9) of this Chapter. A majority vote of a quorum of the City Council present and voting shall be required to approve any variance brought in conjunction with the application process outlined in this Article. 
(Prior code 6-17-4; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 11 3, 2003; Ord. 08 15, 2007) 
Sec. 16-18-70. - Amendments. 
(a)  The procedure for amending any approved conditional use permit shall be the same as prescribed for original approval. No amendment approved by the City Council after consideration and recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission shall violate the conditions, requirements or limitations set forth in this Code. Provided that the applicable conditions of Subsection (b) below are met, the City Manager may approve administrative amendments for the following specified changes: relocation of structures, parking and open spaces, but not including any variation from the maximum or minimum standards for each established by the approved conditional use permit. 
(b)  The City Manager may approve a request for an administrative amendment to an approved conditional use, which does not contain any of the following: 
(1)  A change to any specific conditions attached to the original permit, or to any subsequent amendment thereto, approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission; 
(2)  A change in the approved use; 
(3)  An increase in the approved gross floor area greater than five percent (5%) above the amount approved in the application by the City Council after consideration and recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission; 
(4)  An increase in the structure/building height; 
(5)  An increase in the approved access to public streets; 
(6)  A reduction of required private and/or public open space; 
(7)  A reduction of required off-street parking and loading space; 
(8)  A reduction of required landscaping and/or screening requirements; or 
(9)  A change to any variance approved for the property. 
(Prior code 6-17-5; Ord. 7, 1999; Ord. 1, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 11 4, 2003) 
ARTICLE XIX - Vested Property Rights 

Sec. 16-19-10. - Legislative purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this Article to provide procedures necessary to implement Article 68, Title 24, C.R.S., titled "Vested Property Rights". 
(Prior code 6-18-1; Ord. 14, 1999) 
Sec. 16-19-20. - Definitions. 
    The following listed specific words and terms are defined as follows: 
    Development means any permanent construction of structures or on-site improvements, including but not limited to: pouring of concrete slabs or footings; installation of underground utilities; or placement of curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving. Development shall not include land preparation that includes, for example, clearing, grading, filling, dredging, mining, drilling, excavation or demolition. For purposes of this Article, the terms redevelopment, construction, reconstruction and substantial improvement shall be deemed to be development . 
    Landowner means the owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property, including heirs, successors and assigns of such ownership interest. 
    Site means the property on which development will be undertaken. For purposes of this Article, site shall mean all of the landowners' property contiguous with the property on which development will be undertaken. Contiguity shall not be affected by the existence of a public street or alley. 
    Site specific development plan or plan means those certain documents referenced in this Article which, taken together, provide the City with the specific details of proposed development necessary to apply for vested property rights approval pursuant to the review process provided herein. Only the documentation as further described in Subsection 16-19-40(2) below shall be construed to be a site specific development plan pursuant to Article 68, Title 24, C.R.S.; provided that the City Council approves said documentation pursuant to the procedures in this Article. 
    Vested property right means the right to undertake and complete the specific development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan or plan . 
(Prior code 6-18-2; Ord. 14, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-19-30. - Eligibility. 
    Vested property rights shall not be created except upon specific application for approval of such rights by a landowner, as hereinafter provided in this Article, and approval by the City Council of a site specific development plan. Any landowner may, but is not required to, apply for the creation of vested property rights, provided that at least the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The site is located within the City. 
(2)  The site is zoned to permit the specific use or uses for which vesting is sought. The vesting procedure set forth herein shall not, under any circumstances, be construed as a means by which zoning changes, expanded uses, variances, special uses, conditional uses or changes in use, density, height limits or other established development standards are warranted, varied, changed, waived or otherwise approved or amended, nor shall it be construed to extend the term of a variance, which variance, if granted, is only good for one (1) year from the date of approval. 
(3)  A subdivision final plat has been approved and recorded in the County Clerk's office for the subject property, or for land of which the subject property is a part. 
(4)  The landowner has completed and submitted all documents and information as herein described, and notice and hearing requirements of this Article have been met. 
(5)  A landowner may only apply for a vested right after having obtained all other development approvals. including but not limited to variances, expanded uses, zoning changes, subdivision special uses and conditional uses. 
(Prior code 6-18-3; Ord. 14, 1999) 
Sec. 16-19-40. - Application. 
    An application for the creation of vested property rights shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  An application form, obtained from the Community Development Director, fully completed and signed by the landowner of the site. 
(2)  A proposed site specific development plan which shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Name, address, fax and telephone number of the landowner. 
b.  Details of the proposed site development as follows (on one [1] or more twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets): 
1.  Name and address of the proposed development; 
2.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, seal and license number (if applicable) of the responsible consultant assisting in the preparation of the submittal; 
3.  North point, date and scale (not smaller than one [1] inch equals fifty [50] feet, with one [1] inch equals twenty [20] feet desirable); 
4.  Legal description of the site; 
5.  A summary table describing the site area, site area coverage, gross floor area, building height, parking area, unobstructed open space and use; and off-street parking and loading spaces, as applicable; 
6.  Adjacent and included public rights-of-way; easement locations and dimensions; and existing and proposed utility locations; 
7.  Location and building outline of each existing structure to be retained, and all new structures proposed for the site; 
8.  Location, dimensions and site area of existing and proposed curb cuts and driving lanes; and off-street parking and loading areas, public transportation points and outdoor storage and trash disposal facilities, as applicable; 
9.  Designation of paved areas, fences, lighting and signs; 
10.  The location, area, proposed uses and proposed ownership must be specified for all common open space; 
11.  Grading, drainage and utilities specifications including: 
a)  Phase III drainage report; 
b)  Location, sizes, elevation and grade of existing and proposed utility lines, both adjacent and included within the property, including the nearest fire hydrants; 
12.  Designation of landscaped areas and a landscape plan drawn in conformance with this Code; 
13.  Sign details, including location, type of materials, height and orientation, as applicable; 
14.  Typical elevation drawings of each type of structure to be included on the site showing the architectural style of the proposed structures; 
15.  Typical floor plans of each type of structure to be included within the plan showing the general dimensions and gross floor area of each; 
16.  The location of all mechanical equipment and an indication to show how such equipment will be screened from adjacent properties; 
17.  Any other information pertinent to the application which addresses issues raised during the review process, or which is deemed necessary by the applicant; 
18.  The existing zone district; 
19.  The name of the governing subdivision plat. 
    It is the specific intent of this Section that the full requirements of this Subsection b shall apply regardless of zone district designation. 
c.  A specific statement of the term of the vesting period which shall include the effective date and date of termination. Such term shall be three (3) years from the effective date of the vested property right described in Subsection 16-19-110(a) below. This vesting period shall not be extended or amended unless expressly authorized by the City Council pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 16-19-140 below. 
d.  A description of the density and/or floor-to-lot area ratio. 
e.  A description and cost estimate of all private on-site and related off-site (where required) improvements including, but not limited to, drainage facilities, paving, water, sanitary sewer, pedestrian walks and landscaping features. 
f.  A description and cost estimate of all public on-site and related off-site (where required) improvements including, but not limited to, storm drainage facilities, curb, gutter and sidewalk, street construction, street lighting, traffic signals, traffic-control devices and/or signage and sanitary sewer. 
g.  A detailed construction schedule. 
h.  A conditions and terms of approval table which shall contain all conditions and terms of approval as the City may require. 
i.  The proposed site specific development plan shall have the following certifications: 
    I, ____________, owner, do hereby agree that the above described property will be developed in accordance with the uses, restrictions and conditions contained in this Site Specific Development Plan. I understand that failure to abide by the terms and conditions of this Site Specific Development Plan shall result in the forfeiture of any development rights which may be vested by virtue of the approval of this proposed Site Specific Development Plan. 
      Signature of Owner         Subscribed and sworn before me this _____ date of __________, 20___. 
Witness my hand and official seal. 
My Commission expires _______________. 
      Notary Public             APPROVAL OF THIS PLAN MAY CREATE A VESTED PROPERTY RIGHT PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 68 OF TITLE 24, COLORADO REVISED STATUTES. 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
      City Attorney             Approved this _____ day of ______________, 20___, by the Cherry Hills Village City Council. ___________________ 
      Mayor         ATTEST: 
      City Clerk             This document was filed for record in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County at _____ .m. on the _____ day of _____________ A.D. 20___, in Book ______, Map ______, Reception No. ____________. 
      County Clerk and Recorder         By: 
      Deputy Clerk and Recorder         j.  The applicant may be required to submit one (1) or more of the following items, if deemed necessary by the Community Development Director: 
1.  Plans and/or agreements for placing utilities underground; 
2.  Right-of-way and easement dedication or conveyance document; 
3.  Title insurance commitment or policies; 
4.  Traffic studies and/or signal plans; 
5.  Plans for off-site improvements, i.e., curb, gutter, sidewalk and storm drainage facility construction and/or removal; and 
6.  Development agreement. 
k.  Additional materials, drawings and/or information may be required by the Community Development Director to determine compliance of the proposed site specific development plan with the applicable ordinances and regulations. 
(Prior code 6-18-4; Ord. 14, 1999) 
Sec. 16-19-50. - General procedures. 
    Vested property rights, which may be applied for under this Article by the landowner, are created only by the City Council after conduct of a duly advertised public hearing pursuant to this Article; recording of the subsequently approved site specific development plan in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder; and the landowner has caused all necessary publications to be made. A reproducible copy of the site specific development plan with a completed County Clerk and Recorder's certificate shall be provided to the City at the landowner's expense. 
(Prior code 6-18-5) 
Sec. 16-19-60. - Preapplication meeting and submission requirements. 
    No matter shall be set for a hearing before the City Council until the applicant: 
(1)  Has been afforded a preapplication meeting with the City Manager, if so requested by the applicant. 
(2)  Pays the required application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(3)  Makes a deposit in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) into a non-interest-bearing account in accordance with Section 16-19-150 below. 
(4)  Submits five (5) copies of the completed application form and proposed site specific development plan to the Community Development Director. 
(5)  Meets in at least one (1) application completeness-check meeting with the City Manager to confirm the completeness of the application form and proposed site specific development plan. On the next business day following the City Manager's determination that the application form and proposed site specific development plan are complete, this Chapter and Chapter 17 of this Code and any amendatory ordinances in effect on that day shall be copied at the applicant's expense and become part of the City's official file on the matter. 
(6)  Meets in at least one (1) prehearing conference with the City Manager, which conference may result in amendments or corrections to the application and proposed site specific development plan. 
(7)  Submits within thirty (30) days of the final prehearing conference eighteen (18) copies of the completed application form and eighteen (18) copies of the proposed site specific development plan or revised application and revised plan as applicable, including and addressing the City Manager's comments made as a result of the prehearing conferences. 
(Prior code 6-18-5; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 25, 2004; Ord. 15 5, 2010) 
Sec. 16-19-70. - Expiration of application. 
    An application form and proposed site specific development plan shall expire one (1) year after the City Manager determines completeness pursuant to Subsection 16-19-60(5) above, unless the applicant agrees: 
(1)  That this Code and ordinances effective on the first anniversary of the completeness determination govern the application form and proposed site specific development plan; and 
(2)  That the applicant will revise the application form and proposed site specific development plan to conform with any changes to this Code and amendatory ordinances that have taken effect since the date of the completeness determination on the original application form and plan. 
(Prior code 6-18-5; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-19-80. - Public hearing notice. 
(a)  Mailing. At least ten (10) calendar days prior to the public hearing date, the applicant shall send notice of the time, place and subject matter of the public hearing by certified mail to the owners of all adjacent properties. The applicant shall obtain the names of said owners from the last preceding real property tax roll of the County Assessor's office. 
(b)  Posting. Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the City Council public hearing date, the landowner shall cause the site to be posted by means of one (1) or more signs, erected in a conspicuous location, with at least one (1) sign posted on each street which abuts the site. Signs shall be at least three (3) feet by four (4) feet in size, supported by corner posts, with the bottom of the sign at least four (4) feet above ground level. Letters shall be at least one (1) inch in height, or large enough to be intelligible from the nearest public street. Signs shall read as follows: 
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING 
TO CREATE VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT APPLICATION HAS BEEN MADE TO CREATE VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS FOR THIS SITE PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 68 OF TITLE 24, C.R.S. A PUBLIC HEARING WILL BE HELD BEFORE THE CITY COUNCIL AT THE VILLAGE CENTER, 2450 E. QUINCY AVENUE, CITY OF CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE, COLORADO 80110, AT ______ P.M. ON THE _____ OF ______________, 20___. ALL THOSE WISHING TO BE HEARD SHOULD BE PRESENT AT THE TIME AND PLACE STATED ABOVE. 
      LANDOWNER         (c)  Publication. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the City's legal newspaper at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the City Council hearing, which shall read: 
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING 
TO CREATE VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS 
PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 68 OF TITLE 24, C.R.S., NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT APPLICATION HAS BEEN FILED WITH THE CITY OF CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE TO CREATE VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS FOR THE PROPERTY DESCRIBED AS (general legal description or address). A PUBLIC HEARING WILL BE HELD BEFORE THE CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE CITY COUNCIL AT THE VILLAGE CENTER, 2450 E. QUINCY AVENUE, CHERRY HILLS VILLAGE, COLORADO 80110, AT _____ P.M. ON THE _____ DAY OF _________________, 20___, AT WHICH TIME ALL THOSE WISHING TO BE HEARD SHOULD BE PRESENT AT THE TIME AND PLACE STATED ABOVE. 
Dated this _____ day of _______________, 20___. 
      Name of Landowner         (d)  Certified statements. The landowner shall submit to the Community Development Director, not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing date, certified statements that the mailing, posting and publication did occur in compliance with the requirements set forth hereinabove. The statement certifying to the adequacy of the sign posted on the subject property shall be accompanied by photographs showing the placement of the sign on the subject property, and shall be sufficiently legible to read the text of the notice on the sign. A publisher's affidavit is adequate to certify that the published notice meets City requirements. 
(Prior code 6-18-5; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-19-90. - Public hearing procedure. 
(a)  The City Manager shall review the application and proposed site specific development plan, including any comments from affected agencies, and shall prepare a report for the City Council containing his analysis and recommendations. The City Manager shall advise the landowner of his recommendations at least three (3) calendar days prior to the Council hearing. Copies of the City Manager's report shall be available for the reasonable cost of its reproduction. 
(b)  The public hearing shall be in accordance with rules of procedure adopted by the Council. 
(c)  After receiving and considering evidence and testimony presented at the public hearing, the City Council, in light of the standards set forth in Section 16-19-100 below, may deny or, by ordinance, approve the proposed site specific development plan with such terms and conditions as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare or table the matter to a date certain pending the provision of further information. 
(Prior code 6-18-5; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-19-100. - Standards for approval. 
    The City Council may approve or conditionally approve a site specific development plan if the applicant proves beyond a reasonable doubt that the proposed development as described in the site specific development plan complies with all applicable City ordinances and Code provisions in effect on the date the City Manager determined that the application form and plan were complete. 
(Prior code 6-18-5; Ord. 14, 1999) 
Sec. 16-19-110. - Effective date of approval. 
(a)  For all purposes, including judicial review and referendum, the effective date that a vested property right is deemed to be created shall be the date of publication of a notice advising the general public of the approval of a vested property right. The landowner shall cause such publication to be made, which shall occur not later than fourteen (14) days following the date of the second reading of the ordinance adopted by the City Council approving the plan. Such notice shall read: 
NOTICE 
VESTED PROPERTY RIGHTS CREATED 
Notice is hereby given that on the ______ day of _______________, 20___, the City Council of Cherry Hills Village approved a Site Specific Development Plan for the property described as (general legal description or address). This publication of the approval of such Site Specific Development Plan may have created vested property rights pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S. The approved Site Specific Development Plan, for the property described hereinabove, has been recorded in the County of Arapahoe in Book ______ at Page ______. Such approval is subject to all rights of referendum and judicial review. 
Dated this _____ day of ____________, 20___. 
      Name of Landowner         (b)  A publisher's affidavit shall be provided to the Community Development Director as certification that the required notice pursuant to Subsection (a) above was published. 
(Prior code 6-18-6) 
Sec. 16-19-120. - Expiration. 
    Any vested property rights which may have been approved pursuant to this Article shall be deemed to have expired and/or terminated should any of the following occur: 
(1)  A period of three (3) years has lapsed since the effective date of the vested right (Subsection 16-19-110(a) above). This vesting period shall not be extended unless expressly authorized pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 16-19-140 below; 
(2)  Failure by the landowner to conform with the terms and conditions of the site specific development plan approved by the City Council; or 
(3)  Failure by the landowner to publish notice of the creation of vested property rights in a newspaper of general circulation within the City within the required fourteen-day period following City Council approval. 
(Prior code 6-18-6; Ord. 14, 1999) 
Sec. 16-19-130. - Subsequent regulation prohibited. 
(a)  Any vested property right, once established, shall not be subject to any zoning or land use action by the City which would alter, impair, prevent, diminish or otherwise delay the development or use of the site as set forth in an approved site specific development plan, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Without payment of compensation by the City, upon the consent of the affected landowner; 
(2)  Without payment of compensation by the City, upon the discovery of natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the site, which hazards could not reasonably have been discovered at the time of site specific development plan approval or, if reasonably discoverable, are not the result of error or misrepresentation by the applicant or his agents, and which hazards, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare; or 
(3)  As long as neither Subsection (1) nor (2) above has occurred, to the extent that the affected landowner receives just compensation for all costs, expenses and liabilities incurred by the landowner, including, but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural, planning and marketing, legal and other consultant fees incurred after approval of the site specific development plan by the City Council, together with interest thereon at the legal rate until paid. Just compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the site that is caused by such action. 
(b)  The establishment of a vested property right shall not preclude the application of ordinances or regulations which are general in nature and are applicable to all property within the City, including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes. 
(Prior code 6-18-7; Ord. 14, 1999) 
Sec. 16-19-140. - Extension and amendments. 
(a)  Extension. No extension of the vesting period shall be granted unless such extension is approved by the City Council in its sole discretion following a public hearing. Such request for extension shall be filed by the landowner, together with all materials and fees required by this Article to be submitted for original approval. No extension shall be granted by the City Council for a period greater than one (1) year. 
(b)  Amendments. 
(1)  Applications for amendment to an approved site specific development plan must be submitted and reviewed under the same procedures set forth in this Article as required for original approval. 
(2)  Amendments to an approved site specific development plan shall not automatically extend the approved vesting period. Specific application for the extension of an approved vesting period shall be required as set forth in Subsection (a) above. 
(Prior code 6-18-8; Ord. 14, 1999) 
Sec. 16-19-150. - Land development account. 
    Persons applying for a vested property right shall pay for planning and engineering review services and other consultant fees including, without limitation, legal fees and other direct expenses incurred on behalf of the City and made necessary as a result of said application. The applicant shall make an initial deposit into a non-interest-bearing escrow account held by the City at the time the application is filed with the City. The amount of this initial deposit shall be as set forth in Appendix A to this Code. The City shall have the right and authority to make disbursements from said escrow account at its sole discretion to cover the City's costs and expenses for planning and engineering review services, attorney and other consultant fees and other direct expenses incurred with regard to said application. Any balance remaining in the escrow account at the conclusion of said application, such as approval, denial or withdrawal, shall be returned to the applicant without interest. In the event said funds are exhausted before completion of said application, the applicant will make a supplemental deposit to said escrow account in an amount determined by the City Manager. Failure to make necessary supplemental deposits shall cause the application process to cease until the required deposits are made. 
(Prior code 6-18-9; Ord. 14, 1999; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-19-160. - Repealer. 
    Nothing in this Article is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of Article 68, Title 24, C.R.S. In the event of the repeal of said article or a judicial determination that said article is invalid or unconstitutional, this Article shall be deemed to be repealed and the provisions hereof shall no longer be in effect. 
(Prior code 6-18-10; Ord. 14, 1999) 
ARTICLE XX - Nonprofit Institutions, Private Clubs, Public Recreational Facilities and Nonprofit Recreational Facilities 

Sec. 16-20-10. - General. 
(a)  The purpose of this Article is to establish procedures, submittal requirements and review criteria which the City will use to review and approve certain uses, or expansions or increases to those uses. For purposes of this Article, references to the "Commission" shall mean either the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Parks and Trail Commission, as designated in Paragraph 16-20-40(1) of this Chapter. 
(b)  The procedures and submittal requirements set forth in this Article shall apply to all requests to establish all nonprofit institutions, private clubs, public recreational facilities and nonprofit recreational facilities and shall apply to requests to expand or increase all nonprofit institutions, private clubs, public recreational facilities and nonprofit recreational facilities to the extent such request seeks: 
(1)  The physical alteration of any building or structure by more than one thousand (1,000) square feet; 
(2)  The creation, addition, modification or increase in size of any parking area, including the reconfiguration or alteration of the size, number or location of one (1) or more parking spaces or drive aisles; 
(3)  The addition or increase in number, size or intensity, or a change or modification in direction of existing exterior lighting other than changes or modifications which are determined by the City Manager to bring exterior lighting into greater conformance with the requirements of this Article; 
(4)  The creation, addition, modification or increase in outdoor recreational fields or recreational facilities, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, parks, courts and swimming pools; or 
(5)  Any increase or modification to a previously approved use that could result in increased traffic or parking demands or an increase in the number of employees, enrollment, attendees or memberships above previously City approved limits, or above maximum levels documented in a prior application reviewed and approved or conditionally approved by the City. 
(c)  In addition to the standards of this Chapter, as applicable, all requests submitted under this Article XX shall be evaluated based on the following general standards: 
(1)  The proposed use is consistent with and furthers or implements the goals and strategies of the Master Plan, including preservation of the semi-rural character of the City. 
(2)  The proposed use complies with all applicable City ordinances and is consistent with all other City policies and plans. 
(3)  The bulk and scale of any proposed design is compatible with the site and the character of the surrounding area. 
(4)  Drainage and transportation systems are designed to encourage the use of natural materials and comply with the character of the surrounding area. 
(5)  The proposed use will not result in unreasonable traffic congestion or create a safety hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic and adequate provisions will be provided to manage any traffic-related issues. 
(6)  Sufficient parking in terms of parking spaces and areas to accommodate parking needs is provided and designed to minimize the impact on the character of the surrounding area. 
(7)  Adverse impacts on adjacent properties as a result of the proposed scope of work will be eliminated, mitigated, or reasonably controlled, including but not limited to lighting and noise. 
(d)  The City Manager can require any or all of the information required in Section 16-20-50 below that impacts the area affected by the proposed activity, or is otherwise required by this Code. In addition, the City Manager may request that the applicant hold a meeting with affected neighbors and the City in order to make the determination. 
(e)  Any expanded use permit approved or conditionally approved by the City shall automatically expire if the improvements described in the permit application are not constructed or the use is not commenced within two (2) years of the date of City approval. The City Manager or his or her designee may grant extensions of time to the permit expiration date, not to exceed six (6) months, for good cause shown but only if an application for such extension is made in writing and filed with the City prior to the end of the applicable two (2) year expiration period. 
(Prior code 6-19-1; Ord. 13, 2000; Ord. 17, 2000; Ord. 13  1, 2013; Ord. 6,  1, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-20-20. - Procedures generally. 
    Any application by a nonprofit institution, private club, public recreational facility or nonprofit recreational facility is subject to the review processes set forth in Sections 16-20-30 and 16-20-40 below. 
(Prior code 6-19-2; Ord. 17, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 16-20-30. - Preliminary application review process. 
(a)  An applicant shall be required to submit a preliminary application for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The preliminary application submittal shall include a letter of intent fully describing the intended use or expanded or increased use of the property, a site plan containing information required in Subparagraphs 16-20-50(3)a through (3)f, (3)m and (3)p below and an appropriate number of eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch reductions of the site plan as determined by the Community Development Director. 
(b)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the preliminary application packet to determine if it is consistent with the standards set forth in this Chapter and will suggest to the applicant whatever changes, if any, are recommended in the application. 
(c)  The City Manager may waive this preliminary application process upon written request from the applicant and after making a determination that the application is sufficiently complete to advance to the public hearing process identified in Section 16-20-40 below. 
(d)  This preliminary application review process shall not apply to applications for City-owned or -leased public recreational facilities. 
(Prior code 6-19-2; Ord. 13 2, 2013) 
Sec. 16-20-40. - Application review process. 
    Upon receipt of a complete application, upon payment of all fees and after determination that sufficient information has been presented, the City Manager will subject the application to the following review and approval procedures: 
(1)  Commission review and recommendation. Except for applications to establish, expand or increase public recreational facilities, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review all applications submitted pursuant to this Article. The Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission shall review all applications to establish, expand or increase public recreational facilities, and when referred by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall also review such applications. 
a.  The City Manager shall refer the application to the appropriate Commission by setting the same on the next available Commission agenda. The Commission shall hold a public hearing preceded by public notice thereof as provided in Subsection 16-2-40(c) of this Chapter. 
b.  The Commission shall determine whether the application meets the requirements of this Chapter based on the application and on evidence and testimony presented at the public hearing, if any. The Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of the application. The Commission may table the matter to a date certain pending the provision of further information. 
c.  The Commission shall have the authority to hear and make recommendation to the City Council regarding any requests for variances to this Chapter brought in conjunction with the application process outlined in this Article. In hearing such requests, the Commission will utilize the criteria contained in Section 16-3-50 of this Chapter and follow the rules of procedure applicable to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
(2)  City Council review procedure. 
a.  Only after a recommendation is made by the Commission shall the complete application be set for public hearing in front of the City Council. Notice shall be given of the public hearing pursuant to the requirements of Subsection 16-2-40(c) of this Chapter. 
b.  The City Council shall determine whether the application meets the requirements of this Chapter based on the application, the Commission's recommendation and evidence and testimony presented at the public hearing, if any. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. In the case of public recreational facilities, the City Council may refer the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a recommendation before the City Council makes a final determination. The City Council may also table the matter to a date certain pending the provision of further information. 
c.  The City Council shall have the authority to hear and decide any requests for variances to this Chapter brought in conjunction with the application process outlined in this Article. In hearing such requests, the City Council will utilize the criteria contained in Paragraphs 16-3-50(b)(1) through (9) of this Chapter. A majority vote of a quorum of the City Council present and voting shall be required to approve any variance brought in conjunction with the application process outlined in this Article. 
d.  The City Council shall have the authority to hear and decide any appeals of the City Manager's decision made in conjunction with the application process outlined in this Article. In hearing such requests, the City Council will utilize the criteria contained in Subsection 16-3-30(a) of this Chapter. A majority vote of a quorum of the City Council present and voting shall be required to reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or to modify any decision of the City Manager made in conjunction with the application process outlined in this Article. 
e.  The City Council may require reasonable conditions, other than the minimum requirements and conditions established in this Article, deemed reasonably essential for the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(Prior code 6-19-2; Ord. 13, 2000; Ord. 14, 2001; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 13 3, 2013) 
Sec. 16-20-50. - Submittal requirements. 
    A complete application for a nonprofit institution, private club, public recreational facility or nonprofit recreational facility or an expanded or increased use of an existing nonprofit institution, private club, public recreational facility or nonprofit recreational facility includes review by staff, city consultants and referral agencies and must contain the following: 
(1)  Letter of intent requesting public hearings in front of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council and describing fully the intended use or expanded or increased use of the property. 
(2)  An application fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(3)  A site plan which shall be an original drawing in black ink on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch media and contain the following information: 
a.  Project name, type of proposal, legal description of the plan's land area, date of the drawing, scale (one [1] inch = fifty [50] feet or one [1] inch = one hundred [100] feet), north arrow and names and addresses of the owner, planner and surveyor. 
b.  Vicinity map with north arrow (scale of one [1] inch = two thousand [2,000] feet) with an emphasis on the major roadway network within one (1) mile of the proposal. 
c.  The existing zoning of the property, as well as the zoning and residential density of all adjacent properties, including yard requirements of the zone districts. 
d.  The graphic location, dimensions, maximum heights and gross floor area of all existing and proposed structures, the uses to be contained within and the location of entrances and loading points. 
e.  Historic, existing and proposed contours expressed in one-foot increments based upon the USGS datum. 
f.  All proposed curb cut and driveway locations and dimensions, off-street parking locations, dimensions and total numbers by type (full size, compact, handicap, etc.) and types of surfacing, such as asphalt, concrete, etc., in compliance with the provisions of Article 16 of this Chapter, and Chapter 11, Article II of this Code. 
g.  Public and private utility service lines and/or main lines with appurtenances. 
h.  Location of existing easements of record within one-tenth foot (0.1) of actual location. 
i.  All walks, open and recreation areas, with a description of these improvements. 
j.  Location of outdoor trash receptacle systems. 
k.  Provision for access by emergency vehicles. 
l.  Location and dimensions of all existing access points on immediately adjacent properties. 
m.  Location and dimension and surface treatment of drainage easements, volume capacity of all drainage ponds and the size of outlet restrictors. 
n.  An illustrative landscape plan showing locations and general types of all proposed landscaping materials, including fences, walls, planters and any other landscaping features. 
o.  A signage plan describing and illustrating the size, location, type and material of all signs, in compliance with the provisions of Article XV of this Chapter. 
p.  Location, type and height of lighting devices, in compliance with Article XVI of this Chapter. 
q.  Representative architectural elevation plans of all sides of proposed structures which show building heights, colors and general textures of materials to be used on the exterior of the building. 
r.  Applicable notes and certifications approved by the City Attorney, which regulate the development. 
s.  Commission and City Council signature blocks. 
t.  Owners of record signature block. 
(4)  Phase III drainage report conforming to the requirements of the "Arapahoe County Storm Drainage Design & Technical Criteria." 
(5)  Traffic impact study conforming to the requirements of Article XVI of this Chapter. 
(6)  Cost estimate of public improvements such as sidewalks, roadway and/or drainage improvements, etc. 
(7)  An appropriate number of eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch reductions of the site plan as determined by the Community Development Director. 
(8)  A letter from the appropriate water and sanitation districts, South Metro Fire and Rescue and the Colorado Department of Transportation (if property contains access to a state highway) stating the ability to serve the proposal. 
(9)  Additional information as requested by the Community Development Director as appropriate to the request. Information required above may be waived by the City Manager if it is deemed to be inappropriate to the request. 
(10)  A development agreement between the applicant and the City defining terms and conditions of approval. The site plan, landscape plan, building plan, phase III drainage report and traffic report shall become part of the development agreement. If approved, the City will record the development agreement and attachments and charge the fees for recording to the escrow account of the applicant. 
(11)  Any applicant, other than the City, for a nonprofit institution, private club, public recreational facility or nonprofit recreational facility or expanded or increased uses to a nonprofit institution, private club, public recreational facility or nonprofit recreational facility shall also pay for planning and engineering review services, attorney and consultant fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City and made necessary as a result of said application. An initial deposit into a non-interest-bearing escrow account held by the City shall be made at the time the application is filed with the City. The amount of this initial deposit shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The City shall have the right and authority to make disbursements from said escrow account at its sole discretion for planning and engineering review services, attorney and consultant fees and other costs and expenses incurred with regard to said application. Any balances remaining in the escrow account following approval, denial or withdrawal of said application shall be returned to the applicant without interest. In the event said funds are exhausted before final disposition of said application, the applicant shall make a supplemental deposit to said escrow account in a reasonable amount to cover future costs and expenses, as determined by the City Manager, based on past expenditures. Failure to make necessary supplemental deposits shall cause the application process to cease until the required deposits are made. The City Manager, with cause, may reduce the amount of the initial escrow deposit; however, the applicant shall remain responsible for the actual cost of the planning and engineering review services and other consultant fees, including, without limitation, legal fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City. If the City incurs costs and expenses beyond the amount deposited with the City and the applicant does not pay those costs and expenses within ten (10) days after written notice from the City, then, in addition to the other remedies the City may have, the City shall be entitled to a lien on the property that is the subject of the application, or the City may elect to certify the assessed costs and expenses to the office of the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. Such lien shall be perfected and foreclosed upon in accordance with applicable state laws. Nothing herein shall authorize the City to charge the applicant for costs and expenses the City incurs as a result of litigating a matter against the applicant or against a third party. 
(Prior code 6-19-3; Ord. 13, 2000; Ord. 17, 2000; Ord. 18 3, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 26, 2004; Ord. 13 4, 2013) 
ARTICLE XXI - Major Event Permit 

Sec. 16-21-10. - Legislative purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish procedures and submittal requirements for applications to conduct major events of national or regional importance within the City. Due to the potential for significant impacts caused by major events upon residents, streets and public improvements, law enforcement and other administrative resources, this Article is intended to provide the City the greatest possible degree of legislative discretion and authority in the review and approval of major event permits. 
(Ord. 3 1, 2004) 
Sec. 16-21-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Article, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Major event means any organized assemblage of more than two thousand (2,000) people during any one (1) day for the purpose of participation, attendance and observation of a nationally or regionally advertised or televised sporting, recreational, entertainment, conference, seminar or other similar event or activity. A major event shall not include normal day-to-day, routine, regularly scheduled or seasonal operations lawfully conducted by nonprofit institutions, private clubs, public recreational facilities or nonprofit recreational facilities within the City, such as but not limited to regularly scheduled or seasonal religious services, funerals, weddings or regularly scheduled local high school sporting events. A major event shall not include events or functions expressly authorized by a development agreement or other contract approved by the City. 
    Support services means any use of property to provide services in support of a major event, including but not limited to parking areas, passenger drop-off and pick-up areas, concession or vendor booths, equipment staging and storage areas, media equipment areas, information centers, bus stops and bus staging areas, sanitation facilities and trash collection areas. 
(Ord. 3 1, 2004) 
Sec. 16-21-30. - Applicability; permit required. 
(a)  A major event may only be conducted upon property owned by and used for a nonprofit institution, private club, public recreational facility or nonprofit recreational facility as these uses are defined by Section 16-1-10 of this Chapter. An application for a major event permit may, however, identify and propose the use of additional property, regardless of such additional property's zone district designation, necessary to provide support services to the site of the major event. No property shall be identified as a site for support services unless the applicant has first obtained express written authorization from the owner of the support service site consenting to the use of the owner's property for such support service use. Unless otherwise approved by the City Council in its absolute discretion, support services shall not be conducted on property held by the City or any special district for use as a park, trail or open space, or any area used for public parking associated with a park, trail or open space area. 
(b)  A permit issued in accordance with this Article shall be required prior to the conduct of any major event. 
(c)  Major event permits shall be issued by resolution of the City Council. The resolution shall incorporate the approved application, conditions of approval imposed by the City Council and any written agreement between the applicant and the City deemed necessary by the City Council to ensure compliance by the applicant with this Article and this Code. 
(d)  Issuance of a major event permit in accordance with this Article shall constitute authorization to conduct the major event and the support services only as specifically described in the resolution issuing the permit. Where a use expressly authorized in the resolution conflicts with a regulation imposed by the applicable zoning district(s) for the property or with a standard imposed by this Chapter, the approval of the application shall be deemed approval of a temporary exception to such regulation or standard only for the duration of the major event. 
(Ord. 3 1, 2004) 
Sec. 16-21-40. - Presubmittal meeting. 
(a)  Not less than one (1) year prior to the date of the proposed major event, the applicant shall contact the Community Development Director and schedule a presubmittal meeting. The presubmittal meeting shall provide the applicant an opportunity to informally discuss the proposed major event with the City's administrative staff and receive suggestions and comments concerning potential issues and concerns raised by the proposed major event. Suggestions and comments by the City's administrative staff shall be advisory in nature and shall not be deemed binding decisions by the City regarding the applicant's preparation of a preliminary or formal application for a major event permit. 
(b)  The time limits provided by this section may be waived by the City Manager upon good cause shown. 
(Ord. 3 1, 2004) 
Sec. 16-21-50. - Preliminary application review. 
(a)  Following the presubmittal meeting and not less than nine (9) months prior to the date of the proposed major event, an applicant for a major event permit shall submit a preliminary application to the City for administrative review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The preliminary application shall include a letter of intent fully describing the proposed major event, identifying any other property proposed for support services, a general or conceptual site plan including the major event site and all sites for support services, and a preliminary proposed traffic and parking management plan. The applicant shall provide a sufficient number of eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch reductions of the site plan and other oversized documents to permit the Planning and Zoning Commission's review as specified by the Community Development Director. 
(b)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall administratively review the preliminary application to determine if the application and proposed use are generally consistent with the standards set forth in this Article and this Code. No notice or public hearing is required for the administrative review of the preliminary application. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend or suggest changes to the application and proposed plan for the major event plan. Recommendations and suggestions by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be advisory in nature and shall not be deemed binding decisions by the City regarding the applicant's preparation of a formal application for a major event permit. 
(c)  The time limits provided by this Section may be waived by the City Manager upon good cause shown. 
(Ord. 3 1, 2004) 
Sec. 16-21-60. - Final application - requirements. 
(a)  Following review by the Planning Commission of the preliminary application and not less than six (6) months prior to the date of the proposed major event, the applicant shall submit a complete final application for a major event permit, which shall include or contain the following information: 
(1)  A letter requesting approval of a major event permit and describing fully the proposed major event, including but not limited to dates and hours of event operation (including dates of setup and post-event activities), estimated number of participants and attendees for all event dates, and the specific use and location of all property upon which the major event will be conducted and upon which all supporting services will be provided. 
(2)  Payment of the application fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(3)  Letters of authorization from the owner of the property upon which the major event will be conducted and from the record owner of all property upon which supporting services will be provided. 
(4)  A site plan of the property upon which the major event will be conducted and site plans for all supporting service sites. All site plans shall be an original drawing in black ink on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch media and contain the following information: 
a.  Major event name, date of the drawing, scale and north arrow; 
b.  All proposed ingress and egress points, curb cuts and driveway locations and dimensions; 
c.  Temporary buildings, structures and shelters; 
d.  Traffic patterns, directions and widths on all interior roads and on the adjacent street network, and proposed routes of unimpeded access and circulation for emergency vehicles; 
e.  Pedestrian circulation patterns, existing and proposed sidewalks and paths, seating and grandstand areas and areas of proposed attendee assembly; 
f.  Parking locations, including number and dimensions of parking spaces, handicapped parking and types of parking surface; 
g.  Sources of public and private utility services, including any additional temporary services; 
h.  Temporary fencing and barricades; 
i.  Temporary signage; 
j.  Additional lighting; and 
k.  Additional information and site plan data deemed relevant to the applicant or requested by the City as necessary to show the scope and impact of the major event and use of all properties. 
(5)  The following studies and reports shall be prepared and submitted to the City with the application: 
a.  Traffic study and management plan conforming to the requirements of Article XVI of this Chapter, including a City-wide evaluation of projected vehicle travel patterns and volumes generated by the major event, proposed routes of traffic, street closures, proposed new traffic signage and signalization, proposed modification of existing traffic signage and signalization, and proposed number and locations of personnel to assist in traffic management. 
b.  Parking report, including estimates and projections of demand by vehicle types and sizes, duration of parking, and number and locations of personnel to assist in parking management. 
c.  Signage plan describing and illustrating the size, location, type and material of all signs. 
d.  Lighting plan, including location, type and height of lighting devices that are proposed in addition to existing lighting sources. 
e.  Security plan, including proposed staffing needs, duties, location, hours and source of personnel (private company and/or City police). Where the application proposes the use of officers of the Police Department, the application shall include a proposal conforming to the requirements of the City's policy for use of extra duty officers and the applicant shall contact the Chief of Police regarding officer availability. 
f.  Sanitation plan, including number and location of trash receptacles, dumpsters and portable toilets. Such plan shall include an estimate of the number of necessary portable toilets based upon professional standards used for the type of major event proposed. The plan shall also include a proposed schedule for trash pickup and toilet servicing during the event and identify the company or companies proposed to provide such service. 
g.  Emergency medical and ambulance service plan, including the number of personnel, equipment, locations and hours and type of on-site service during the major event. The plan shall also identify the anticipated emergency routing of an ambulance from the major event to the nearest or appropriate hospital(s) or medical center(s). 
h.  Amplified sound plan, including a description of sources, placement, volumes, times, duration and dates of amplified sound. 
(b)  The Community Development Director or the City Manager may require additional information, studies or reports determined as necessary to fully evaluate the impact of the major event. 
(c)  The submission of plans, studies and reports and the deadline for submission of the final application required by this Section may be waived by the City Manager upon a finding by the City Manager that the submission is unnecessary or inappropriate for the particular major event request. Notwithstanding the City Manager's waiver as authorized by this Subsection, the City Council may require the preparation and submission of any plans, studies or reports, deemed by the City Council as necessary to evaluate fully the impacts of any major event; provided, however, if the application is not deemed complete to the satisfaction of the City Manager, the application shall not be further processed until the deficiencies have been satisfactorily remedied prior to the six-month deadline established by Subsection (a) hereof. 
(Ord. 3 1, 2004; Ord. 7 27, 2004; Ord. 03 1, 2, 2005) 
Sec. 16-21-70. - Major event agreement required. 
(a)  Unless otherwise determined by the City Council as unnecessary or inappropriate for the particular major event request, the applicant shall enter into a written agreement memorializing the applicant's obligations and duties in, and the conditions imposed upon, the conduct of the major event. The major event agreement shall include terms and conditions deemed appropriate by the City to guarantee and ensure the applicant's conduct of the major event in accordance with the approved major event permit. The agreement may include requirements for the applicant to provide cash deposit(s) or other forms of financial security or guarantees, at the City's election, in amounts and forms sufficient to protect the City from incurring costs or expenses resulting from the applicant's nonperformance or default in the conduct of the major event. The major event agreement shall require each applicant to agree to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City, its City Council, agents and employees from any and all liability, actions, claims, damages, costs or expenses, including attorney's fees, that may be asserted by any person or entity, including the applicant, arising out of or in connection with any willful act or negligence of the applicant, its agents, employees, vendors and affiliates. The form of agreement shall be approved by the City Attorney. 
(b)  The development agreement may provide, in the sole and absolute discretion of the City Council, that all or a portion of the review fees may be reimbursed to the applicant when the major event generates tax revenues pursuant to Article VI, Chapter 4 of this Code sufficient to fund such reimbursement. 
(Ord. 3 1, 2004; Ord. 03 3, 2005) 
Sec. 16-21-80. - Review expenses. 
    Every applicant for a major event permit shall pay for planning and engineering review services, attorney and consultant fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City and made necessary as a result of the application. An initial deposit into a non-interest-bearing escrow account held by the City shall be made at the time the application is filed with the City. The amount of this initial deposit shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The City shall have the right and authority to make disbursements from the escrow account at its sole discretion for planning and engineering review services, attorney and consultant fees and other costs and expenses incurred with regard to the application. Any balances remaining in the escrow account following approval, denial or withdrawal of the application shall be returned to the applicant without interest. In the event the deposited funds are exhausted before final disposition of the application, the applicant shall make a supplemental deposit to the escrow account in a reasonable amount to cover future costs and expenses, as determined by the City Manager, based on past expenditures. Failure to make necessary supplemental deposits shall cause the application process to cease until the required deposits are made. The City Manager, with cause, may reduce the amount of the initial escrow deposit; however, the applicant shall remain responsible for the actual cost of the planning and engineering review services and other consultant fees, including, without limitation, legal fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City. If the City incurs costs and expenses beyond the amount deposited with the City and the applicant does not pay those costs and expenses within ten (10) days after written notice from the City, then, in addition to the other remedies the City may have, the City shall be entitled to impose a lien on the property proposed for the major event and the City may elect to certify the assessed costs and expenses to the office of the County Treasurer for collection against the property in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. Such lien shall be perfected and foreclosed upon in accordance with applicable state laws. 
(Ord. 3 1, 2004; Ord. 7 28, 2004) 
Sec. 16-21-90. - Application review process. 
    Upon receipt of a complete application and payment of all fees and required review deposit, the application shall be processed in accordance with this Section. 
(1)  Planning and Zoning Commission review. 
a.  The City Manager shall refer the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission by setting the application on a Planning and Zoning Commission agenda. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing preceded by public notice thereof as provided in Subsection 16-2-40(c) of this Chapter. 
b.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine whether the application meets the requirements of this Article based on the application and on evidence and testimony presented at the public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of the application. The Planning and Zoning Commission may continue consideration of the application to a date certain in order to obtain additional information or to enable a full and complete consideration of the application. 
(2)  City Council review. 
a.  Following the Planning and Zoning Commission's public hearing, the City Manager shall set a public hearing by the City Council on the application. Notice shall be given of the public hearing pursuant to the requirements of Subsection 16-2-40(c) of this Chapter. 
b.  The City Council shall determine whether the application meets the requirements of this Article based on the application, the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendation and evidence and testimony presented at the public hearing. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. The City Council may continue consideration of the application to a date certain in order to obtain additional information or to enable a full and complete consideration of the application. 
c.  The City Council may impose conditions upon the issuance of the major event permit deemed reasonably essential to ensure conformance with applicable requirements of this Article and this Code or otherwise necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. 3 1, 2004) 
Sec. 16-21-100. - Standards for approval of major event permit. 
    A major event permit shall only be issued upon a finding that: 
(1)  The proposed event is a major event within the meaning of Sections 16-21-20 and 16-21-30 of this Article; 
(2)  The major event will provide one (1) or more significant and important public benefits to the City; 
(3)  The major event is appropriately sized in relationship to the site and, together with any proposed support services, can be conducted in an organized and efficient manner; 
(4)  The major event will not result in unreasonable traffic congestion or create a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
(5)  The major event will provide sufficient parking in terms of parking spaces and areas to accommodate parking demand; 
(6)  The major event will be conducted in a manner that eliminates, mitigates or reasonably controls adverse impacts upon adjacent properties and upon the public generally; and 
(7)  The major event will not unreasonably impair the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 3 1, 2004) 
Sec. 16-21-110. - Penalty for unauthorized major event. 
    Notwithstanding Section 1-4-20 of this Code, any person, corporation, association or other entity that conducts a major event without an approved permit under this Article, or in violation of the condition of an issued permit shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, be assessed a mandatory minimum fine of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day for each day such unauthorized major event is conducted. Each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. 03 4, 2005) 
CHAPTER 17 - Subdivisions 
ARTICLE I - Master Plan 

Sec. 17-1-10. - Maintenance of Land Use Master Plan. 
    The Land Use Master Plan of the City, approved by the City Council in Resolution No. 1, 1993, shall be maintained by the City and copies made available to interested persons at the Village Center. 
(Prior code 7-1-1; Ord. 3, 1993) 
ARTICLE II - General Subdivision Provisions 

Sec. 17-2-10. - Short title. 
    This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado . For the purpose of this Chapter, the Subdivision Regulations or these regulations shall mean the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado. 
(Prior code 7-2-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-2-20. - Purpose. 
(a)  The subdivision of land is the first step in the process of urban development. The arrangement of land parcels for residential and recreational uses, utilities and other public purposes will determine to a large degree the qualities of health, safety and the environment. 
(b)  These regulations are designed, intended and should be administered in a manner to seek to: 
(1)  Implement the City's Master Plan. 
(2)  Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision. 
(3)  Relate harmoniously the development of the various tracts of land to the existing community and facilitate the future development of appropriate adjoining tracts. 
(4)  Provide for adequate, safe and efficient public utilities and improvements; and provide for other general community facilities and public places. 
(5)  Provide for light, air, parks and other spaces for public use. 
(6)  Protect the health and safety of the residents and preserve the quality of the environment. 
(7)  Assist in providing for protection from fire, flood and other dangers; and provide for proper design of storm water drainage and streets. 
(8)  Provide that the cost of improvements which primarily benefit the tract of land being developed be borne by the owners/developers of the tract, and the costs of improvements which primarily benefit the whole community be borne by the whole community. 
(Prior code 7-2-2) 
Sec. 17-2-30. - Jurisdiction. 
    These subdivision regulations shall apply to all land located in the City, and all land in the process of annexation or that may hereafter be annexed to the City. 
(Prior code 7-2-3) 
Sec. 17-2-40. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Chapter, the following shall govern: 
(1)  Provisions are minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be regarded as the minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, prosperity and welfare. This Chapter shall be regarded as remedial and shall be liberally construed to further its underlying purposes. 
(2)  Application of overlapping regulations. Whenever both a provision of this Chapter and any other provision of this Chapter or any provision of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind contains any restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, whichever restrictions are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(3)  Existing permits. This Chapter is not intended to and shall not abrogate or annul any permits issued before the effective date of the initial ordinance codified herein. 
(Prior code 7-2-4; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-2-50. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Alley means a strip of land dedicated to public use, located at the side or rear of lots and providing a secondary means of vehicular access to the property. 
    Block means a parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public streets, highways, public walks, parks or green strips, rural or vacant land or drainage channels or a combination thereof. 
    Council means the City Council of the City. 
    Cul-de-sac means a short street having only one (1) end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround. 
    Disposition means a contract of sale resulting in the transfer of equitable title to an interest in subdivided land; an option to purchase an interest in subdivided land; a lease or assignment of an interest in subdivided land; or any other conveyance of an interest in subdivided land which is not made pursuant to one (1) of the foregoing. 
    Easement means a right in the public of any person to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with the general property rights retained by the owner. 
    Evidence means any map, table, chart, contract or any other document or testimony prepared or certified by a qualified person to attest to a specific claim or condition, which evidence must be relevant and competent and must support the position maintained by the subdivider. 
    Floodplain means the relatively flat or lowland area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other body of standing water which has been or may be covered temporarily by flood water. For the purpose of this Chapter, the floodplain is defined as the area that would be inundated by the base flood and is used interchangeably with the term one-hundred-year flood and the term special flood hazard area . 
    Improvements means street grading; paving and curbing; fire hydrants; water mains; sanitary sewers; storm sewers and drains; pedestrian ways; crosswalks; and such other construction as may be designated by the Commission or Council. 
    Lot means a block or other measured parcel intended as a unit for the transfer of ownership or for development. 
    Lot, double frontage means a lot which runs through a block from street to street and which abuts two (2) or more streets. 
    Master Plan means the Master Plan and amendments thereto for the City which has been officially adopted to provide development policies for current and long-range development within the City. 
    National Cooperative Soil Survey means the soil survey conducted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in cooperation with the State Agriculture Experiment Stations and other federal and state agencies. 
    Planning and Zoning Commission means the City Planning and Zoning Commission, also referred to as the Commission. 
    Plat, final means the map of a proposed subdivision and specific supporting material drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of adopted regulations as an instrument for recording of real estate interests with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
    Plat, preliminary means the map of a proposed subdivision, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of adopted regulations, to permit the evaluation of the proposal prior to detailed engineering and design. 
    Plat, sketch means a map of a proposed subdivision, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of the subdivision regulations, to evaluate feasibility and design characteristics at an early state in the planning. 
    Public hearing means a meeting of the Commission or the Council for the purpose of hearing comments, testimony, recommendations and other responses from the applicant, other interested parties and the general public regarding the applicant's proposal or appeal, Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the public hearing, shall be posted on the property, if practical, on a sign at least two (2) feet by three (3) feet for a period of fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing, and posted in a conspicuous location at the Village Center approved by the Council. Publication costs shall be paid by the City and posting costs by the applicant. The above-mentioned signs shall be removed no later than one (1) week following the hearing or continued hearing. 
    Regular meeting means any regularly scheduled or special call meeting of the Council or Commission that conforms with the requirements of state statutes and the City Charter for a legal meeting. 
    Resubdivision means the changing of any existing lot on any subdivision plat previously recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
    Right-of-way means all streets, roadways, sidewalks, alleys and all other areas reserved for present or future use by the public as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian travel. 
    Street means a dedicated public right-of-way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. This definition shall include the terms road , lane , place , avenue , drive and other similar descriptions. 
    Subdivider or developer means any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association or corporation who shall participate as owner, promoter, developer or sales agent in the planning, platting, development, promotion, sale or lease of a subdivision, and who either owned the land or has written authorization from the owner of the land to proceed with the subdivision. 
    Subdivision means the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It includes resubdivisions and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. 
    Subdivision improvements agreement means one (1) or more security arrangements which may be accepted by the City to secure the construction of such public improvements as are required by the subdivision regulations within the subdivision, and shall include collateral such as, but not limited to, performance or property bonds, private or public escrow agreements, loan commitments, assignments of receivables, liens on property, deposit of certified funds or other similar surety agreements. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-2-5; Ord. 4, 1993; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-2-60. - Appeal. 
    In the event any plat of a subdivision is not recommended for approval by the Commission, the applicant may petition the Council for a hearing. The petition for a public hearing must be made in writing to the Council within ten (10) days of the Commission's action and notification to the applicant. After public hearing, the Council, upon two-thirds (?) favorable vote of its entire membership, may approve the plat of the subdivision or take other action consistent with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 7-2-6) 
Sec. 17-2-70. - Separability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the Council that the provisions of this Chapter shall be severable in accordance with the provisions set forth below: 
(1)  If any provision is declared invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that: 
a.  The effect of such decision shall be limited to that provision or those provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid; and 
b.  Such decision shall not affect, impair or nullify this Chapter as a whole, or any other part thereof, but the rest of this Chapter shall continue in full force and effect. 
(2)  If the application of this Chapter to any tract of land is declared to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that: 
a.  The effect of such decision shall be limited to that tract of land immediately involved in the controversy, action or proceeding in which the judgment or decree of invalidity was rendered; and 
b.  Such decision shall not affect, impair or nullify this Chapter as a whole or the application of any provision thereof to any other tract of land. 
(Prior code 7-2-7) 
Sec. 17-2-80. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the City, to transfer, sell, agree to sell or offer to sell any land which would constitute a subdivision as described herein, or to refer to, exhibit or use a plat of a proposed subdivision, before such plat has been approved by the Council and recorded or filed in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder. The penalties for a violation of this Section shall be as described in Subsection (c) hereof. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction. 
(b)  All departments, officials and public employees of the City vested with the duty or authority to issue permits shall conform to the conditions of these regulations and shall issue no permits or certificates for the use or construction of buildings or other improvements requiring a permit, upon any land for which a plat is required by this Chapter, unless and until the requirements thereof have been duly complied with. It shall be the duty of the Council, the City Manager, the City Attorney and the Building Inspector to enforce the provisions of these regulations. 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  It is a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this Chapter. Every person convicted of a violation of any provision stated or adopted in this Chapter shall be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-20 of this Code for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold, agreed or negotiated to be sold, or offered to be sold. 
(2)  The City may further enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action brought in any court of competent jurisdiction and may recover therein all penalties provided for herein and all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney's fees incurred therein. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-2-8; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE III - Subdivision Procedures 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 17-3-10. - General procedure. 
(a)  The subdivision of land within the city shall be accomplished by the combined actions of the subdivider, the commission and the council. the function of the commission is advisory to the council. only the council has authority to accept a plat for filing, thereby permitting the subdivision. 
(b)  The first step in the process is for the subdivider to submit a sketch plat to the Commission. The Commission shall review the submittal and advise the subdivider of whatever comments or recommendations it deems appropriate. 
(c)  The second step is for the subdivider to submit the preliminary plat to the Commission. After proper notice is given to neighboring property owners and referrals made to appropriate agencies, the Commission will review the submittal at a public hearing. The Commission shall then advise the Council of its recommendations. The Council, following a public hearing, shall approve, approve conditionally or disapprove the plat. Approval shall be valid for twelve (12) months only. 
(d)  The last step is for the subdivider to submit the final plat to the Commission. The final plat must correspond in every significant respect with the preliminary plat as previously approved. The Commission shall review the final plat at a regular meeting and advise the Council of its recommendations. The Council shall approve, disapprove or approve conditionally the final plat by action taken at a regular meeting. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-3-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-3-20. - Fees. 
(a)  To defray the costs and expenses of administrative procedures, there shall be paid to the City Treasurer at the time of submission of the preliminary plat a fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) per lot. 
(b)  Applicants for subdivision approval, including plat amendments, shall also pay for planning and engineering review services, attorney and consultant fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City and made necessary as a result of said application. An initial deposit into a non-interest-bearing escrow account held by the City shall be made at the time the preliminary or amended plat application is filed with the City. The amount of this initial deposit shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) plus two hundred dollars ($200.00) per lot. The City shall have the right and authority to make disbursements from said escrow account at its sole discretion for planning and engineering review services, attorney and consultant fees and other costs and expenses incurred with regard to said application. Any balances remaining in the escrow account following approval, denial or withdrawal of said application shall be returned to the applicant without interest. In the event said funds are exhausted before final disposition of said application, the applicant shall make a supplemental deposit to said escrow account in a reasonable amount to cover future costs and expenses, as determined by the City Manager, based on past expenditures. Failure to make necessary supplemental deposits shall cause the application process to cease until the required deposits are made. The City Manager, with cause, may reduce the amount of the initial escrow deposit; however, the applicant shall remain responsible for the actual cost of the planning and engineering review services and other consultant fees, including, without limitation, legal fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City. If the City incurs costs and expenses beyond the amount deposited with the City and the applicant does not pay those costs and expenses within ten (10) days after written notice from the City, then, in addition to the other remedies the City may have, the City shall be entitled to a lien on the property that is the subject of the application, or the City may elect to certify the assessed costs and expenses to the office of the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. Such lien shall be perfected and foreclosed upon in accordance with applicable state laws. Nothing herein shall authorize the City to charge the applicant for costs and expenses the City incurs as a result of litigating a matter against the applicant or against a third party. 
(c)  The subdivider shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per page for County filing fees. This fee may be paid after approval of the final plat. 
(Prior code 7-3-2; Ord. 3, 1985; Ord. 1, 1994; Ord. 8, 1998; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 29, 2004; Ord. 15 6, 2010) 
Sec. 17-3-30. - Land dedication or cash payment in lieu thereof. 
(a)  In addition to provisions for roads and easements for drainage and utilities, every subdivider, in order to facilitate the acquisition and development of open space, parks and trails as contemplated by the City's Master Plan and Parks and Trails Sub-Master Plan, and other community recreational, cultural, educational and civic amenities and facilities, shall convey to the City an area of land from within the subdivision that is not less than seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of the gross area of all land being subdivided. The City may, in its discretion, accept in lieu of such land dedication either land located outside of the land being subdivided or a payment equivalent to the fair market value of the land required for dedication hereunder, or some combination thereof. In the event the City elects to require the dedication of land from the land being developed, the City and the subdivider shall determine what land shall be dedicated and whether in fee simple or by easement, taking into account the existing and anticipated parks, trails and other recreational amenities as provided in the City's Master Plan and Parks and Trails Sub-Master Plan, provided that the City's reasonable determination of what land shall be dedicated shall control in the event the City and the subdivider do not agree. Land dedications and cash payments in lieu thereof under this provision shall be used to provide, improve and maintain open space, parks, trails and other recreational amenities for the benefit of all residents of the City. In addition, every subdivider shall pay to the City a development fee of five thousand five hundred dollars ($5,500.00) for each lot included in the proposed subdivision. 
(b)  Such development fees shall be devoted to the development of open space, parks and trails as contemplated by the City's Master Plan and Parks and Trails Sub-Master Plan and other community recreational, cultural, educational and civic amenities and facilities. The amount of such fee may be adjusted as appropriate from time to time by resolution of the Council. 
(c)  All cash fees payable to the City under this Section shall be due to the City prior to the recording of the plat or per contract. They shall be placed in the Land Dedication Fund of the City for future disbursal by the City Council. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-3-3; Ord. 7, 1996; Ord. 7 30, 2004; Ord. 8 1, 2004) 
Sec. 17-3-40. - Sketch plat and submittal. 
(a)  The subdivider shall submit to the Commission the sketch plat reflecting such information and in the form as required by Section 17-4-40 of this Chapter, and the dated sketch plat shall be retained by the City. 
(b)  The subdivider may submit such additional material or information which the subdivider or the Commission deems supportive of the proposed subdivision. 
(c)  The Commission shall review the sketch plat submittal to determine if it is consistent with the standards set forth in this Chapter, and will suggest to the subdivider whatever changes, if any, are recommended in the plan. The Commission shall respond to applicant within a period of sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-3-4; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Division 2 - Preliminary Plat and Submittal 

Sec. 17-3-110. - Requirements for subdivider. 
(a)  The subdivider shall submit to the Commission the preliminary plat reflecting such information and in the form required by Section 17-4-40 of this Chapter. The plat shall comply with the principles, standards and criteria of Section 17-4-30 and Article V of this Chapter. All plats shall be dated when they are received to avoid confusion at a later time. 
(b)  The subdivider shall furnish a letter addressing the land dedication requirement of Section 17-3-30 above and outlining in preliminary fashion how he proposes to satisfy this requirement. 
(c)  The subdivider shall furnish documentary evidence of at least a preliminary nature, indicating the manner in which the following essential items will be provided to the subdivision. The essential items are: 
(1)  Water supply. 
(2)  Sewage disposal. 
(3)  Electricity. 
(4)  Gas. 
(5)  Storm drainage. 
(6)  Telephone. 
(d)  The subdivider shall submit, at least in summary or outline form, any agreements as may be required by Sections 17-4-10 and 17-4-20 of this Chapter relating to improvements. 
(1)  In the event any portion of the land to be subdivided lies within the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodplain, the subdivider shall submit a floodplain development plan consisting of a map and supporting data. The map shall show: 
a.  All lots in the subdivision, any part of which lies within the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
b.  All lands adjacent to the above-described lots for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in all directions. 
c.  Location of all reasonably anticipated structures on lots in the subdivision, when any part of the lot lies within the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
(2)  The floodplain development plan must show to the satisfaction of the Council that all lots, any part of which falls within the one-hundred-year floodplain, do provide or can be improved to provide for the structures reasonably anticipated for the lot and that such structures can be constructed in compliance with existing ordinances or regulations approved by the Council. 
(e)  In the event that the preliminary plat covers only a portion of the subdivider's entire holding, a sketch plat of the prospective street systems and the approved zoning for the entire tract shall accompany said plat. Filing fees will not be paid on the additional area until such time that a preliminary plat is actually submitted for such area. 
(f)  Written notice of the forthcoming Commission hearing at which the plat will be considered shall be given at least ten (10) days in advance by the subdivider by receipted personal service or receipted certified mail to the owners of all property (exclusive of streets, alleys and easements) within five hundred (500) feet of any portion of the proposed subdivision, and a certificate of mailing shall be filed with the City Clerk. Such written notice shall specify that the proposed plat may be inspected at the City offices during normal working hours prior to the hearing and that any person may appear at said meeting to protest such subdivision. If a variance is requested by the subdivider in accordance with Section 17-3-420 of this Chapter, the written notice shall make specific reference thereto. 
(Prior code 7-3-5-1; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-3-120. - Action required by Commission. 
(a)  Distribution: The chairman of the Commission shall submit the preliminary plat to such of the following agencies, and to other agencies as he deems appropriate, with a request for prompt return of comments and recommendations. 
(1)  Public Works Director. 
(2)  Fire District. 
(3)  Park and Recreation District. 
(4)  Arapahoe County. 
(5)  Denver County. 
(6)  Adjacent municipalities. 
(7)  Water and/or Sanitation District. 
(8)  Telephone company. 
(9)  Gas and electric company. 
(10)  Ditch company. 
(11)  Tri-County Health. 
(12)  Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(13)  State Engineer regarding water wells. 
(14)  Colorado Department of Transportation. 
(15)  City Police Department. 
(16)  School district. 
(17)  Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission. 
(b)  Failure of a reviewing agency to forward its comments to the City within twenty (20) calendar days after receiving a plat may be interpreted to indicate there are no objections to said plat. 
(c)  Public hearing. The Chairman of the Commission shall schedule a public hearing of the Commission to consider the proposed subdivision. Notice of this date shall be given to the subdivider at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the hearing. 
(d)  Following the hearing referred to in the preceding Subsection, the Commission shall respond to the subdivider within sixty (60) days. When the preliminary plat has been given approval or conditional approval by the Commission, it shall be sent to the Council and the subdivider shall be informed by the Commission. 
(Prior code 7-3-5-2; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 02 2, 2006) 
Sec. 17-3-130. - Action required by Council. 
(a)  Following a public hearing, the Council shall consider the preliminary plat submittal and the recommendations of the Commission. The Council may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the preliminary plat. The subdivider and the Commission shall be informed of the action taken. 
(b)  Approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months. Twelve-month extensions may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The extension may be for an unlimited number of twelve-month periods. If a preliminary plat extension is not granted, a new preliminary plat must again be submitted before action may be taken on a final plat. Any fees that have previously been paid are forfeited. 
(Prior code 7-3-5-3; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Division 3 - Final Plat and Submittal 

Sec. 17-3-210. - Requirements for subdivider. 
(a)  Within the time limits prescribed in Section 17-3-130 above following approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to the Commission the final plat, prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 17-4-40 below and consistent in every significant respect with the preliminary plat as approved, and in addition, complying with conditions if conditionally approved. 
(b)  The subdivider shall also submit the following where appropriate: 
(1)  A current commitment for title insurance showing the ownership to the property in the proposed subdivision, together with liens, encumbrances and restrictions thereon, if any. 
(2)  Treasurer's certificate of taxes, reflecting that taxes are not delinquent. 
(3)  A general warranty deed which deeds to the City, or other appropriate public agency, all lands other than streets which are to be held for or used for public purposes. 
(4)  Subdivision improvement agreements in accordance with Sections 17-4-10 and 17-4-20 below. 
(5)  Certified check representing the amount in lieu of land donation required of the subdivider pursuant to Section 17-3-30 above. 
(6)  Attorney's certificate. 
(7)  Proof satisfactory to the Commission that all essential services, as specified in Section 17-3-110(c) above, will be provided to the subdivision. 
(8)  Street profiles in accordance with Section 17-4-30 below. 
(9)  Two (2) sets of pavement design computations in accordance with Section 17-4-30 below. 
(10)  One (1) sepia with approved house numbers and two (2) prints of the same. 
(Prior code 7-3-6-1) 
Sec. 17-3-220. - Action required by Commission. 
(a)  The Commission shall seek such comments on the final plat submittal from such other governmental units, utilities, service companies or consultants as it deems appropriate. The Commission may request from the City Attorney and City Engineer their written opinions as to the legal and engineering sufficiency of the final plat submittal. 
(b)  The Commission shall, at a regular meeting, review the final plat submittal and whatever information is obtained pursuant to Subsection (a) and Section 17-3-210 above. 
(c)  Following the meeting referred to in Subsection (b) above, the Commission shall respond to the subdivider within sixty (60) days. When the final plat has been given approval or conditional approval by the Commission, it shall be sent to the Council and the subdivider shall be informed by the Commission. 
(Prior code 7-3-6-2) 
Sec. 17-3-230. - Action required by Council. 
(a)  The final plat submittal, along with the recommendations of the Commission, shall be presented at a regular meeting of the Council, after which the subdivider shall be informed of its decision. 
(b)  Following the approval of the final plat by the Council, the plat shall be signed by the Mayor and the chairman of the Commission and attested by the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall then record the final plat and any other documents required in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder. All costs of recording shall be paid by the applicant. 
(c)  Any conditional or final approval of a final plat by the Council shall be effective for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months. In the event all required conditions are not fully met or the plat is not signed by the appropriate City officials within said period of time, the subdivider shall submit a new proposed final plat before any further action may be taken. Any fees that have been previously paid are forfeited. In considering the new proposed final plat, the Council may impose any reasonable additional conditions to the approval of same and may require a review and re-evaluation of the land dedication provisions as set forth in Section 17-3-30 above. For good cause shown, the Council may grant an applicant a twelve-month extension of this time limitation. This Section shall apply to any final plat now pending or hereinafter submitted. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; Ord. 10, 1980; prior code 7-3-6-3) 
Division 4 - Minor Subdivisions and Amended Plats 

Sec. 17-3-310. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Division is to establish a subdivision process applicable to certain small and simple divisions of property as well as minor amendments to existing subdivision plats. This Division is intended to provide for the faster processing of final and amended subdivision plats without the need to pursue sketch plan or preliminary plan processing or approvals by the City. 
(Ord. 2, 2002; Ord. 2 1, 2010) 
Sec. 17-3-320. - Definition of minor subdivision and minor amendment. 
(a)  A minor subdivision is any division of land that: 
(1)  Divides a parcel of land held in single or common ownership into two (2) parcels; and 
(2)  Does not create or result in the creation of a lot or parcel of land that would violate or fail to conform to any applicable zoning or other standard, including but not limited to lot area, building height, setback, private road or private drive standards, parking, drainage requirements or access or public amenities, including public roads, easements, rights-of-way, parks, open spaces or trails. 
(b)  A minor amendment is any amendment to or modification of an existing subdivision plat that: 
(1)  Does not relocate previously established lot lines; 
(2)  Does not result in a lot consolidation or minor lot adjustment (as defined in Section 17-6-20 of this Chapter); and 
(3)  Does not create or result in the creation of a lot or parcel of land that would violate or fail to conform to any applicable zoning or other standard, including but not limited to lot area, building height, setback, private road or private drive standards, parking, drainage requirements or access or public amenities, including public roads, easements, rights-of-way, parks, open spaces or trails. 
(Ord. 2, 2002; Ord. 2 1, 2010) 
Sec. 17-3-330. - Application fee. 
    To defray the costs and expenses of administrative procedures, the fee for a minor subdivision or amended plat application shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In addition to the application fee, applications for minor subdivisions or amended plats must comply with the escrow deposit requirements of Subsection 17-3-20(b) above and the land dedication or cash payment requirements of Section 17-3-30 above. 
(Ord. 2, 2002; Ord. 7 31, 2004; Ord. 2 1, 2010) 
Sec. 17-3-340. - Contents of plat and application. 
(a)  The contents of the minor subdivision plat or amended plat and the application for approval are the same as the contents and application for a final plat contained in Article IV of this Chapter, except that the title of the subdivision plat shall prominently identify the proposed name of the subdivision, together with the phrase Minor Subdivision or Minor Amendment . A minor amendment shall carry over from the existing subdivision plat all notations, easements and conditions that are not the subject of the amendment request. 
(b)  Minor subdivision. The following application materials must be submitted for any minor subdivision request: 
(1)  An application in a form approved by the City, which may be in the form of a letter signed by the owner or owners requesting approval of the minor subdivision pursuant to this Article. 
(2)  Current commitment for title insurance required by Paragraph 17-3-210(b)(1) above or, in the alternative where no dedication of property to the public is proposed by the plat, all of the following: 
a.  A copy of a recorded deed for all of the property described in the application evidencing that the applicant is the fee owner of the property; 
b.  A written, executed and notarized statement of the applicant representing to the City that he is the fee owner of the property; and 
c.  A certified copy of documentation from the County Assessor or Clerk and Recorder evidencing that the applicant is the owner of record of the property. 
(3)  Topography for the entire property subject to subdivision expressed in one-foot contours in USGS datum. 
(4)  A statement or tabulation reflecting the total acreage of the subdivision and breakdown as to land uses; such as building lots, streets, deeded public areas and easements. 
(5)  A study by a professional engineer, licensed to practice in the State, detailing the method for moving storm water through the subdivision. The study shall include: 
a.  Detailed description of existing ditches, culverts and irrigation facilities, including the condition or quality of such improvements; 
b.  Calculations of projected quantity of storm water naturally entering the proposed subdivision; 
c.  Quantities of flow from each pickup point; 
d.  Location, size and grades of required culverts, drain inlets and storm drainage sewers; 
e.  Elevations of any adjacent or on-site delineated floodplains; 
f.  Projected impacts on any downstream property; and 
g.  Details of on-site detention of storm water if required. Storm water detention is required unless no adverse impact is shown downstream to a delineated floodplain. 
(6)  Construction details for any public improvements. 
(7)  An agreement relating to public improvements as required by Sections 17-4-10 and 17-4-20 below. 
(8)  Documentary evidence of water supply, sewage disposal, electricity, gas and telephone. 
(9)  Floodplain development plan consisting of map and supporting data if the property is in a floodplain. 
(10)  Letter addressing land dedication requirements outlining how the subdivider proposes to meet the land dedication requirements of Subsection 17-3-30(a) above. 
(11)  Additional information deemed necessary by the City to evaluate the proposed application or plat. 
(c)  Minor amendment. The following application materials must be submitted for any minor amendment request: 
(1)  An application in a form approved by the City, which may be in the form of a letter signed by the owner or owners requesting approval of the minor amendment pursuant to this Article. 
(2)  Current commitment for title insurance required by Paragraph 17-3-210(b)(1) above or, in the alternative where no dedication of property to the public is proposed by the plat, all of the following: 
a.  A copy of a recorded deed for all of the property described in the application evidencing that the applicant is the fee owner of the property; 
b.  A written, executed and notarized statement of the applicant representing to the City that he is the fee owner of the property; and 
c.  A certified copy of documentation from the County Assessor or Clerk and Recorder evidencing that the applicant is the owner of record of the property. 
(3)  The following additional items shall be required for buffer removal requests pursuant to Section 16-8-80 of this Code: 
a.  Written approval of the request by all property owners contiguous to the entire length of the buffer being removed; and 
b.  A current commitment for title insurance, or other documentation outlined in Paragraph (2) above, for all property owners contiguous to the entire length of the buffer being removed. 
(4)  Additional information deemed necessary for the City to evaluate the proposed application or plat. 
(Ord. 2, 2002; Ord. 2 1, 2010) 
Sec. 17-3-350. - Minor subdivision and minor amendment approval procedure. 
    The Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the subdivision's conformance with the requirements of this Code and this Article. The Commission shall render a decision to recommend approval, conditional approval or denial of the minor subdivision or minor amendment. Following the Commission's review, the Council shall consider minor subdivision and minor amendment applications at a public hearing. Notice shall be given of the public hearings pursuant to the requirements of Subsection 16-2-40(c) of this Code. 
(Ord. 2, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 2 1, 2010) 
Sec. 17-3-360. - Standard for minor subdivision and minor amendment approval. 
    The recommendation of approval or conditional approval of any minor subdivision or minor amendment by the Commission and any approval or conditional approval by the Council shall require a finding that the applicant established each of the following by competent and sufficient evidence: 
(1)  The proposed subdivision meets the definition of a minor subdivision or minor amendment contained in this Division; 
(2)  The proposed subdivision fully conforms to all applicable requirements for the zone district in which the property is located, including but not limited to requirements for setbacks and minimum lot sizes; 
(3)  The proposed subdivision meets or satisfies all other applicable requirements of this Code; 
(4)  The streets, whether public or private, and all public improvements necessary to serve the subdivision meet or exceed the requirements of the City; 
(5)  Adequate utility easements are established within the affected property to provide service to the lots created by or illustrated upon the minor plat; 
(6)  Existing public trails located within the lots illustrated upon the minor plat are preserved or new trails are dedicated by the plat that will provide, in the opinion of the City, a substantially similar or improved trail system in terms of route, grade, access, surface quality, ease of maintenance and safety; 
(7)  The proposed configuration, shape, arrangement and layout of the lots, conditions placed on the lots and any streets do not, in the opinion of the City, create a lot or street that is inconsistent or incompatible with other lots or streets within the neighborhood or the vicinity, or do not substantially and adversely affect adjacent properties; and 
(8)  The proposed subdivision substantially conforms to the goals and policies of the City's Master Plan to the extent that such goals and policies establish requirements that are sufficiently specific to permit the Commission or Council to decide that the application and subdivision plat meets or fails to meet such goal or policy. 
(Ord. 2, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 2 1, 2010) 
Sec. 17-3-370. - Conditions for approval. 
    The Council may impose reasonable conditions upon any approval of a minor subdivision or minor amendment that are necessary to ensure continued conformance with these standards of approval, this Code or other conditions deemed necessary based on the evidence presented to the Commission or the Council to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City and its residents. 
(Ord. 2, 2002; Ord. 2 1, 2010) 
Division 5 - Additional Provisions 

Sec. 17-3-410. - Building permits. 
(a)  No building or construction permit shall be issued covering unplatted property unless the property has been specifically exempted from the subdivision process by definition or by official action of the Council. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the City will require the following subdivision improvements to be completed: 
(1)  Survey monuments. As required by City specifications. 
(2)  Water mains. If provided, the subdivider shall provide adequate mains and stubs to each lot in such a manner that street and sidewalk cuts will not be required to hook up. 
(3)  Fire hydrants. As required according to City or Fire District specifications. 
(4)  Site and street grading. As required by City specifications. 
(c)  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the City will require the following improvements to be completed: 
(1)  Sanitary sewers. If provided, the subdivider shall provide adequate lines and stubs to each lot in such a manner that street and sidewalk cuts will not be required to hook up. 
(2)  Storm drainage. The subdivider shall provide storm sewers, culverts and bridges where required. 
(3)  Streets. Base construction will be completed. 
(4)  Street signs. As required according to City specifications. 
(5)  Utilities (telephone, electric services and gas lines). These shall be installed underground and shall be in place. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-3-7) 
Sec. 17-3-420. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  Application for variance. A subdivider may submit an application for a variance to this Chapter or Chapter 16 in writing to the Commission setting forth the extent of the requested variance supported with reasons for the request. 
(b)  Time and place of regular meeting. The Commission shall, upon receipt of such application, arrange a time for meeting and notify the applicant of the time and place of meeting. This meeting shall be concurrent with a public hearing on the preliminary plat. 
(c)  Commission response. Following the meeting referred to in Subsection (b) above, the Commission shall respond to the subdivider within sixty (60) days. When the application for a variance has been given a recommendation for approval or conditional approval by the Commission, it shall be sent to the Council and the subdivider shall be informed by the Commission. 
(d)  Criteria for granting variances. When considering the Commission's recommendation, approval of variances shall be based fundamentally on findings that unusual topographical or other exceptional conditions or circumstances not caused by action of the subdivider require such variance, modification or waiver; and that the granting thereof will not adversely affect the general public nor have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. In addition to those findings, no approval of any variance under this Section shall be granted unless the Council finds that: 
(1)  Reasonable protections are afforded adjacent properties; 
(2)  The requested variance will not have an adverse impact on the character of the neighborhood or have an adverse effect on the physical or environmental conditions of the surrounding properties; and 
(3)  The variance is the minimum variance necessary to alleviate the exceptional condition or circumstance. 
(e)  Limitation of variances. In no case shall a variance be granted for a lot that is not lawful under the provisions of Section 16-14-10 of this Code. In no case shall any variance, modification or waiver be more than a minimum change in requirements and, except for a variance of the minimum lot area and, upon the grant of a minimum lot area variance, the minimum yard requirements, in no case shall it be in conflict with Chapter 16 of this Code or objectives of the City's Master Plan. 
(f)  Public hearing. Following a public hearing, the Council shall consider the application for a variance and the recommendations of the Commission. This public hearing may be concurrent with the public hearing on the preliminary plat. The Council may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application. The subdivider and the Commission shall be informed of the action taken. In granting variances, modifications or waivers, the Council may require such conditions which in its judgment will substantially secure the objectives of the standards and requirements affected. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-3-8; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 03 1, 2008) 
Division 6. - Subdivision Renaming Process 

Sec. 17-3-510. - Purpose, intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this Section is to create a process for a subdivision name change. 
( Ord. 9 1, 2017 ) 
Sec. 17-3-520. - Process. 
(a)  Application. A request to obtain City Council approval of a subdivision name change may be initiated by the property owners within the subdivision as provided in this Article. The applicant must submit a written application and petition on forms provided by the city, which application shall contain at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  Existing subdivision name; 
(2)  Proposed subdivision name; 
(3)  Reason for request to change subdivision name; 
(4)  A list of all property owners within the subdivision identified by lot and block number and street address; 
(5)  Legible copy of the recorded subdivision plat; 
(6)  Petition supporting the name change signed by property owners owning at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the lots. Each lot counts as only one (1) vote, regardless of the number of property owners signing the petition. All record owners of a lot must sign the petition in order to count towards the fifty-one percent (51%) requirement. The completed petition must be signed by the applicant and returned to the City's community development department with the application; and 
(7)  Payment of application fee determined by resolution of the City Council. 
(8)  Payment of recording fees to be held by the City in a non-interest-bearing account. Recording fees will be determined by City staff based on the number of lots involved in the proposed subdivision name change and current recording fees imposed by Arapahoe County. 
(b)  Review for completeness. Within fifteen (15) days of submittal of an application, the community development department will review the application for completeness and verify the owners' signatures against Arapahoe County Assessor's tax records to ensure that it meets all requirements. Incomplete applications will not be processed and will be returned to the applicant. Upon deeming the application complete, the community development department will refer the application to the City Council for a final determination. 
(c)  Public Hearing. The City Council shall consider the proposed subdivision name change at a duly noticed public hearing. Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the public hearing and posted at each major entrance to the subdivision from public streets bordering the subdivision, on sign(s) at least two (2) feet by three (3) feet for a period of fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The Community Development Director shall determine the location of signs and the required number of signs in his or her discretion to provide adequate notice to the public. The applicant shall be responsible for all public hearing costs and for posting in accordance with this Section. 
( Ord. 9 1, 2017 ) 
Sec. 17-3-530. - Criteria of approval. 
    The application shall not be approved unless the City Council finds that the application meets each of the following standards: 
(1)  The application is complete and the supporting petition is signed by property owners owning at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the lots within the subdivision; and 
(2)  The proposed subdivision name is not duplicated anywhere else in the City; and 
(3)  No other changes to the subdivision plat are proposed. 
( Ord. 9 1, 2017 ) 
Sec. 17-3-540. - City decision. 
(a)  Upon a finding that the application meets the standards for approval set forth in Section 17-3-530 above, the City Council shall adopt a resolution and cause the same to be recorded with the Arapahoe County Clerk and Recorder at the applicant's expense per Section 17-3-520(a)(8) above against each and every property impacted by the plat renaming. 
(b)  The City Council shall deny an application for failure to meet the standards set forth in Section 17-3-530 above. Any decision to deny an application shall be set forth in a resolution stating the specific reasons for denial, and the decision shall be promptly mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
( Ord. 9 1, 2017 ) 
ARTICLE IV - Improvement and Plat Requirements 

Sec. 17-4-10. - Public improvements. 
(a)  Prior to the approval of the final plat, the City will require from the subdivider a written agreement to construct any required public improvements shown in the final plat documents, as well as repairs occasioned by such improvements. Such agreement shall reflect an estimate of the cost of the various improvements, repairs and a time schedule for their completion. 
(b)  The subdivider shall deposit with the City a performance and payment bond, maintenance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or other collateral which is sufficient, in the judgment of the Council, to assure financial capability for the completion of the improvements or repairs required under Subsection (a) above. 
(c)  As improvements are completed, the subdivider may apply to the City for a release of part or all of the collateral deposited with the City. Upon inspection and approval, the Council shall release said collateral. If the City determines that any of such improvements are not constructed in substantial compliance with specifications, it shall furnish to the subdivider a list of specific deficiencies and shall be entitled to withhold collateral sufficient to ensure substantial compliance. If the City determines that the subdivider has not constructed any or all of the improvements in a timely manner and in accordance with all of the specifications, the City may withdraw and employ from the deposit of collateral such funds as may be necessary to construct the improvement or improvements in accordance with specifications. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, public ways, including but not limited to streets, roads, lanes and drives ("public ways"), or other public improvements, including but not limited to improvements on or in recreational trails, parks or open space, dedicated to the City for public use must remain free from defect for a period of one (1) year from the date that the respective public way or other public improvement is complete as determined by the City. The subdivider shall provide the City with a letter of credit issued by a bank acceptable to the City, in an amount equal to the cost of the public way or other public improvement plus a reasonable amount for contingencies, which shall be no less than ten percent (10%) of such cost. Said letter of credit shall remain in place until the anniversary of the completion of the public way or other public improvement, at which time, depending upon the condition of the public way or other public improvement, the City may, in its sole discretion, do what it deems necessary for the public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Accept the same for maintenance; 
(2)  Require the subdivider to correct any defects in the public way or other public improvement; or 
(3)  Draw on the letter of credit to correct any defect in the public way or other public improvement. 
The subdivider shall be responsible for paying the City for any shortfall in the letter of credit. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-4-1; Ord. 1, 2000) 
Sec. 17-4-20. - Private improvements. 
(a)  In the event the subdivision is to contain any property or facility that is not for public use but which is for the private use of the owners or occupants of two (2) or more lots or dwelling units, the maintenance and operation of such privately owned common facility shall be covered by an agreement with the City. Examples of such property or facility might be tennis courts, swimming pools, parkways, roadways, gates, greenbelts and stables. 
(b)  The agreement between the subdivider and the City will provide to the City whatever it deems necessary to assure that: 
(1)  Construction. The proposed facilities will be constructed as proposed. 
(2)  Future operation. The future operation and maintenance of the facility is properly provided for both as to management and funding. Such agreement may require approval of covenants, escrow deposits, performance and payment bonds or any other method of assurance required by the City. 
(3)  Maintenance of drainage facilities. 
a.  The subdivider and all of the owners of the properties drained by or draining into any drainage facility, including but not limited to private drainage facilities and private and public drainage easements, located on the property that is the subject of the final plat ("benefited owners") shall be jointly and severally responsible for maintaining the structural integrity and operational functions of said drainage facility. If at any time following certification of any such drainage facility, or any time following approval of the final plat, the City deems that any such drainage facility no longer complies with the approved plans, the subdivider and the benefited owners shall restore such facility to the standards and specifications as shown on the approved drainage plans. Failure to maintain the structural integrity and operational function of any such drainage facility will result in the City notifying the subdivider and the benefited owners as to the nature of the work required to bring the facility into compliance, together with a request for the work to be performed in a reasonable time period. If the subdivider and benefited owners fail to bring the drainage facility into compliance with the approved drainage plans or an emergency situation exists, the City may enter onto the property and cause the necessary work to be performed at the expense of the subdivider and benefited owners. 
b.  The City shall invoice said subdivider and benefited owners for its costs and expenses. The subdivider and benefited owners shall, within thirty (30) days of the date of the invoice, remit full payment to the City. If full payment is not made by the thirtieth day, the City Manager may elect to have the City's costs and expenses become a lien against the properties drained by or draining into any such drainage facility as of the date the City Manager certifies the costs and expenses to the office of the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. A notice of the lien shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder. The amount of the costs and expenses may be paid to the City at any time prior to certification of the same by the City Manager to the office of the County Treasurer, but thereafter payments shall be made only to the office of the County Treasurer. Upon receipt of the certified costs and expenses, the County Treasurer shall proceed to collect the amounts so certified against said properties in the same manner as the collection of general property taxes and the redemption thereof. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-4-2; Ord. 1, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-4-30. - Engineering and construction criteria. 
(a)  Codes adopted. Pursuant to and in the manner provided by law, there is hereby adopted by reference the following codes and standards: 
(1)  "Arapahoe County Infrastructure Design and Construction Standards," dated December 15, 2006 and revised on December 31, 2007, published by the Arapahoe County Board of County Commissioners; 
(2)  "Arapahoe County Stormwater Management Manual," dated January 30, 2007 and revised on July 5, 2011, published by the Arapahoe County Board of County Commissioners; 
(3)  "Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual," dated June 2001 and revised in April 2008, published by the Urban Drainage and Flood Control District; 
(4)  "Roadway Design Guide," dated June 20, 2005 and revised in April 2014, published by the Colorado Department of Transportation; and 
(5)  "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction" dated May 3, 2011 and revised on May 23, 2014, published by the Colorado Department of Transportation. 
These codes shall constitute the minimum engineering and construction criteria applicable to the construction of public improvements within the City. Alternative standards may be established by the City if they are determined to be consistent with the Master Plan, meet engineering standards, including but not limited to the construction and excavation standards listed in Section 11-2-220 of this Code and ensure the general safety, health and welfare of the public. 
(b)  Amendments to the codes adopted. The above referenced codes are hereby amended to substitute the word "City" and for all references to "Arapahoe County": "County"; "Board of County Commissioners." All references to the applicability of the codes to "unincorporated Arapahoe County" shall mean the "City of Cherry Hills Village." 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of the codes adopted in this Section shall be subject to the penalties and enforcement set forth in Subsection 17-2-80(c) of this Chapter. In addition, the City Manager may issue a notice, order and demand to immediately cease work or any other action found by the City Manager to be in violation of the codes adopted herein. 
(Ord. 6 1, 2014) 
Sec. 17-4-40. - Table of plat requirements. 
    The plats submitted shall contain the following information: 
Sketch Preliminary Final 1. Sheet size 24"  36". Original on film or linen (final only). 1 Copies - number required. 10 24 20 2. Proposed name of subdivision. x x x 3. Names and addresses of: a. Subdivider; x x x b. Owners; x x c. Land planner; x x d. Registered land surveyor in the State of Colorado. x x 4. North point and date of preparation. x x x 5. Scale, written and graphic, 1" = 50' or 1" = 100'. x x x 6. Vicinity map showing major land use divisions, street and major drainage features for at least one-fourth (1/4) mile on all sides of proposed subdivision located in relation to governmental section lines. x x x 7. Indication of existing zoning. x x 8. A key or index shall be on the first page if the plat consists of more than one page. x x 9. Legal description of subdivision. x x 10. A statement or tabulation reflecting the total acreage of the subdivision and breakdown as to land uses, such as building lots, streets deeded public areas, recreation easements. x x 11. Boundary lines of the subdivision in a heavy solid line. x x x 12. Topographic contouring by a registered land surveyor or engineer: a. Existing topography, with 10-foot interval covering subdivision and one-fourth ( 1 / 4 ) mile in all directions; x b. Existing topography and a grading plan, with 2-foot interval covering subdivision and 100 feet in all directions. x 13. Drainage channels, wooded areas and other significant natural features within the tract or at least 100 feet immediately adjacent thereto. x x x 14. Boundary of existing 100-year floodplain, if applicable. x x 15. Lines depicting any proposed modifications to drainage channels or floodplains. x x x 16. General land plan reflecting land use divisions, including residential, streets, recreational easements and other significant features. x 17. Specific land plan for site and at least 100 feet adjacent thereto reflecting existing and proposed lot and property boundaries, streets, utility lines, drainage structures with easements and dedications, all significant dimensions to nearest foot; show the square footage within each lot. x 18. A preliminary layout map showing the method of moving storm water through the subdivision will be needed. This map should also show runoff concentrations in acres of drainage area on each street entering each intersection. (This may be combined with topographic map.) Flow arrows should clearly show the complete runoff flow pattern: x a. Details of ditch and culvert; b. Calculations of projected quantity of storm water entering subdivision naturally from area outside of subdivision; c. Quantities of flow from each pickup point; d. Location, size and grades of required culverts, drain inlets and storm drainage sewers; e. Details of on-site retention of storm water if required by City. 19. Specific land plan, fully surveyed, reflecting exact location of all boundaries, streets, recreational easements, utility easements, public areas and any other proposed divisions. x 20. Subdivision boundary and interior streets: An accurate and complete boundary survey and survey of interior street lines shall be made of the land to be subdivided. A traverse of the exterior boundaries and interior streets of the tract, and of each block, when computed from field measurements on the ground, must close within a limit of 1 foot to 10,000 feet of perimeter. The boundary of the subdivision shall be clearly indicated on the final plat. All lines shown on the plat which do not constitute a part of the subdivision shall be dashed. Any area enclosed by the subdivision, but not a part thereof, shall be labeled " Not a part of this subdivision ." Adjacent subdivisions shall be identified by official names. x 21. Dimensions, bearing or angles, curve data: The final plat shall show all survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon, including bearings or angles, continued with distances and deflection angles for all circular curves. Where, under unusual circumstances, curves other than circular are used, the final plat must indicate type of curve and all pertinent data. x 22. Lots and blocks: All lots and blocks and all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose shall be particularly delineated and designated with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. Parcels offered for dedication, other than for streets or easements, shall be designated by letter or number which shall be explained on the map. Sufficient linear, angular and curve data shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of the boundary lines of every block, lot and parcel which is part thereof. All lots and wherever practicable, blocks, in their entirety shall be shown on one sheet. No ditto marks shall be used for lot dimensions. All lots and blocks shall be numbered systematically. x 23. Streets: The plat shall show the right-of-way lines and names of each street, the width of any portion being dedicated and widths of any existing dedications. The widths, locations and names of adjacent streets and other public properties within 50 feet of the subdivisions shall be shown. If any street in the subdivision is a continuation of an existing street, the conformity or the amount of nonconformity of such street, to such existing streets shall be accurately shown. Whenever the centerline of a street has been established or recorded, the data shall be shown on the final plat. x 24. Easements: The sidelines of all easements, including easements for utilities and drainage, shall be shown by fine-dashed lines. If any easements already of record cannot be definitely located, a statement of the existence, the nature thereof and its recorded reference must appear on the title sheet. Distances and bearings on the sidelines of lots which are cut by easements must be arrowed or so shown that the plat will indicate clearly the actual length of the lot lines. The widths of all easements and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate the same with respect to the subdivision must be shown. All easements must be clearly labeled and identified. If an easement shown on the plat is already of record, its recorded reference must be given. If an easement is being dedicated by the plat, it shall be set out in the owner's certificate of dedication and dedicated to the City. x 25. Building setback line: The plat shall show building setback lines by long thin dash lines. x 26. The location and description of all section corners and permanent survey monuments in or near the tract, to at least one of which the subdivision shall be referenced. x 27. Owner's and mortgagee's certificate and dedication, signed. x 28. Surveyor's certificate of survey, signed and with seal, and the date of the survey. x x 29. Title certificate. x 30. Street maintenance agreement, if applicable. x 31. Street lighting agreement, if applicable. x 32. Certificates of Planning and Zoning Commission approval. x 33. Certificate of the City's acceptance of ways, easements and public land dedications. x 34. County Clerk and Recorder's certificate. x 35. City Attorney's and City Engineer's written opinions on legal and engineering sufficiency of plat when applicable. x 36. Subdivider's written agreement on public and/or private improvements and assurance of financial capability. x 37. Agreement in summary or outline form required by Sections 17-4-10 and 17-4-20 of this Chapter relating to public improvements. x 38. Documentary evidence of water supply, sewage disposal, electricity, gas, storm drainage, telephone. x 39. Floodplain development plan consisting of map and supporting data. x 40. Letter addressing land dedication requirements outlining how subdivider proposes to meet 10% requirement. x 41. In the event cash in lieu of land is required, documentation substantiating fair market value shall be provided. x 42. A current commitment for title insurance showing the ownership to the property in the proposed subdivision, together with liens, encumbrances and restrictions thereon, if any. x 43. Treasurer's certificate of taxes, reflecting that taxes are not delinquent. x 44. A general warranty deed which deeds to the City, or other appropriate public agency, all lands other than streets which are to be held for or used for public purposes. x 45. Certified check representing amount in lieu of land donation required of subdivider pursuant to Section 17-3-30 of this Chapter. x 46. Attorney's certificate. x 47. Proof satisfactory to the Commission that all essential services, as specified in Subsection 17-3-110(c) of this Chapter, will be provided to the subdivision. x 48. Street profiles in accordance with Section 17-4-30 of this Article. x 49. Two sets of pavement design computations in accordance with Section 17-4-30 of this Article. x 50. One sepia with approved house numbers and two prints of same. x  
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-4-4) 
Sec. 17-4-50. - Certificates required. 
    Certificates required to appear on the final plat of a subdivision shall be in form substantially as set forth herein: 
(1)  Certificate of dedication and ownership: 
Know all men by these presents, that the undersigned, hereby certify that they are all of the Owner(s), Mortgagee(s) and Lienholder(s) of certain lands in the City of Cherry Hills Village, Arapahoe County, Colorado, described as follows: 
Beginning ___________ etc., containing ______ acres, more or less. The undersigned have by these presents laid out, platted and subdivided the same into lots, blocks and tracts, as shown on this plat, under the name and style of _________________________ and do hereby dedicate to the City of Cherry Hills Village for public use the public ways shown hereon, including but not limited to, streets, roads, drives and lanes; the public lands shown hereon for their indicated public use; and the recreational trails shown hereon for non-motorized, recreational use by the public in the manner similar to other public trails throughout the City of Cherry Hills Village, subject to the applicable laws and ordinances of the City of Cherry Hills Village, and for use by vehicles appropriate for the maintenance of the trail easements by the City or its contractors. The undersigned hereby further dedicate to the City of Cherry Hills Village the utility easements shown hereon for utility purposes only. The undersigned hereby further dedicate to the City of Cherry Hills Village all drainage easements shown hereon for drainage purposes only. 
The undersigned hereby further dedicate to the public utilities the right to install, maintain and operate mains, transmission lines, service lines and appurtenances to provide such utility services within this subdivision of property contiguous thereto, under, along and across public ways, including but not limited to, roads, streets, lanes and drives as shown hereon, and also under, along and across utility easements as shown hereon. 
The lands comprising this subdivision are subject to certain covenants which are recorded in Book ______ at Page _________, of the records of Arapahoe County, Colorado. 
Executed this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
      Owner(s):               Mortgagee(s) and Lienholder(s):         State of Colorado, )
) ss. 
         County of Arapahoe ) 
The foregoing dedication was acknowledged before me this______ day of ____________, 20___, by ___________________. 
Witness my hand and seal. 
My commission expires _______________. 
(2)  Surveying certificate: 
I, ________________, a Registered Professional Land Surveyor in the State of Colorado, do hereby certify that the survey represented by this plat was made under my supervision and the monuments shown thereon actually exist and this plat accurately represents said survey. 
      Registered Land Surveyor   (3)  Title certificate: 
I, _____________, an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Colorado, certify that I have examined title to the above-described land dedication to the City of Cherry Hills Village, and that the party(ies) executing the dedication have merchantable title to the above-described real property and are well seized of the property dedicated by this plat and have good, sure, perfect, absolute and indefeasible estate of inheritance, in law, in fee simple and have good right, full power and lawful authority to dedicate the same in manner and form as aforesaid, and that same is free and clear from all former and other grants, bargains, sales, liens, taxes, assessments, encumbrances and restrictions of whatever kind or nature except those of record and acceptable to the City. 
By: 
      Attorney at Law         Or, in the alternative: 
Title Certificate: 
I, ______________, as authorized agent for _____________ Title Company, and having the power and authority to legally bind _____________ Title Company with respect to the certification made herein, hereby certify that I have examined title to the above-described land dedication to the City of Cherry Hills Village, and that the party(ies) executing the dedication have merchantable title to the above-described real property and are well seized of the property dedicated by this plat and have good, sure, perfect, absolute and indefeasible estate of inheritance, in law, in fee simple and have good right, full power and lawful authority to dedicate the same in manner and form as aforesaid, and that same is free and clear from all former and other grants, bargains, sales, liens, taxes, assessments, encumbrances and restrictions of whatever kind or nature except those of record and acceptable to the City. 
By: 
      Agent
        Title Company 
(4)  Planning and Zoning Commission approval: 
This plat was recommended for approval by the City of Cherry Hills Village Planning and Zoning Commission this _____ day of ____________, 20___. 
By: 
      Chairman         (5)  Standard plat notes: 
1. Street maintenance: It is mutually understood and agreed by the subdivider and the City of Cherry Hills Village that the dedicated public ways, including but not limited to streets, roads, lanes and drives, shown on this plat will not be accepted finally for maintenance by the City until and unless the owner(s) constructs the same in accordance with the subdivision agreement, if any, and subdivision regulations in effect at the date of the recording of this plat and approval of the City has issued to that effect. 
2. Covenant concerning maintenance of drainage facilities: The owner(s), its legal representatives, heirs, executors, administrators, successors in interest and assigns shall be jointly and severally liable and responsible for maintaining the structural integrity and operational functions of all drainage facilities located on the property shown hereon unless otherwise specified herein including, but not limited to, private drainage facilities other than easements and public and private drainage easements. The benefits and burdens described in this covenant shall run with the land and bind the present owner(s), its successors and assigns. 
(6)  Street lighting (optional): 
All lots are subject to and bound by tariffs which are now and may in the future be filed with the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado relating to street lighting in this subdivision, together with rates, rules and regulations therein provided and subject to all future amendments and changes thereto. The owner or owners shall pay, as billed, a portion of the cost of public street lighting in the subdivision according to _________________ rates, rules and regulations, including future amendments and changes on file with the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado. 
(7)  City approval: 
This plat is approved for filing and the City hereby accepts the dedication of the public ways shown hereon, including, but not limited to, the streets, roads, drives and lanes for public use subject to the provisions contained in the Street Maintenance note herein, the dedication of public lands shown hereon, and the dedication of the utility easements, drainage easements and recreational trails shown hereon. 
Signed this _____ day of ___________, 20___. 
City of Cherry Hills Village 
By: 
      Mayor         (8)  Recorder's certificate: 
This plat was filed for record in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County at _____.m. on the _____ day of _____________, 20___, in Book ______, Page ______, Map ______, Reception number __________. 
Arapahoe County Clerk and Recorder 
By: 
      Deputy         (9)  Standard notes: 
1. Maintenance of drainage facilities: The owner(s) in possession shall be responsible for maintaining the structural integrity and operational functions of all drainage facilities located thereon. If at any time, following certification of said drainage facilities, the City deems that said drainage facilities no longer comply with the approved plans, the owner(s) in possession shall restore such facilities to the standards and specifications as shown on the approved drainage plans. Failure to maintain the structural integrity and operational function of said drainage facilities following certification will result in the City notifying all property owners whose property contributes to the facility as to the nature of the work required to bring the facility into compliance, together with a request for the work to be performed in a reasonable time period. If the drainage facility is not subsequently brought into compliance with the approved drainage plans by the owner(s) in possession, or an emergency situation exists, the City may enter onto the property, cause the necessary work to be performed and file a lien against all properties contributing to the drainage facility. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-4-5; Ord. 1, 2000; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
ARTICLE V - Design Principles 

Sec. 17-5-10. - General provisions. 
    In order to achieve the intent and purpose of these regulations, the following design principles shall be followed, and as such will constitute a portion of the evaluative criteria to be met before approval of a plat: 
(1)  Minimum standards for development are contained in Chapter 16, Chapter 18, Article I, and this Chapter. However, the City's Master Plan expresses policies designed to achieve an optimum quality of development in the City. If only the minimum standards are followed, as expressed by the various ordinances and codes regulating land development, a standardization of development will occur. Subdivision design shall be of a quality to carry out the purpose and spirit of the policies and special reports expressed in the Master Plan (and amendments thereto) and in this Chapter. 
(2)  The layout of lots and blocks should provide desirable settings for structures by making use of natural contours, maintaining existing views, and affording privacy for the residences and protection from adverse noise and vehicular traffic. Natural features and vegetation of the area must be preserved if at all possible. 
(3)  Tree masses and large individual trees should be preserved. The system of roadways and the lot layout should be designed to take advantage of visual qualities of the area. 
(4)  Pedestrian and recreational ways should be separated from roadways and be designed to provide all residential building sites which direct access to all neighborhood facilities. 
(5)  Tracts subdivided into large parcels which offer the possibility of further subdivision shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets and logical further subdivision. 
(6)  Tracts of land or portions thereof lying within the one-hundred-year floodplain shall not be subdivided except for open space until the subdivider has complied with the requirements of Section 17-3-110(d) above. 
(7)  Whenever a proposed subdivision is not served by proper community access roads, utilities and other basic needs of the future residents, the Council may deny the subdivision until such needs are properly met. 
(Prior code 7-5-1) 
Sec. 17-5-20. - Streets and traffic patterns. 
(a)  Streets shall generally conform to the street plan adopted by the Council and any amendments thereto. 
(b)  If a tentative plan has been adopted by the Council for the neighborhood of the proposed subdivision, the street system of the latter shall conform in general thereto. 
(c)  Streets shall be located with appropriate regard for topography, creeks, wooded areas and other natural features which would enhance attractive development. 
(d)  Existing streets, including preliminary platted streets, in adjoining territory shall be continued at equal or greater width and in similar alignment by streets proposed in the subdivision, unless variations are approved by the Council. 
(e)  Streets within subdivisions shall be designed as a system of circulation routes, so that the use of local streets by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(f)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a state highway right-of-way, the Council shall require provisions for reduction of noise. Masonry walls, landscaped berms, a parallel street, landscaping or screening easement, greater lot depth and increased rear yard setbacks, among others, are recommended solutions. 
(g)  Streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as possible. 
(h)  When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or parcels, such lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility easements and connectors for such resubdivision. 
(i)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be prohibited. 
(j)  Long cul-de-sacs should be avoided whenever possible. 
(k)  Where a street will eventually be extended beyond the plat but is temporarily dead-ended, an interim turnaround may be required. 
(l)  Dedication of half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and provided that the Council finds it will be practical to obtain the dedications of the other half of the street right-of-way. Wherever a half-street dedication is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
(m)  No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. All street naming shall be subject to approval by the Council. 
(n)  Subdivision streets shall have such curbs, gutters, sidewalks, culverts and pavements as may be required by the Council. These streets shall be constructed to specifications as set forth in Section 17-4-30 above. 
(o)  All streets abutting a subdivision shall have such curbs, gutters, sidewalks and pavements as may be required by the Council to be constructed to specifications in Section 17-4-30 above at the cost of the subdivider. 
(p)  Street name signs must be in accordance with City specifications and shall be furnished and installed at the cost of the subdivider. 
(q)  Access ways to arterial streets shall be limited so far as possible to protect the capacity of the arterial street and improve traffic safety. 
(r)  Subject to approval by the Council, streets that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing streets shall bear the same names of the existing streets. 
(s)  Intersecting collector and local streets shall not empty into the same side of an arterial street at intervals of less than eight hundred (800) feet. 
(t)  When a subdivision abuts and controls access to public lands or existing streets, access shall be provided in the form required by the public agency involved. When a subdivision abuts private lands, the City may require the developer to provide access thereto. 
(u)  The planting area, or that unpaved portion of the right-of-way between the curb and the property line, shall be landscaped and maintained by the abutting property owners unless provided otherwise by the Council. 
(v)  Reverse curves on arterials and collectors shall be joined by a tangent at least one hundred (100) feet in length. 
(Prior code 7-5-2) 
Sec. 17-5-30. - Drainage. 
    The rainfall frequency rate used in determining the flow of storm water shall be based on the following principles. The flow of stormwater shall be computed in anticipation of full development of the area upstream in the applicable drainage basin as allowed by present zoning, or where upstream zoning changes are reasonably anticipated, then the drainage resulting from the highest reasonable density should be used in computing flow of storm water. 
(1)  A fifty-year frequency storm shall normally be carried within the dedicated street right-of-way. In the event a quantity of water in excess of these limits is calculated to exist, a storm system will be provided either in the form of an underground system or a formal drainage way to prevent excessive ponding. 
(2)  A generally accepted rational formula and tabulation shall be used to calculate individual drainage areas, time of flow and ultimate quantities at each collection point. 
(3)  In general, culvert sizes shall be sufficient to accommodate the flow computed with no head at the inlet and no less than the equivalent of an eighteen-inch-diameter pipe. 
(4)  The velocity of flow in an unlined ditch shall be compatible with the soil erosion characteristics or the treatment to be afforded the ditch. 
(5)  The quantity and velocity of flow in streets shall be computed from acceptable flow charts or by the usual methods used in computing flows in open channels. 
(6)  Whenever a subdivision is traversed by a drainageway which is approved by the City for surface drainage, provision shall be made for the dedication to the public adequate rights-of-way for access and maintenance. 
(Prior code 7-5-3) 
Sec. 17-5-40. - Lots. 
(a)  The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate to the location of the proposed subdivision and to the type of development contemplated. 
(b)  Lots should front only on local streets; however, when necessary, lots designated to face a collector street shall provide adequate means for automobile turnaround within the lot. 
(c)  Side lot lines should be approximately at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(d)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where they are needed to provide for the separation of residential development from major streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. A planting and screening easement of at least ten (10) feet shall be provided along the portion of the lots abutting such a traffic artery or other use where screening is required. There shall be no right of access across a planting and screening easement. The Commission may require a permanent ornamental fence of a height and architectural design which will appropriately screen and be harmonious with the neighborhood and residential character. 
(e)  The building area of lots should not face directly into the oncoming traffic of an intersecting street of a "T" intersection. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-5-4; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-5-50. - Utilities. 
    New utilities (telephone, electric service, cable television, gas lines and other utilities) that will serve the subdivision shall be installed underground and shall be in place prior to street surfacing. Facilities appurtenant to underground facilities or other required equipment may be placed aboveground if the City determines it is necessary. 
    Existing overhead utilities that are located on the subdivided property or in the public right-of-way immediately adjacent to the property between the street edge and the property shall be relocated underground. The obligation of the subdivider to install all new and existing utilities underground, as required by this Section 17-5-50, shall be set forth in the subdivision improvements agreement required by Section 17-4-10. Existing overhead utilities may remain aboveground if the City Council determines that either of the following criteria is met: 
(1)  The subdivider provides written documentation acceptable to the City Council from a utility provider demonstrating that relocation of specifically identified existing overhead utilities is not possible due to physical constraints on or near the property. 
(2)  The cost of undergrounding outweighs the public benefit and relocation of existing overhead utilities is not necessary to meet the goals and strategies of the Master Plan 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-5-5; Ord. 2 1, 2015 ) 
Sec. 17-5-60. - Recreation easements. 
    A plan for development of an off-street system of recreational easements for pedestrians, horseback riders and non-motor-driven vehicles has been approved by the Council and will be modified periodically. The objective is to provide safe, attractive routes by which all parts of the City may be connected with the Highline Canal. All subdividers are expected to cooperate with this program by providing dedicated public easements for the stated purposes which will provide the most direct route of travel without unduly infringing upon the privacy of the subdivision. In addition, the subdivider will be encouraged to provide private or public easements within the subdivision so that safe access to public recreational easements will be provided to lots within the subdivision. 
(Ord. 2, 1979; prior code 7-5-6) 
ARTICLE VI - Lot Consolidation 

Sec. 17-6-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish administrative review procedures to facilitate the efficient processing of applications for simple adjustment of lots and lot lines that will bring property into greater conformance with the requirements of this Code. The following applications shall be subject to administrative processing in accordance with this Article: 
(1)  Lot consolidation. 
(2)  Minor lot adjustment. 
(Prior code 7-6-1; Ord. 3, 2001) 
Sec. 17-6-20. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Lot consolidation means any proposal and accompanying application that is determined by the City to meet all of the following criteria: 
a.  The proposal consolidates property owned by the applicant only; 
b.  The proposal consolidates or combines two (2) or more contiguous lots into a fewer number of lots by the elimination of one (1) or more lot lines; 
c.  The proposal does not relocate previously established lot lines; 
d.  The proposal does not consolidate or combine property into a lot that would be divided by a public street or road; and 
e.  The proposal, if approved, does not create, result in or leave a contiguous lot or parcel of land that would violate or fail to conform to any applicable zoning or other standard, including but not limited to minimum lot area, building height, setbacks, access standards or parking standards. 
    Minor lot adjustment means any proposal and application that is determined by the City to meet all of the following criteria: 
a.  The proposal adjusts, reconfigures or otherwise relocates a lot line dividing properties owned by the applicant only; 
b.  The proposal does not alter or affect any public street, road, trail or other publicly owned property or publicly owned property interest; and 
c.  The proposal, if approved, will not create, result in or leave a lot or parcel of land that would violate or fail to conform to any applicable zoning or other standard, including but not limited to minimum lot area, building height, setbacks, access standards or parking standards. 
(Prior code 7-6-2; Ord. 3, 2001; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-6-30. - Contents of administrative review application and plat. 
    All applications subject to administrative processing in accordance with this Article shall meet all the submittal, material and information requirements of this Section. The applicant shall submit to the City one (1) original and five (5) copies of all documents. The City may request additional copies of documents larger than eight and one-half (81/2) by eleven (11) inches where necessary to provide sufficient documentation for unanticipated referrals. All submittals, materials and information required by this Article for the processing of a lot consolidation or minor lot adjustment shall be prepared at the applicant's cost and expense. The application and plat shall include: 
(1)  An application in a form approved by the City, which may be in the form of a letter signed by the owner requesting approval of the application and plat pursuant to this Article. 
(2)  Payment of an application fee for administrative review and processing of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In addition, the applicant shall deposit with the City an amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) to be applied toward the applicant's payment of the planning and engineering review services, attorney review fees, plat recordation fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the City and made necessary as a result of the application. The deposit shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 17-3-20(b) of this Chapter. 
(3)  A current commitment for title insurance showing the ownership of the property described in the application, together with liens, encumbrances and restrictions thereon, if any, prepared by a Colorado title insurance company. 
(4)  A survey plat prepared by a registered Colorado land surveyor in a sheet size of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches with the original on Mylar illustrating or including the following information: 
a.  The lots proposed for consolidation or adjustment with clearly identified surveyed boundaries of the new lots and an identifying block and lot number sufficient to identify the new lots. Permanent boundary monuments and bench marks shall be set in the field in accordance with applicable law before the plat is recorded. 
b.  A complete and sufficient legal description of the proposed new lots. 
c.  The title of the plat shall prominently identify the name of the recorded subdivision in which the lots are located together with the phrase "Lot Consolidation" or "Minor Lot Adjustment," as applicable. 
d.  Identification of all easements, including but not limited to easements for water, sewer, electric, telephone, cable, trail, recreation, access and drainage, encumbering the property described on the plat or necessary to provide services to the lots affected by the application. 
e.  A plat note stating: 
1.  For a lot consolidation: 
This Lot Consolidation is for the purpose of combining former lots [insert legal descriptions] of the [name of recorded subdivision)] into [insert number of new lots to be created] lots to be known as [identify new lot and block designations]. Other than this consolidation and the creation of new easements, if any, identified on this plat, no other amendment or modification of the final plat for the [identify original recorded plat title] is intended by this Lot Consolidation. 
2.  For a minor lot adjustment: 
This Minor Lot Adjustment is for the purpose of adjusting, reconfiguring or otherwise relocating a lot line dividing Lots [insert lot and block designations] of the [name of recorded subdivision]. Other than the lot line adjustment identified on this plat and the creation of new easements, if any, as identified on this plat, no other amendment or modification of the final plat for the [identify original recorded plat title] is intended by this Minor Lot Adjustment. 
f.  A surveyor's certificate identified in Subsection 17-4-50(2) of this Chapter. 
g.  A certificate of ownership and dedication stating: 
Know all men by this presents, that the undersigned hereby certifies/certify that he/she/they is/are all of the Owners of the lands described in this plat in the City of Cherry Hills Village, Arapahoe County, Colorado, and hereby dedicates/dedicate to the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, the utility and other easements shown hereon, if any. 
Executed this ____ day of __________, 20___. 
Owner(s): ________________________ 
State of Colorado,   )
) ss. 
             County of Arapahoe ) 
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this _____ day of __________, 20___, by ___________________. 
Witness my hand and official seal. 
My commission expires: ______________________. 
      Notary Public         h.  A certificate of City approval stating: 
APPROVED by the City of Cherry Hills Village and approved for recordation with the Arapahoe County Clerk and Recorder's Office pursuant to Chapter 17, Article VI of the City Code for the City of Cherry Hills Village this ____ day of ________________, 20___. 
Signature: _____________________ 
Title: _________________________ 
i.  A certificate for the County Clerk and Recorder's acceptance as identified in Subsection 17-4-50(8) of this Chapter. 
j.  A certificate of consent to and approval of the lot consolidation or minor lot adjustment by those mortgagees and lienholders deemed necessary by the City in a form stating: 
The undersigned mortgagee(s) and/or lienholder(s) consent and approve of the [insert lot consolidation or minor lot adjustment, as applicable] described on this plat: . 
Executed this _____ day of ______________, 20___. 
Mortgagees/Lienholders:
____________________________________ 
____________________________________ 
____________________________________ 
State of Colorado,   )
) ss. 
             County of Arapahoe ) 
The foregoing instrument was acknowledged before me this _____ day of __________, 20___, by ___________________. 
Witness my hand and official seal. 
My commission expires: ______________________. 
      Notary Public         (5)  Additional information deemed necessary by the City to evaluate the proposed application or plat, including but not limited to written releases from utility service providers of unused and unnecessary utility easements encumbering the lots within the platted area. 
(Prior code 7-6-3; Ord. 3, 2001; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 32, 2004; Ord. 15 7, 2010) 
Sec. 17-6-40. - Administrative review procedures. 
    All applications subject to this Article shall be administratively reviewed by the City without notice or a public hearing and may be approved by the City in accordance with this Article. Following proper submission of an application and plat, the City shall determine whether the application and plat are complete as required by this Article. Following receipt of a completed application and plat, the City shall reach a final decision concerning the application within fifteen (15) days of the date of submission of the completed application and plat. Such deadline may be extended upon agreement of the applicant and the City. Unless otherwise extended, a failure by the City to reach a final decision within fifteen (15) days shall be deemed an administrative decision to deny the application. 
(Prior code 7-6-4; Ord. 3, 2001) 
Sec. 17-6-50. - Standards for approval. 
    An application and plat subject to this Article shall be administratively approved by the City where the City finds all of the following to be established by the application and plat: 
(1)  The proposed consolidation or lot adjustment meets the applicable definition of a lot consolidation or minor lot adjustment and all application and plat content requirements of this Article are met or satisfied; 
(2)  The approval of the application is requested by all owners of record of the affected lots and the owners have properly executed the plat; 
(3)  The proposed application and plat fully conform to all applicable requirements for the zone districts in which the affected property is located, including but not limited to minimum lot size requirements; 
(4)  Adequate utility easements are established within the affected property to provide service to the lots created by or illustrated upon the plat; 
(5)  Existing public trails located within the lots illustrated upon the plat are preserved or new trails are dedicated by the plat that will provide, in the opinion of the City, a substantially similar or improved trail in terms of route, grade, access, surface quality, ease of maintenance and safety; 
(6)  The proposed configuration, arrangement and layout of the lots do not, in the opinion of the City, create illogically shaped lots or lots that are inconsistent or incompatible with other lots within the neighborhood; and 
(7)  The proposed application and plat do not, in the opinion of the City, substantially and adversely affect adjacent lots or raise significant issues of policy that are not addressed by the Comprehensive Plan, Master Plan or this Code. 
(Prior code 7-6-5; Ord. 3, 2001; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-6-60. - City's decision and appeal. 
(a)  Upon a finding by the City that the application and plat meet the standards for approval set forth in Section 17-6-50 above, the City shall cause a fully executed plat to be recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder at the applicant's expense. 
(b)  The City shall deny an application for failure to meet the standards set forth in Section 17-6-50 above. Any decision to deny an application shall be made in writing stating the specific reasons for denial, and the decision shall be promptly mailed or delivered to the applicant. The applicant may appeal a denial by the City to the Planning and Zoning Commission by delivering a written request for appeal to the City Manager not more than thirty (30) days following the date of the applicant's receipt of the City's written notice of denial. The Commission shall administratively consider an applicant's timely request for an appeal at a regular meeting. Following its consideration of the application and plat, the Commission may affirm the City's decision or, upon a finding that the application meets all the standards set forth in Section 17-6-50 above, the Commission may reverse the City's decision and order the City to approve the application and plat. In the event that the Commission orders the City to approve the application and plat, the City shall cause the plat to be recorded in accordance with Subsection (a) above. 
(Prior code 7-6-6; Ord. 3, 2001; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 17-6-70. - Conditions of approval. 
    The City may impose reasonable conditions upon any approval of a plat that are necessary to ensure continued conformance with the standards of approval of this Article or this Code. 
(Prior code 7-6-7; Ord. 3, 2001) 
CHAPTER 18 - Building Regulations 
ARTICLE I - International Building Code 

Sec. 18-1-10. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Building Code , as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5771, except that portion of the 2015 International Building Code entitled "2015 International Property Maintenance Code" and that portion entitled "ICC Electrical Code," which are not adopted by the ordinance codified herein. One (1) copy of such code and other codes adopted by reference in the 2015 International Building Code , the same being adopted as if set out at length herewith, shall be maintained at the office of the Building Department and may be inspected during regular business hours. The subject matter of this code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the construction, alteration, moving, demolition, occupancy, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures within the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 14 1, 2013; Ord. 6 1, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-1-20. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 is hereby amended to insert "the City of Cherry Hills Village," so the section will read as follows: 
    101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the 'Building Code of the City of Cherry Hills Village,' hereinafter referred to as 'this code.' 
(2)  Section 101.4.4 is hereby deleted and specifically not adopted by the City. 
(3)  Section 105.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
    Building: 
1.  One-story detached, prefabricated storage sheds that do not exceed 120 square feet that are located within the building envelope as defined by the appropriate setbacks and bulk plane required for the zone district and meeting all other zoning requirements. 
2.  Fences, walls and berms three feet (3') or less in height measured from natural grade and meeting all other zoning requirements. 
3.  Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height, measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting surcharge or impounding Class I, II or II-A liquids, and meeting all other zoning requirements. 
4.  Sidewalks not over six feet (6') in width and driveways. For purposes of this code the term ' driveways ' shall mean an access route, paved or unpaved, that provides access to a garage structure. Permits are required for driveways if they are: 
a.  More than thirty inches (30") above grade, 
b.  Located over any basement or constructed space, or 
c.  Such as do not provide access to a garage used for the storage of automobiles. 
5.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and similar finish work. 
6.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to single-family dwellings. 
7.  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over six feet (6') in height. 
(4)  Section 105.3 item # 6 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
6.  Be signed by the owner or owners representing a majority interest in the ownership of the property, or by an agent who is duly authorized by those individuals or entities that hold a majority interest in the ownership of the property. With respect to properties where deed, contract or other provisions require more than a majority interest to undertake work necessitating a building permit, such authority of the applicant shall be demonstrated with the permit application. 
(5)  Section 105.3.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    105.3.2 Time limitation of permit application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned ninety (90) days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not to exceed ninety (90) days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(6)  Section 105.5 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid if the work on the site authorized by such permit is not commenced within ninety (90) days after its issuance or, if so commenced, the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days after the time the work is commenced. 
    In the event a permit expires under either of these conditions, a new permit will be required to complete the work. The new permit fee will be calculated using the City's then-current fee calculation methods. Should the project be abandoned, permit fees may be refunded in accordance with Section 109.6. 
(7)  A new Section 105.5.1 is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
    105.5.1 Project completion. If the construction described in any building permit has not been completed to the point where a certificate of occupancy may be issued - or a final building inspection performed in cases where no certificate of occupancy is required - within eighteen (18) months of the date of issuance thereof, said building permit shall expire and be deemed canceled by the building official. Written notice thereof shall be given to the applicant, together with notice that further construction as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained and all fees have been paid. 
    The building official may authorize up to two four-month extensions of a permit, provided that the applicant pays a fee calculated as follows: 
1.  1 st Extension: A fee equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the original permit fee. 
2.  2 nd Extension: A fee equal to fifty percent (50%) of the original permit fee. 
(8)  Section 107.2.5 is hereby amended by adding the following to the end of the paragraph: 
    Two sets of construction documents shall be submitted with the application for permit. Each set shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale and in accordance with an accurate survey, including the following information: 
1.  The size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site noting all portions of the structure, including but not limited to eaves, overhangs and cantilevered elements. 
2.  Setback distances from lot lines appropriate for the parcel's zoning. 
3  Existing grade contours in one-foot (1') intervals in North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) datum. 
4.  The established street grades and the proposed finished grades in NAVD88 datum. 
5.  Location of designated 100-year floodplain boundary. 
    In the case of demolition, two sets of a site plan shall be submitted with the demolition application, showing: 
1.  Construction to be demolished (structures and their foundations). 
2.  The location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site. 
3.  Existing contours in one-foot (1') intervals in U.S.G.S. datum. 
    A site plan is required for projects such as, but not limited to, the addition of new square footage or a change in the use of existing square footage. Site plans are not required in most cases for electrical, plumbing or mechanical work. 
    The building official may request a copy of the survey from which the site plan is based upon to verify the accuracy of the site plan and may waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted. 
(9)  Section 108.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    108.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for only such temporary structures and temporary uses that are allowed by the City of Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. Such permits shall conform to the rules and regulations adopted by the City of Cherry Hills Village regarding temporary structures and uses. 
(10)  A new Section 109.2.1 is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
    109.2.1 Fee schedules. Permit fees shall be as outlined in Tables 1-A through 1-E below. 
Table 1-A 
Building Permit Fees 
"TOTAL VALUATION FEES $1.00 to $2,000.00 $20.00 $2,001.00 and up 1% of valuation  
Table 1-B 
Electrical Permit Fees for Nonresidential Buildings and Residential Alteration or Additions 
PROJECT VALUATION FEES Up to $300.00 $50.00 To $2,000.00 $55.00 To $50,000.00 $21.75 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of the total valuation To $500,000.00 $20.50 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of the total valuation plus $57.50 Over $500,000.00 $19.50 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of the total valuation plus $632.50  
Table 1-C 
Electrical Permit Fees for New Residential Buildings 
BUILDING AREA FEES Not more than 1,000 sq. ft. $51.75 Over 1,000 sq. ft. and not more than 1,500 sq. ft. $69.00 Over 1,500 sq. ft. and not more than 2,000 sq. ft. $86.25 Over 2,000 sq. ft. $4.60 per 100 sq. ft. in excess of 2,000 sq. ft.  
Table 1-D 
Building, Electrical Plan Review and Other Fees 
PROJECT TYPE FEES Nonresidential Structures Including: Churches, Schools, Nonprofit Recreational and Commercial Facilities $1,600 minimum - review beyond 10 hours charged at per hour rate Nonresidential Remodels $320.00 minimum - review beyond 2 hours charged at hourly rate New Home/Scrape and Rebuild - more than 50% of Existing Square Footage $1,280.00 minimum - review beyond 8 hours charged at hourly rate Additions- less than 50% of Existing Square Footage $640.00 minimum - review beyond 4 hours charged at hourly rate Remodel With No New Square Footage $320.00 minimum - review beyond 2 hours charged at hourly rate Accessory and Recreational Structures $320.00 minimum - review beyond 2 hours charged at hourly rate Additional Plan Review beyond hours noted above $160.00 per hour, minimum 1 hour Investigation Fee Same fee as building permit fee or $160.00, whichever is more Reinspection Fee $110.00 Duplicate Inspection Record Card $50.00 Drainage Review $195.00 per hour Electrical Reviews: All New & Remodels for Commercial Residential 400 Amp. Services & Greater $320.00 minimum - review beyond 2 hours charged at hourly rate Engineering Review - for review of all lots located within the designated 100-year floodplain and for review of drainage plans as required for all new structures and additions that increase square footage by more than 50% $195.00 per hour, minimum 1 hour  
Table 1-E 
Elevator Inspection Fees 
ANNUAL CERTIFICATES OF INSPECTION FEES For each elevator, dumbwaiter or lift $220 For each escalator or moving walk $1,200 Special Inspection not otherwise covered, eg. Construction use, temporary use, minor modernization and safety test witnessing $ 130.00 per hour "5 YR. WITNESSED SAFETY TEST" 5 Year Hydraulic Witnessed Test $220.00 5 Year Traction Witnessed Test $450.00 "Plan Review Fees" Commercial Elevator or Escalator - including plan review, progress inspections and final acceptance inspection (New Installation or Major Modernization/ Alteration) $900.00 Residential Elevator, Platform lift, or dumbwaiter - including plan review, 1 progress inspection, and final acceptance inspection $600.00  
(11)  Section 109.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    109.3 Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include the total value of the work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. For the purpose of determining the valuation for new construction, the building official for the City of Cherry Hills Village will use the value provided by the permit applicant or the most recent Building Valuation Data table in the Building Standards Magazine as published by the International Code Council, whichever is higher. No regional modifier will be used in calculating the valuation of construction. 
(12)  Section 109.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences work before obtaining any necessary permits shall be subject to penalties and enforcement set forth in Chapter 18, Article IX of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code." 
(13)  Section 109.6 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    109.6 Fee refunds. The City of Cherry Hills Village shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any building permit fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected; 
2.  The full amount of any building permit fee paid hereunder less a fifty-dollar administrative fee when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code; 
3.  For permits where work has occurred, the refund will be calculated by City staff. Staff will consider all cost factors involved in administration of the permit, including but not limited to inspection and reinspection fees, mileage, staff time, supplies and building overhead. 
4.  The full amount of the plan review fee paid hereunder less a fifty-dollar administrative fee for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid but is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
(14)  Section 113.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    113.3 Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the same members as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals outlined in Section 8.2 of the Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village. The rules of procedure set forth in Section 16-3-30 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code shall apply to all appeals brought under this code. 
(15)  Section 114 is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    114.1 General. Violations of this code shall be governed by Chapter 18, Article IX of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(16)  Section 115 is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    115.1 General. The issuance of stop work orders and notices for violations of this code shall be governed by Section 18-9-30 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(17)  Section 1612.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas, the governing body shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified in Subsection 16-17-40(b) of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. Said areas of special flood hazard are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section. 
(18)  A new Section 3009 is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
Section 3009
Existing Elevators and Escalators 
    3009.1 Scope. This section shall apply to existing installations of elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and moving walks and provides for the inspection and maintenance of such conveyances. 
    Exception: Conveyances located within a dwelling unit. 
    3009.2 Certificates of inspection required. It shall be unlawful to operate any elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator, moving walk, LULA, stair chair, material lift or vertical / inclined wheelchair lift without a current certificate of inspection issued by the building official. Such certificate shall be issued upon payment of prescribed fees and a valid inspection report indicating that the conveyance is safe and that the inspections and tests have been performed in accordance with Part X of the ASME code. Certificates shall not be issued when the conveyance is posted as unsafe pursuant to Section 3015. 
    Exception: Certificates of inspection shall not be required for conveyances within a dwelling unit. 
    3009.3 Application for certificates of inspection. The owner of any lift referenced in Section 3009.2 shall make application for an annual certificate of inspection. Fees for certificates of inspection shall be as specified in this section. 
    3009.3.1 Fees. A fee for each permit or certificate of inspection shall be paid to the Building Department as contained in Table 1-E in Appendix A to the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
    (Each escalator or moving walk unit powered by one motor shall be considered as a separate escalator or moving walk.) 
    3009.4 Referenced standards. Elevators and escalators shall conform to ASME A17.1-2007. Vertical and Inclined platform lifts shall comply with ASME A18.1-2005 published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
    3009.5 Requirements for operation and maintenance. The owner shall be responsible for the safe operation and maintenance of each elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator or moving walk installation and shall cause periodic inspections, tests and maintenance to be made on such conveyances as required in this section. 
    3009.5.1 Periodic inspections and tests. Routine and periodic inspections and tests (including 5-yr. witnessed tests) shall be made as required by Part X of the ASME A17.1 Elevator and Escalator Safety Code and the State of Colorado Elevator and Escalator Certification Act. The owner shall pay all costs of such inspections and tests. A full and correct report of such inspection shall be filed with the building official after each required inspection." 
(19)  Section 3412.2 is hereby amended by inserting the effective date of the ordinance codified herein. 
(20)  Only the following Appendix Chapters are hereby adopted: 
    Appendix C - Group U - Agricultural Buildings 
    Appendix I - Patio Covers 
(Ord. 14 1, 2013; Ord. 6 1, 2017 ; Ord. 10 1, 2019) 
ARTICLE I.5 - International Existing Building Code 

Sec. 18-1.5-10. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Existing Building Code , as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5771, One (1) copy of such code and other codes adopted by reference in the 2015 International Existing Building Code , the same being adopted as if set out at length herewith, shall be maintained at the office of the Building Department and may be inspected during regular business hours. The subject matter of this code includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings within the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
( Ord. 6 9, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-1.5-20. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 is hereby amended to insert "the City of Cherry Hills Village," so the section will read as follows: 
    101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the 'Existing Building Code of the City of Cherry Hills Village,' hereinafter referred to as 'this code.' 
(2)  Section 1401.2 is hereby amended to insert "January 1, 1970" so the first sentence of the section will read as follows: 
    1401.2 Applicability. Structures existing prior to January 1, 1970, in which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy shall be made to conform to the requirements of this chapter or the provisions of Chapters 5 through 13. 
(3)  Section 105 is hereby deleted and replaced with the following language. 
    1501.1. Permits. Any owner or owner's authorized agent who intends to repair, add to, alter, relocate, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or to repair, install, add, alter, remove, convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be performed, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit in accordance with the applicable code for the work. This includes the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International Mechanical Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Plumbing Code, International Energy Conservation Code and the National Electrical Code as adopted and amended herein. 
( Ord. 6 9, 2017 ) 
ARTICLE II - International Residential Code and National Green Building Standard 

Sec. 18-2-10. - Adoption of International Residential Code. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Residential Code , as published by the International Code Council, Publications, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. One (1) copy of such code and other codes adopted by reference in the 2015 International Residential Code , the same being adopted as if set out at length herewith, shall be maintained at the office of the Building Department and may be inspected during regular business hours. The subject matter of this code includes the design and construction of one- and two-family dwellings and townhomes in the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 14 2, 2013; Ord. 6 2, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-2-20. - Amendments to International Residential Code. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section R101.1 is hereby amended by inserting "City of Cherry Hills Village," to read as follows: 
    R101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the City of Cherry Hills Village, hereinafter referred to as 'this code.' 
(2)  Section 101.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    R101.2 Scope. The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration , movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures. 
(3)  Section R105.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
    Building: 
1.  One-story detached, prefabricated storage sheds that do not exceed 120 square feet that are located within the building envelope as defined by the appropriate setbacks and bulk plane required for the zone district and meeting all other zoning requirements. 
2.  Fences, walls and berms three feet (3') or less in height, measured from natural grade and meeting all other zoning requirements. 
3.  Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting surcharge or impounding Class I, II or II-A liquids, and meeting all other zoning requirements. 
4.  Sidewalks not over six feet (6') in width and driveways. For purposes of this code, the term 'driveways' shall mean an access route, paved or unpaved, that provides access to a garage structure. Permits are required for driveways if they are: 
a.  More than thirty inches (30") above grade, 
b.  Located over any basement or constructed space, or 
c.  Such as do not provide access to a garage used for the storage of automobiles. 
5.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and similar finish work. 
6.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to single-family dwellings. 
7.  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over six feet (6') in height. 
(4)  Section 105.3(6) is hereby amended to read as follows: 
6.  Be signed by the owner or owners representing a majority interest in the ownership of the property, or by an agent who is duly authorized by those individuals or entities that hold a majority interest in the ownership of the property. With respect to properties where deed, contract or other provisions require more than a majority interest to undertake work necessitating a building permit, such authority of the applicant shall be demonstrated with the permit application. 
(5)  Section R105.3.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    R105.3.2 Time limitation of permit application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned ninety (90) days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not to exceed ninety (90) days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(6)  Section R105.5 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    R105.5 Expiration of permits. Every permit issued shall become invalid if the work on the site authorized by such permit is not commenced within ninety (90) days after its issuance or, if so commenced, if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days after the time the work is commenced. In the event a permit expires under either of these conditions, a new permit will be required to complete the work. The new permit fee will be calculated using the City's then-current fee calculation methods. Should the project be abandoned, permit fees may be refunded in accordance with Section 109.6 of the International Building Code , as adopted herein. 
(7)  A new Section R105.5.1 is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
    R105.5.1 Project completion. If the construction described in any building permit has not been completed to the point where a certificate of occupancy may be issued - or a final building inspection performed in cases where no certificate of occupancy is required - within eighteen (18) months of the date of issuance thereof, said building permit shall expire and be deemed canceled by the building official. Written notice thereof shall be given to the applicant, together with notice that further construction as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building permit has been obtained and all fees have been paid. 
    The building official may authorize up to two four-month extensions of a permit, provided that the applicant pays a fee calculated as follows: 
1.  1 st Extension: A fee equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the original permit fee. 
2.  2 nd Extension: A fee equal to fifty percent (50%) of the original permit fee. 
(8)  Section R106.2 is hereby amended by adding the following to the end of the section: 
    Two sets of construction documents shall be submitted with the application for permit. Each set shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale and in accordance with an accurate survey including the following information: 
1.  The size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site noting all portions of the structure, including but not limited to eaves, overhangs and cantilevered elements. 
2.  Setback distances from lot lines appropriate for the parcel's zoning. 
3.  Existing grade contours in one-foot (1') intervals in North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) datum. 
4.  The established street grades and the proposed finished grades in NAVD88 datum. 
5.  Location of designated 100-year floodplain boundary on subject property. 
6.  For all new residences and proposals to increase the square footage of a residence by 50% or more, the proposed contours and drainage plan required by the Arapahoe County Stormwater Management Manual, as the same may be amended from time to time. A copy of the manual is on file in the Community Development Department. 
7.  For all new residences and proposals to increase the square footage of a residence by 50% or more, a site plan showing the proposed location of all outdoor light fixtures, a light fixture schedule and lumen output of each fixture. 
    In the case of demolition, two sets of a site plan shall be submitted with the demolition application, showing: 
1.  Construction to be demolished (structures and their foundations). 
2.  The location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site. 
3.  Existing contours in one-foot (1') intervals in U.S.G.S. datum. 
    A site plan is required for projects such as, but not limited to, the addition of new square footage or a change in the use of existing square footage. Site plans are not required in most cases for electrical, plumbing or mechanical work. 
    The building official may request a copy of the survey from which the site plan is based upon to verify the accuracy of the site plan and may waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted. 
(9)  A new Section R106.1.5 is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
    R106.1.5 Electrical Drawings. Electrical drawings showing compliance with part VIII of this code and NFPA 70, National Electrical Code shall be provided. The documents shall provide the following information. 
1.  Provide a one-line diagram that includes all of the electrical service equipment, all of the conduit and conductor sizes, all of the feeder panels, the entire grounding electrode system, and the grounding electrode conductor sizes, in order to verify compliance with NEC 310.15(B), NEC 250.66 and NEC 250.122. 
2.  Provide a floor plan with the location of all of the electrical service equipment, service disconnect(s), and panel(s) in order to verify compliance with NEC 110.26. 
3.  Provide fault current calculations. Provide the short circuit current rating of all of the service equipment and the feeder panel(s), in order to verify compliance with NEC 110.9. 
4.  Provide the load calculations for the service, each service disconnect, each feeder panel, and each branch circuit to demonstrate compliance with NEC 220. 
5.  Provide a complete mechanical schedule. 
6.  Provide the location of all of the electrical outlets and switching devices. 
7.  All GFCI protected receptacles and weather-proof receptacles shall be identified on the floor plans. NEC 210.8(A). 
8.  Identify each branch circuit that is AFCI protected on the panel schedules in order to verify compliance with NEC 210.12(A). 
(10)  Section R107.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    R107.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for only such temporary structures and temporary uses that are allowed by the City of Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. Such permits shall conform to the rules and regulations adopted by the City of Cherry Hills Village regarding temporary structures and uses. 
(11)  A new Section R108.2.1, which inserts Tables 1-A through 1-E of the International Building Code , as amended herein, is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
    R108.2.1 Fee schedule. The fees for residential work shall be as indicated in Tables 1-A through 1-E located in Section 18-1-20(10) of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(12)  Section R108.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    R108.3 Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include the total value of the work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. For the purpose of determining the valuation for new construction, the building official for the City of Cherry Hills Village will use the value provided by the permit applicant or the most recent Building Valuation Data table in the Building Standards Magazine as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, whichever is higher. No regional modifier will be used in calculating the valuation of construction. 
(13)  Section R108.5 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    R108.5 Fee refunds. The City of Cherry Hills Village shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any building permit fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected; 
"2.  The full amount of any building permit fee paid hereunder less a fifty-dollar administrative fee when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code; 
"3.  For permits where work has occurred, the refund will be calculated by City staff. Staff will consider all cost factors involved in administration of the permit, including but not limited to inspection and reinspection fees, mileage, staff time, supplies and building overhead. 
"4.  The full amount of the plan review fee paid hereunder less a fifty-dollar administrative fee for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid but is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
(14)  Section R112.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    R112.3 Qualifications. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the same members as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals outlined in Section 8.2 of the Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village. The rules of procedure set forth in Section 16-3-30 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code shall apply to all appeals brought under this code. 
(15)  Section R113 is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    R113.1 General. Violations of this code shall be governed by Chapter 18, Article IX of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(16)  Section R114 is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    R114.1 General. The issuance of stop work orders and notices for violations of this code shall be governed by Section 18-9-30 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(17)  The definition of accessory structure in Section R202 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure not over two stories in height, the use of which is customarily accessory to and incidental to that of the dwelling(s) and which is located on the same lot. 
(18)  Section 301.1 is hereby amended to add an exception as follows: 
    Exception: Greenhouse structures having a floor area of 200 square feet or less shall not be required to comply with the wind and snow load requirements of this code. 
(19)  Table R301.2 (1) is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Ground Snow Load "Wind Design Seismic
Design
Category Subject To Damage From Speed (mph) Topographic effects Special wind region Wind-borne debris zone Weathering Frost Line Depth Termites 30 psf 115 No No No B Severe 36 in. Slight/ 
Moderate  
Winter Design Temp Ice Barrier
Underlayment
RequiredFlood Hazards Air Freezing Index Mean Annual Temp 1 degree Yes 8/95 726 49.5F"  
(20)  A new Section R324.7 is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
    R324.7 Access and pathways. Roof access, pathways and spacing requirements shall be provided in accordance with Sections R324.7.1 through R324.7.2.5. 
    Exceptions: 
1.  Detached garages and accessory structures to one-and two-family dwellings and townhouses, such as parking shade structures, carports, solar trellises and similar structures. 
2.  Roof access, pathways and spacing requirements need not be provided where an alternative ventilation method approved by the building official has been provided or where the building official has determined that vertical ventilation techniques will not be employed. 
    R324.7.1 Roof access points. Roof access points shall be located in areas that do not require the placement of ground ladders over openings such as windows or doors, and located at strong points of building construction in locations where the access point does not conflict with overhead obstructions such as tree limbs, wires or signs. 
    R324.7.2 Solar photovoltaic systems. Solar photovoltaic systems shall comply with Sections R324.7.2.1 through R324.7.2.5. 
    R324.7.2.1 Size of solar photovoltaic array. Each photovoltaic array shall be limited to 150 feet by 150 feet (45 720 by 45 720 mm). Multiple arrays shall be separated by a clear access pathway not less than 3 feet (914 mm) in width. 
    R324.7.2.2 Hip roof layouts. Panels and modules installed on dwellings with hip roof layouts shall be located in a manner that provides a clear access pathway not less than 3 feet (914 mm) in width from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where panels and modules are located. The access pathway shall be located at a structurally strong location on the building capable of supporting the live load of fire fighters accessing the roof. 
Exception: These requirements shall not apply to roofs with slopes of 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (16.6 percent) and less. 
    R324.7.2.3 Single ridge roofs. Panels and modules installed on dwellings with a single ridge shall be located in a manner that provides two, 3-foot-wide (914 mm) access pathways from the eave to the ridge on each roof slope where panels or modules are located. 
Exception: This requirement shall not apply to roofs with slopes of 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (16.6 percent) and less. 
    R324.7.2.4 Roofs with hips and valleys. Panels and modules installed on dwellings with roof hips or valleys shall not be located less than 18 inches (457 mm) from a hip or valley where panels or modules are to be placed on both sides of a hip or valley. Where panels are to be located on one side only of a hip or valley that is of equal length, the 18-inch (457 mm) clearance does not apply. 
Exception: These requirements shall not apply to roofs with slopes of 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (16.6 percent) and less. 
    R324.7.2.5 Allowance for smoke ventilation operations. Panels and modules installed on dwellings shall not be located less than 3 feet (914 mm) below the roof ridge to allow for fire department smoke ventilation operations. 
Exception: Where an alternative ventilation method approved by the building official has been provided or where the building official has determined that vertical ventilation techniques will not be employed, clearance from the roof ridge is not required. 
(21)  A new Section R1007 is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
Section R1007
Pollution Control 
    R1007.1. Fireplace pollution control. Any new or remodeled fireplace installed in any dwelling shall be one of the following: 
1.  A gas appliance; 
2.  An electric device; or 
3.  A fireplace or fireplace insert that meets the most stringent emission standards for wood stoves established by the State of Colorado Regional Air Quality Control Commission; or 
4.  Any other clean-burning device approved by the State of Colorado Regional Air Quality Control Commission. 
(22)  A new Section G2432.3.1 (602.3.1) is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
    G2432.3.1 Unvented decorative appliances. Unvented decorative appliances shall not be installed within a dwelling unit. 
(23)  Only the following Appendix Chapters of the International Residential Code are hereby adopted: 
a.  Appendix H - Patio Covers. 
b.  Appendix O - Automatic Vehicular Gates 
(Ord. 14 2, 2013; Ord. 6 2, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-2-30. - Adoption of National Green Building Standard. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the National Green Building Standard ICC/ASHRAE 700-2015 , including Appendix Chapters, as published by the National Association of Home Builders of the United States, 1201 15 th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005-2800. One (1) copy of such code and other codes adopted by reference in the National Green Building Standard ICC/ASHRAE 700-2015 , the same being adopted as if set out at length herewith, shall be maintained at the office of the Building Department and may be inspected during regular business hours. The subject matter of this Standard relates to criteria for rating the environmental impact of design and construction practices to achieve voluntary conformance with specified performance levels for green residential buildings in the City of Cherry Hills Village. The National Green Building Standard shall be referred to herein as the "Standard." 
(Ord. 1 1, 2014; Ord. 6 2, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-2-40. - Amendments to National Green Building Standard. 
    The Standard adopted herein is modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 103.1 shall be amended by the addition of new sub-sections 103.1.1 and 103.1.2 to read as follows: 
103.1.1  The Bronze level shall be the minimum performance level to insure compliance with the standard. 
103.1.2  Verification for compliance shall be determined by the adopting entity or an approved third party agency. 
(2)  Section 305 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
(3)  The first sentence of Section 503.4 shall be amended to read as follows: 
    503.4 Stormwater management. Stormwater management shall be deemed to comply with section 503.4 (2) and (5) to receive 13 points when the stormwater requirements of Cherry Hills Village have been achieved. Further points maybe obtained in this section by following low-impact development techniques: 
(4)  The first sentence of Section 605.2 shall be amended to read as follows: 
    605.2 On-site recycling. On-site recycling measures are mandatory and will receive 7 points following applicable regulations and codes are implemented, such as the following: 
(5)  Section 605.3 shall be amended to read as follows: 
    605.3 Recycled construction materials. Construction materials (e.g., wood, cardboard, metals, drywall, plastic, asphalt roofing shingles, or concrete) are recycled offsite. 
(1)  a minimum of two types of materials are recycled - Mandatory 3 points 
(6)  Section 701.1.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
    701.1.1 Bronze level compliance. Any building that qualifies as an ENERGY STAR Version 3.0 Quality Home or demonstrates compliance with the 2015 IECC or Chapter 11 of the 2015 IRC is deemed to meet all mandatory practices of Chapter 7 and achieves the bronze level for Chapter 7 and receives 10 points for compliance. Additional points maybe awarded for practices above mandatory practices. 
(7)  Green Plan Review Fees for All New Residence shall be as follows: 
" Green Building Plan Review" FEES 1,400 sq. ft. up to 6,000 sq. ft. $ 450.00 minimum for 3 hours review 6,001 sq. ft. up to 8,000 sq. ft. $ 600.00 minimum for 4 hours review 8,001 sq. ft. up to 10,000 sq. ft. $ 750.00 minimum for 5 hours review 10,001 sq. ft. and up $ 900.00 minimum for 6 hours review Additional Plan Review beyond hours noted above $ 150.00 per hour, minimum 1 hour  
(Ord. 1 1, 2014; Ord. 6 2, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-2-50. - Incentive rebate program. 
    To encourage the construction of Dwelling Units to the Standard, the City authorizes the following rebates for Dwelling Units that achieve specified rating levels defined in Section 303 of the Standard, as evidenced by a "Home Innovation NGBS Green Certified" certificate issued by the National Association of Home Builders Research Center: 
Rating Level Building Permit Fee Rebate (% of Fee Paid Pursuant to Table 1A - Building Permit Fees) Bronze 10% Silver 15% Gold 20% Emerald 25%  
The rebate shall be paid to the owner of the Dwelling Unit within ninety (90) days following (i) the building official's receipt of a "Home Innovation NGBS Green Certified" certificate issued by the National Association of Home Builders Research Center specifying the level of certification achieved and (ii) the City's issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the Dwelling Unit. 
(Ord. 1 1, 2014; Ord. 6 2, 2017 ) 
ARTICLE III - International Mechanical Code 

Sec. 18-3-10. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Mechanical Code , as published by the International Code Council, Publications, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. One (1) copy of such code and other codes adopted by reference in the 2015 International Mechanical Code , the same being adopted as if set out at length herewith, shall be maintained at the office of the Building Department and may be inspected during regular business hours. The subject matter of this code includes comprehensive provisions and safety standards for the regulation and control of the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance of heating, ventilating, comfort cooling and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances; construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, equipment and use of buildings and structures and the standards for design and installation of heating, ventilation and air conditioning units; plumbing systems and fuel gas systems within buildings and structures within the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 14 3, 2013; Ord. 6 3, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-3-20. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 is hereby amended by inserting "the City of Cherry Hills Village," so the section will read as follows: 
    101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Mechanical Code of the City of Cherry Hills Village , hereinafter referred to as 'this code.' 
(2)  Section 106.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    106.3 Application for Permit. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or owners representing a majority interest in the ownership of the property, or by an agent who is duly authorized by those individuals or entities that hold a majority interest in the ownership of the property. With respect to properties where deed, contract or other provisions require more than a majority interest to undertake work necessitating a building permit, such authority of the applicant shall be demonstrated with the permit application. The permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure and shall contain such other information required by the building official. 
(3)  Section 106.4.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    106.4.3 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid if the work on the site authorized by such permit is not commenced within ninety (90) days after its issuance or, if commenced, the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days after the time the work is commenced. In the event a permit expires under either of these conditions, a new permit will be required to complete the work. The new permit fee will be calculated using the City's then-current fee calculation methods. Should the project be abandoned, permit fees may be refunded in accordance with Section 109.6 of the International Building Code , as adopted herein. 
(4)  Section 106.5.2 is hereby amended as follows: 
    106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as indicated in Tables 1-A through 1-E located in Section 18-1-20(10) of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(5)  Section 106.5.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    106.5.3 Fee refunds. The City of Cherry Hills Village shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any building permit fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected; 
2.  The full amount of any building permit fee paid hereunder less a fifty-dollar administrative fee when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code; 
3.  For permits where work has occurred, the refund will be calculated by City staff. Staff will consider all cost factors involved in administration of the permit, including but not limited to inspection and reinspection fees, mileage, staff time, supplies and building overhead. 
4.  The full amount of the plan review fee paid hereunder less a fifty-dollar administrative fee for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid but is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
(6)  Section 108 is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    108.1 General. Violations of this code shall be governed by Section 18-9-20 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(7)  Section 109.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    109.2 Membership of Board. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the same members as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals outlined in Section 8.2 of the Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village. The rules of procedure set forth in Section 16-3-30 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code shall apply to all appeals brought under this code. 
(8)  Section 109.2.1 through 109.2.6 and 109.3 through 109.7 are here by deleted. 
(Ord. 14 3, 2013; Ord. 6 3, 2017 ) 
ARTICLE IV - International Plumbing Code 

Sec. 18-4-10. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Plumbing Code , as published by the International Code Council, Publications, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. One (1) copy of such code and other codes adopted by reference in the 2015 International Plumbing Code , the same being adopted as if set out at length herewith, shall be maintained at the office of the Building Department and may be inspected during regular business hours. The subject matter of this code includes minimum provisions and standards for the installation, alteration or repair of plumbing and drainage systems and equipment within or on public or private buildings or other structures in the City, and provides for the inspection thereof within the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 14 4, 2013; Ord. 6 4, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-4-20. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 is hereby amended by inserting "the City of Cherry Hills Village," so the section will read as follows: 
    101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Plumbing Code of the City of Cherry Hills Village, hereinafter referred to as 'this code.' 
(2)  Section 106.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    106.3 Application for Permit. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or owners representing a majority interest in the ownership of the property, or by an agent who is duly authorized by those individuals or entities that hold a majority interest in the ownership of the property. With respect to properties where deed, contract or other provisions require more than a majority interest to undertake work necessitating a building permit, such authority of the applicant shall be demonstrated with the permit application. The permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure and shall contain such other information required by the building official. 
(3)  Section 106.5.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    106.5.3 Expiration of permits. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within ninety (90) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days after the time the work is commenced. In no event shall a permit remain active longer than two (2) years. In the event a permit expires under either of these conditions, a new permit will be required to complete the work. The new permit fee will be calculated using the City's then-current fee calculation methods. Should the project be abandoned, permit fees may be refunded in accordance with Section 109.6 of the International Building Code , as adopted herein. 
(4)  Section 106.6.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for plumbing work shall be as indicated in Tables 1-A through 1-E located in Section 18-1-20(10) of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(5)  Section 106.6.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    106.6.3 Fee refunds. The building official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any building permit fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected; 
2.  The full amount of any building permit fee paid hereunder less a fifty-dollar administrative fee when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code; 
3.  For permits where work has occurred, the refund will be calculated by City staff. Staff will consider all cost factors involved in administration of the permit, including but not limited to inspection and reinspection fees, mileage, staff time, supplies and building overhead; 
4.  The full amount of the plan review fee paid hereunder less a fifty-dollar administrative fee for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid but is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
(6)  Section 108.1 is hereby amended to read as follows, and Sections 108.2 through 108.6 are hereby deleted: 
    108.1 General. Violations of this code shall be governed by Chapter 18, Article IX of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(7)  Section 109.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    109.2 Membership of Board. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the same members as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals outlined in Section 8.2 of the Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village. The rules of procedure set forth in Section 16-3-30 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code shall apply to all appeals brought under this code. 
(8)  Sections 109.2.1 through 109.2.6 and 109.3 through 109.7 are hereby deleted. 
(9)  Section 305.4.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of sixty inches (60") below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of sixty inches (60") below grade. 
(10)  Section 903.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    903.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least twelve inches (12") above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least seven feet (7') above the roof. 
(11)  A new exception to Section 2904.3.2 
    Exception: The sprinkler system piping shall be permitted to have additional control valves install when supervised by one of the following methods: 
1.  Central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service. 
2.  Local alarm service that causes the sounding of an audible signal at a constantly attended location. 
3.  Valves that are locked open or other approved method of securing the valve. 
(Ord. 14 4, 2013; Ord. 6 4, 2017 ) 
ARTICLE V - International Fuel Gas Code 

Sec. 18-5-10. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code , as published by the International Code Council, Publications, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. One (1) copy of such code and other codes adopted by reference in the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code , the same being adopted as if set out at length herewith, shall be maintained at the office of the Building Department and may be inspected during regular business hours. The subject matter of this code includes minimum provisions and safety standards for the regulations of fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances within buildings and structures in the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 14 5, 2013; Ord. 6 5, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-5-20. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 is hereby amended by inserting "the City of Cherry Hills Village," so the section will read as follows: 
    101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Cherry Hills Village, hereinafter referred to as 'this code.' 
(2)  Section 106.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    106.3 Application for Permit. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or owners representing a majority interest in the ownership of the property, or by an agent who is duly authorized by those individuals or entities that hold a majority interest in the ownership of the property. With respect to properties where deed, contract or other provisions require more than a majority interest to undertake work necessitating a building permit, such authority of the applicant shall be demonstrated with the permit application. The permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure and shall contain such other information required by the building official. 
(3)  Section 106.5.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    106.5.3 Expiration of permits. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within ninety (90) days after its issuance or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days after the time the work is commenced. In no event shall a permit remain active longer than two (2) years. In the event a permit expires under either of these conditions, a new permit will be required to complete the work. The new permit fee will be calculated using the City's then-current fee calculation methods. Should the project be abandoned, permit fees may be refunded in accordance with Section 109.6 of the International Building Code , as adopted herein. 
(4)  Section 106.6.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for work performed under this code shall be as indicated in Tables 1-A through 1-E located in Section 18-1-20(10) of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(5)  Section 106.6.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    106.6.3 Fee refunds. The building official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any building permit fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected; 
2.  The full amount of any building permit fee paid hereunder less a fifty-dollar administrative fee when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code; 
3.  For permits where work has occurred, the refund will be calculated by City staff. Staff will consider all cost factors involved in administration of the permit, including but not limited to inspection and reinspection fees, mileage, staff time, supplies and building overhead; 
4.  The full amount of the plan review fee paid hereunder less a fifty-dollar administrative fee for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid but is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
(6)  Section 108.1 is hereby amended to read as follows, and Sections 108.2 through 108.6 are hereby deleted: 
    108.1 General. Violations of this code shall be governed by Chapter 18, Article IX of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(7)  Section 109.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    109.2 Membership of Board. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the same members as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals outlined in Section 8.2 of the Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village. The rules of procedure set forth in Section 16-3-30 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code shall apply to all appeals brought under this code. 
(8)  Sections 109.2.1 through 109.2.6 and 109.3 through 109.7 are hereby deleted. 
(9)  A new Section 2432.3.1 (602.3.1) is hereby added and shall read as follows: 
    2432.3.1 Unvented decorative appliances. Unvented decorative appliances shall not be installed. 
(Ord. 14 5, 2013; Ord. 6 5, 2017 ) 
ARTICLE VI - International Energy Conservation Code 

Sec. 18-6-10. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code , as published by the International Code Council, Publications, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. One (1) copy of such code and other codes adopted by reference in the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code , the same being adopted as if set out at length herewith, shall be maintained at the office of the Building Department and may be inspected during regular business hours. The subject matter of this code includes comprehensive provisions and safety standards for the design of energy-efficient buildings and energy-efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems within buildings and structures in the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 14 6, 2013; Ord. 6 6, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-6-20. - Amendment. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendment: 
(1)  Section 101.1 is hereby amended by inserting "the City of Cherry Hills Village," so the section will read as follows: 
    101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Energy Conservation Code of the City of Cherry Hills Village, hereinafter referred to as 'this code. 
(Ord. 14 6, 2013; Ord. 6 6, 2017 ) 
ARTICLE VII - National Electrical Code 

Sec. 18-7-10. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the 2014 National Electrical Code , as published by the National Fire Protection Association, One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, 02269, or any other electrical code revision approved by the State. One (1) copy of such code and other codes adopted by reference in the 2014 National Electrical Code , the same being adopted as if set out at length herewith, shall be maintained at the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours. The subject matter of this code includes comprehensive provisions and safety standards for the electrical construction, alteration, repair, removal and demolition of equipment within buildings and structures in the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 14 7, 2013; Ord. 6 7, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-7-20. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Annex H of the 2014 National Electric Code is hereby adopted. 
(2)  Annex H, Section 80.13(13), is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"(13)  Whenever any installation subject to inspection prior to use is covered or concealed without having first been inspected, the authority having jurisdiction shall be permitted to require that such work be exposed for inspection. The authority having jurisdiction shall be notified when the installation is ready for inspection and shall conduct the inspection within three (3) days of such notification." 
(3)  Annex H, Section 80.15, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"(a)  Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the same members as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals outlined in Section 8.2 of the Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village. The rules of procedure set forth in Section 16-3-30 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code shall apply to all appeals brought under this code." 
(4)  Annex H, Section 80.19(F)3., is hereby amended to read as follows: 
"3.  When any portion of the electrical installation within the jurisdiction of the Electrical Inspector is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person, firm or corporation installing the equipment shall notify the Electrical Inspector, and such equipment shall not be concealed until it has been approved by the Electrical Inspector, provided that on large installations, where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person, firm or corporation installing the equipment shall give the Electrical Inspector due notice in advance, and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work." 
(5)  Annex H, Section 80.19(H), is hereby amended to read as follows: 
1.  Applications for permits shall be made to the City on forms provided by the City and shall include the applicant's answers in full to inquiries set forth on such forms. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such data as required by the City, such as plans and specifications, location and so forth. The fees for work performed under this code shall be as indicated in Tables 1-A through 1-E located in Section 18-1-20(10) of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
2.  An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned ninety (90) days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not to exceed 90 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
3.  The City shall review all applications submitted and issue permits as required. If an application for a permit is rejected by the City, the applicant shall be advised of the reasons for such rejection. Permits for activities requiring evidence of financial responsibility by the City shall not be issued unless proof of required financial responsibility is furnished. 
4.  Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within ninety (90) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of ninety (90) days after the time the work is commenced. In the event a permit expires under either of these conditions, a new permit will be required to complete the work. The new permit fee will be calculated using the City's then-current fee calculation methods. Should the project be abandoned, permit fees may be refunded in accordance with Section 108.6 of the International Building Code , as adopted herein. 
(6)  Annex H, Section 80.23(B), is hereby deleted, and Section 80.23(A) is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    80.23(A) Violations. Violations of this code shall be governed by Chapter 18, Article IX of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(7)  Annex H, Section 80.27, is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(8)  Annex H, Section 80.29, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    80.29 Liability for damages. Article 80 shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability of any party owning, designing, operating, controlling or installing any electric equipment for damages to persons or property caused by a defect therein, nor shall the City of Cherry Hills Village or any of its employees be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection, re-inspection or other examination authorized. 
(Ord. 14 7, 2013; Ord. 6 7, 2017 ) 
ARTICLE VIII - International Fire Code 

Sec. 18-8-10. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the 2015 International Fire Code , as published by the International Code Council, Publications, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. One (1) copy of such code and other codes adopted by reference in the 2015 International Fire Code, the same being adopted as if set out at length herewith, shall be maintained at the office of the Building Department and may be inspected during regular business hours. The subject matter of this code includes comprehensive provisions and safety standards for fire prevention generally and, specifically, the regulation of conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion; and to provide for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations within buildings and structures in the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 14 8, 2013; Ord. 6 8, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-8-20. - Amendments. 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 is hereby amended as follows: 
    101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Cherry Hills Village , hereinafter referred to as 'this code.' 
(2)  Section 103 is amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    103.1 General. South Metro Fire Rescue provides fire protection services for the City. It operates under the direction of its fire chief. South Metro Fire Rescue (the 'fire department'), working in conjunction with the City, is charged with the implementation, administration and enforcement of the provisions of this code. 
(3)  Section 108 is hereby amended by amending Section 108.1 to read as follows and by deleting Section 108.3: 
    108.1 Board of Appeals. The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals or orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official or the City Manager or his or her designee relative to the application and interpretation of this code. The board of appeals shall consist of the same members as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals outlined in Section 8.2 of the Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village. The rules of procedure set forth in Section 16-3-30 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code shall apply to all appeals brought under this code. 
(4)  Section 109 is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    109.1 Violations. Violations of this code shall be governed by Chapter 18, Article IX of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(5)  Section 111 is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    111.1 General. The issuance of stop work orders and notices for violations of this code shall be governed by Section 18-9-30 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code. 
(6)  Section 503.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    503.2 Specifications. Fire apparatus access roads shall be installed and arranged in accordance with Sections 503.2.1 through 503.2.8 and Appendix D and/or the City of Cherry Hills Village roadway design provisions, as approved by the fire code official. 
(7)  Section 503.4.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    503.4.1 Traffic calming devices. Fire Code Official approval is required before traffic calming devices can be constructed. 
(8)  Section 507.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    507.3 Fire-flow. Fire-flow requirements for buildings or portions of buildings and facilities shall be determined in accordance with Appendix B or by an approved method. 
(9)  Section 507.5 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    507.5 Fire hydrant systems. Fire hydrant systems shall comply with Sections 507.5.1 through 507.5.6 and Appendix C. 
(10)  Section 903.2.9 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  [No Change] 
2.  [No Change] 
3.  [No Change] 
4.  [No Change] 
5.  A Group S-1 fire area used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m 2 ). 
(11)  Section 1103.7.6 is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    1103.7.6 Group R-2 . A manual and automatic fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group R-2 occupancies more than three stories in height or with more than 16 dwelling or sleeping units. 
    Exceptions : 
1.  [No Change] 
2.  [No Change] 
3.  A fire alarm system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving dwelling units, provided that dwelling units either have a means of egress door opening directly to an exterior exit access that leads directly to the exists or are served by open-ended corridors designed in accordance with Section 1027.6, Exception 3, items 3.2 to 3.5. 
4.  [No Change] 
(12)  Section 5601.1.3 is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
    5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited. 
    Exceptions : 
1.  The possession, storage, handling, and use of fireworks as allowed in Section 5608. 
(13)  Section 5704.2.9.6.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    5704.2.9.6.1 Locations of aboveground tanks . Aboveground tanks shall be located in accordance with this section. 
(14)  Section 5706.2.4.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(15)  Section 5806.2 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(16)  Section 6104.2 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(17)  Only the following Appendix Chapters of this code are hereby adopted and amended as follows: 
a.  APPENDIX B - Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings. 
Appendix B is hereby amended to read as follows: 
1.  Table B105.1(1) REQUIRED FIRE-FLOW FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS, GROUP R-3 AND R-4 BUILDINGS AND TOWNHOUSES shall read as follows: 
Table B105.1(1)
REQUIRED FIRE-FLOW FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS, GROUP R-3 AND R-4 BUILDINGS AND TOWNHOUSES 
Fire-Flow Calculation Area (square feet)Automatic Sprinkler System
(Design Standard)Minimum Fire-Flow
(gallons per minute)Flow Duration (hours) 0-3,600 No automatic sprinkler system 1,000 1 3,601 and greater No automatic sprinkler system Value in Table B105.1(2) Duration in Table B105.1(2) at the required fire-flow rate  
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m 2 , 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m. 
b.  APPENDIX C - Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution 
Appendix C is hereby amended to read as follows: 
1.  Section C103.2 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
" C103.2 Average spacing. The average spacing between fire hydrants shall be in accordance with Table C102.1. 
Exception : The average spacing may be permitted to be increased by 10 percent where existing fire hydrants provide all or a portion of the required number of fire hydrants." 
2.  Table C102.1 is hereby amended to: 
Delete all references to footnote f and footnote g in their entirety. 
c.  APPENDIX D - Fire Apparatus Access Roads. 
Appendix D is hereby amended to read as follows: 
1.  Section D103.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
2.  Section D103.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
D103.4 Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet (45 720 mm) shall be provided with width and turnaround provisions in accordance with Table D103.4 and/or the City of Cherry Hills Village roadway design provisions, as approved by the fire code official. 
3.  IFC Section D105.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
D105.3 Proximity to building . At least one of the required access routes meeting this condition shall be located within a minimum of 15 feet (4572 mm) and a maximum of 30 feet (9144 mm) from the building, and shall be positioned parallel to one entire side of the building. The side of the building on which the aerial fire apparatus access road is positioned shall be approved by the fire code official. 
Exception: 
The proximity of an aerial fire apparatus access road may be altered by the fire code official based on the specifications and capabilities of the fire protection district's apparatus. 
(Ord. 14 8, 2013; Ord. 6 8, 2017 ) 
ARTICLE IX - Violations and Enforcement 

Sec. 18-9-10. - Unlawful actions. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for any property owner, permit holder or any other person: 
(1)  To authorize the performance or to perform any work or activity for which a permit is required by this Code without first securing or obtaining all City-issued permits in accordance with this Code necessary to commence and perform such work or activity. 
(2)  Following issuance of a stop work order, to authorize the performance or to perform any work or activity other than work or activity deemed by the code official as necessary to remedy the violations or conditions cited in the stop work order. 
(3)  To authorize the performance or to perform any work that fails to comply with the requirements of this Code. 
(4)  Following the effective date of this Code, to allow any structure, building, improvement or condition to exist upon property that was installed, constructed, erected or created in violation of this Code. 
(5)  To remove, move, cover, obscure, damage, destroy or alter a posted Stop Work Order. 
(6)  To interfere with or otherwise impede or impair the lawful actions of the code official. 
(Ord. 17 2, 2002) 
Sec. 18-9-20. - Violations. 
    Persons who violate a provision of this Chapter or any provision of any code adopted within this Chapter, or who erect, install, alter or repair a structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Misdemeanors are punishable by: 
(1)  A fine of not more than the maximum fine authorized in Section 1-4-20 of this Code for any one (1) offense, each day after a ticket is given constituting a separate offense, or 
(2)  By imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 17 2, 2002; Ord. 10 6, 2013; Ord. 6 10, 2017 
Sec. 18-9-30. - Stop work orders and notices. 
    The building official is authorized to issue a notice, order and demand to immediately cease work or any other action found by the building official to be in violation of this Chapter or any code or codes either currently adopted or subsequently adopted by the City. 
(1)  A stop work order or other notice shall be made in writing and signed by the code official. The stop work order shall identify with reasonable specificity the activity found by the code official to be in violation of this Code or conducted in an unsafe or dangerous manner. Whenever possible, the order shall cite the applicable provisions of the code. The order shall identify the conditions necessary to remedy the violation and permit the continuation of the work authorized under the permit. 
(2)  A stop work order shall be deemed issued and effective when posted in a conspicuous place at the site described in the application for permit. The code official shall endeavor to mail or otherwise deliver a copy of the stop work order to the permit holder, the owner of the property and/or to persons engaged in the performance of the work authorized by the permit. Provided that the stop work order is properly posted in accordance with this Section, failure to deliver a copy of the order to the permit holder, the property owner or any other person shall not invalidate or render ineffective the order. 
(3)  Upon correction or remedy of the violations cited in a stop work order, the code official shall issue a written order rescinding the stop work order. 
(4)  Upon issuance of a stop work order, the applicant shall submit for a building permit in accordance with this Chapter. The review of such building permit shall be subject to the normal permit fees for such work outlined in Section 108.2.1, Tables 1-A through 1-E, of the 2000 International Building Code, as amended, in addition to an investigation fee as outlined in Table 1-D of said section. 
(Ord. 17 2, 2002; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 8 9, 2005; Ord. 6 10, 2017 
Sec. 18-9-40. - Abatement of violations. 
    The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the City Attorney from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the property, the structure or any mechanical, plumbing or other system on or about any premises. 
(Ord. 17 2, 2002; Ord. 6 1, 2017 
ARTICLE X - Construction Practices 

Sec. 18-10-10. - Applicability and intent. 
(a)  Applicability. This Article shall apply to all construction activity within the City, except construction activity performed by or on behalf of the City for a City project. 
(b)  Intent. It is the City's intent by the adoption of this Article to reasonably minimize the detrimental health, safety and general welfare impacts of construction activities on the residents of the community and to ensure that each construction activity is conducted in such a manner so as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and the occupants of neighboring property. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2006; Ord. 5 1, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-10-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article and unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
    The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. 
    Construction activity means any site preparation, landscaping, building construction, sign erection, paving, fencing, planting or other improvement or modification of any real property or existing improvement thereon. 
    Construction site means all of a real property, as defined by its boundary lines, over any part of which there is a construction activity, along with the public or private right-of-way adjacent to such property. 
    Construction site facilities means a portable toilet, a trash receptacle or dumpster and any other structure or facility erected or installed as a job office, material storage facility or other facility or installation on or within a construction site that is used for or in connection with a construction activity or that is required to be depicted on a construction staging plan pursuant to this Article. 
    Construction staging plan means a site plan of a construction site that shows the location for all construction site facilities and all other items that are required to be shown on such plan pursuant to the requirements of this Article. 
    Construction vehicle means any car, truck, tractor, trailer or other vehicle or equipment of any type that is used to perform any part of a construction activity or to transport equipment, supplies or workers to a construction site. 
    Emergency work means work required to protect persons or property from exposure to imminent danger. 
    Right-of-way means any street, way, place, alley, easement, median, parkway or boulevard, whether public or private, the principal purpose of which is the provision of vehicular access to real property. 
    Vehicle tracking control means an effective method or methods of preventing vehicles from tracking soil, mud or gravel from a construction site to a right-of-way, which method or methods may include, but be not limited to, the use of temporary paving or a washing or mud-clearing station. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2006; Ord. 12 1, 2008; Ord. 5 2, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-10-30. - Administration. 
(a)  A construction staging plan shall be submitted along with the application for a permit for any construction activities. In instances when a building permit or other permit from the City is not required for a construction activity, or for any work being conducted pursuant to a permit issued for a project consisting solely of electrical work, plumbing work or mechanical work, such construction activity shall still be subject to the minimum requirements outlined in 18-10-40(2)(a) through (i) of this Article even though a construction staging plan may not be required. The City Manager or his or her designee may require a construction staging plan be submitted for review and approval, for proposed or current construction activities, if the City Manager or his or her designee determines that a construction staging plan is necessary to ensure that construction is conducted in such a manner so as to minimize the impacts resulting from the construction activity on the general public and the occupants of neighboring property. It shall be unlawful to perform, or for the owner of any construction site to allow to be performed, any construction activity prior to the City's full approval of the construction staging plan, when such construction staging plan is required by this Section. 
(b)  The construction staging plan shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Manager or his or her designee. Such review shall be conducted to ensure that the construction activities will be conducted in compliance with the requirements of this Article; provided, however, that if the City Manager or his or her designee determines that a deviation of a construction staging plan from the requirements of this Article will result in no greater adverse impacts on adjacent properties than would occur if the plan were to fully comply with the provisions of this Article, then the City Manager or his or her designee may approve the plan in his or her reasonable discretion. 
(c)  The City Manager or his or her designee may impose reasonable conditions upon any approval of a construction staging plan to ensure that the construction activities will be conducted in compliance with the requirements of this Article. 
(d)  A construction staging plan may be modified or amended upon the written approval of the City Manager or his or her designee. Any modification to or amendment of a construction staging plan shall be reviewed and approved under the same standards, and shall be subject to the same conditions, as are set forth in this Section for the review and approval and conditioning of the initial construction staging plan. 
(e)  Any construction activity performed by a property owner or occupant of property without the assistance of a contractor, or any landscaping, planting or grading work that disturbs less than five hundred (500) square feet of property area and less than ten (10) cubic yards of soil, shall not be subject to the requirements of this Article. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2006; Ord. 12 2, 2008) 
Sec. 18-10-40. - Construction staging plan. 
    The construction staging plan shall include all of the following information: 
(1)  A to-scale, accurate depiction of all existing and proposed improvements. 
(2)  A to-scale, accurate depiction of the location of all construction site facilities and, when applicable, a description of construction site facilities, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Portable toilets. 
1.  Except for construction sites that contain an operable, permanent toilet that is made available for the use of every construction worker, at least one (1) portable toilet shall be provided on each construction site and the location of such portable toilet shall be shown on the construction staging plan. For a residential construction site, no more than one (1) portable toilet may be located on the site. 
2.  A portable toilet shall not be located within any right-of-way. 
3.  Every portable toilet shall be reasonably screened from the view of adjacent properties and rights-of-way, and in no event shall a portable toilet be located within ten (10) feet of any property line. 
4.  Every portable toilet shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary and odor-free condition. 
b.  Trash receptacles and dumpsters. 
1.  A trash receptacle and/or dumpster of a size adequate to contain the construction waste materials anticipated in connection with a construction activity shall be provided on each construction site to contain solid waste materials, and the location of such trash receptacle and/or dumpster shall be shown on the construction staging plan. Liquid and hazardous waste materials shall be disposed of at a proper waste depository. 
2.  Trash receptacles or dumpsters shall not be located within any right-of-way, and in no event shall a trash receptacle or dumpster be located within five (5) feet of any side or rear property line. 
3.  Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall at all times be maintained in an odor-free condition and in such a manner as to prevent waste materials from being blown out of them. Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be emptied on a regular basis so as to comply with the requirements of this Subsection. 
c.  Construction trailers. 
1.  Temporary construction trailers shall be permitted, operated and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 16-16-70 of this Code. If a temporary construction trailer is to be used on a construction site, its location shall be depicted on the construction staging plan. 
d.  Vehicle tracking control. 
1.  No construction vehicle shall track soil, mud or gravel off of a construction site and onto a right-of-way. Vehicle tracking control shall be used at ingress and egress points on all construction sites that have the potential for construction vehicles to track soil, mud or gravel off of a construction site and onto a right-of-way. 
2.  The construction staging plan shall depict the location for, and describe the type of, vehicle tracking control that will be utilized for the construction site. 
e.  Silt fencing. 
1.  Silt fencing shall be placed downgrade of all areas of a construction site that are to be disturbed and that have the potential for sediment to be transported off of a construction site by runoff, and the location and type of such silt fencing shall be shown on the construction staging plan. 
2.  A minimum of nine (9) inches of the bottom of the silt fence shall be anchored using gravel or dirt. 
f.  Parking. For purposes of this Subsection, gross lot area shall have the meaning set forth in Section 16-1-10 of this Code for the terms Lot, gross area. 
1.  The locations of all parking and loading/unloading areas for construction vehicles associated with a construction site shall be shown on the required construction staging plan. 
2.  For any lot, parcel or other real property that contains one (1) or more acres of gross lot area, the parking of construction vehicles shall occur only within the boundaries of such lot, parcel or other real property. It shall be unlawful for any construction vehicle associated with any lot, parcel or other real property that contains one (1) or more acres of gross lot area to be parked within a right-of-way. 
3.  For any lot, parcel or other real property that contains less than one (1) acre of gross lot area, the parking of construction vehicles shall occur only within the boundaries of such lot, parcel or other real property if reasonably feasible. 
4.  In the event that the parking of construction vehicles within the boundaries of a lot, parcel or other real property containing less than one (1) acre of gross lot area is not reasonably feasible, the construction staging plan may provide: 
a)  That the parking area shall be located within the right-of-way area that is immediately adjacent to the subject property and not adjacent to any other property; and 
b)  That vehicular access on the right-of-way shall be maintained at a minimum width of twenty (20) feet (for emergency response purposes), assuming the contemporaneous use of the right-of-way for the parking of vehicles immediately across the right-of-way from the area in which the construction vehicles are to be parked. In the event that such minimum width cannot be maintained, the parking of construction vehicles shall not occur within the right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any construction vehicle associated with such lot, parcel or other real property to be parked within a right-of-way except to the extent that the parking within a right-of-way is in conformance with the approved construction staging plan. 
5.  The construction staging plan shall make provision for parking at remote locations that are not within a right-of-way within the City in the event that the number of anticipated construction vehicles exceeds the parking capacity of the site. 
g.  Temporary construction fencing. 
1.  Any temporary construction fencing shall be shown on the required construction staging plan. 
2.  Temporary construction fencing shall be provided for any below-grade construction in excess of thirty (30) inches that is unattended or open overnight. 
3.  Temporary construction fencing shall not exceed six (6) feet in height and may be opaque so as to provide additional screening of the construction site. 
4.  Temporary construction fencing may not be located in a right-of-way. 
h.  Construction material storage. 
1.  Construction material storage areas shall be designated on the required construction staging plan. 
2.  Construction materials shall not be stored in any right-of-way. 
3.  Construction materials shall be reasonably screened from view of adjacent properties and rights-of way. 
4.  In no event shall construction materials be stored within five (5) feet from any property line. 
i.  Storage of fill or excavated dirt. 
1.  The location of storage sites for any fill or excavated dirt shall be indicated on the construction staging plan. 
2.  Any fill or excavated dirt shall be maintained in a manner so as to prevent dust from blowing on adjacent properties, which manner may include, but need not be limited to, the periodic watering of the piles. 
3.  Silt fencing around piles of fill or excavated dirt may be required under the provisions of Subparagraph e. above. 
4.  All excess fill or excavated dirt shall be removed promptly upon completion of the project. 
(3)  Photographs of all improved portions of any public right-of-way that are within five hundred (500) feet of any point of vehicular access to a construction site. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2006) 
Sec. 18-10-50. - Construction site maintenance and operation and duty to repair public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Contractors, subcontractors and persons holding permits to perform construction activities, and the owners of construction sites, shall cause the construction site to be maintained in a neat and orderly condition that is free from any debris, garbage, junk, used or discarded construction materials, trash or any other foreign substance produced as a result of the construction project other than debris, garbage, junk, trash or other foreign substance deposited into and contained within a trash receptacle or trash dumpster. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Article, all construction activities and construction sites shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 7 of this Code, including but not limited to those provisions concerning noise. 
(c)  Contractors, subcontractors, persons holding permits to perform construction activities and the owners of construction sites shall, at the direction of the City Manager or his or her designee, either repair or reimburse the City for its costs incurred to repair any damage to any public right-of-way that is caused by a construction vehicle. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2006) 
Sec. 18-10-60. - Construction times. 
(a)  Construction activity may be performed subject to the following restrictions: 
Day Hours Monday through Friday 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. Saturday 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Sunday No outside construction activity permitted at any time. Construction activity occurring within a fully enclosed structure is permitted between the hours of 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Federal holidays (observed): New Year's Day; Martin Luther King Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day No construction activity permitted.  
(b)  Construction Vehicles. Construction vehicles or construction delivery trucks shall not park or stand and leave their engines idling between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(c)  Exception. This Section shall not apply to emergency work as defined in Section 18-10-20, provided an owner or contractor obtains prior written approval from the City Manager and the emergency work is concluded within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of approval from the City Manager. Emergency work shall not be subject to the waiver process set forth in Subsection (d) of this Section. 
(d)  Construction times waiver. A waiver to the construction times as prescribed in Section 18-10-60(a) may be approved by the City Manager subject to the procedure and approval criteria set forth in this subsection. 
(1)  Eligibility. 
a.  A waiver may be authorized for water well drilling construction activity that exceeds the construction time limits set forth in Subsection (a) of this Section for up to a maximum of seven (7) consecutive days. Any waiver request to the construction time limits that exceeds seven (7) consecutive days shall be referred to City Council for consideration at a public meeting and shall be approved only upon a showing of good cause. 
(2)  Application Requirements. 
a.  Completed waiver request in a form provided by the building department. 
b.  A statement of justification for the construction times waiver including the following: 
1.  Reason for waiver. 
2.  Copy of well permit issued by office of state engineer. 
3.  Scope of work. 
4.  Description of potential impacts to adjacent properties, including but not limited to noise, lighting, vibrations, location of heavy equipment. 
5.  Description of mitigation efforts to address any adjacent property impacts. 
6.  Time schedule for start and completion of construction. 
c.  Site plan showing the size, location and use of all existing and proposed improvements or construction, with dimensions to property lines showing setbacks. The plan shall show all other existing or proposed structures or improvements on the site, including the location and size of vegetation, if applicable. 
d.  Construction staging plan exhibit in accordance with Section 18-10-30 of this Code. 
e.  Application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), as may be amended by resolution of the City Council. 
(3)  Preapplication Neighborhood Meeting. The applicant shall conduct a preapplication neighborhood input meeting in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 18-10-80 of this Code. 
(4)  City Decision. Within ten (10) business days of receipt of a complete waiver application, the City Manager shall render a decision on the waiver request, and may approve a waiver for a specified period of time upon finding that all of the following criteria of approval have been met: 
a.  The waiver is necessary to complete the drilling or re-drilling of a water well in the most expeditious and safe manner; 
b.  Construction activity will be mitigated to prevent any significant disruptions to adjacent properties; and 
c.  The location of construction activity is limited to the subject property and does not adversely impact adjacent properties. 
(5)  Issuance of Waiver. Upon issuance of a waiver, the applicant shall be authorized to commence and complete construction activity within the parameters of the written waiver. Said written waiver may include conditions of approval and/or waivers to noise limits set forth in Section 7-1-30(4) of this Code. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2006; Ord. 5 3, 2017 ) 
Sec. 18-10-70. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon a complaint or observation by the City of a violation of this Article, or upon a determination by the City that a construction site is not being maintained or operated in strict conformance with the provisions of an approved construction staging plan, the City shall provide written notice to the contractor or person performing the work on the construction site, as well as mailed notice to the owner of record of the construction site, specifying the specific conditions that are deemed in violation of this Article or the approved construction staging plan and demanding that the construction site be brought into compliance with this Article or such plan within twenty-four (24) hours; provided, however, that no such notice is required if the City Manager or his or her designee determines that the immediate cessation of the violation or failure to comply with an approved construction staging plan is necessary to preserve health or safety, or when there is a violation of the regulations concerning construction times as stated in Section 18-10-60 of this Article. 
(b)  In the event of a violation of any provision of this Article, or in the event that the City determines that a construction site is not being maintained or operated in strict conformance with the provisions of an approved construction staging plan, or in the event that reasonable steps have not been undertaken within the twenty-four-hour period referenced in Subsection (a) above to bring a site into compliance with any provision of this Article or such plan after notice as provided in Subsection (a) above, or without prior notice in the event of a second violation of the same provision of this Article or a second failure to operate in strict conformance with the same provision of an approved construction staging plan, the City may, at its discretion: 
(1)  Issue a stop work order; 
(2)  Withhold any certificate of occupancy for any improvement on the construction site; 
(3)  Withhold any required construction or building inspection approvals; 
(4)  Reject any necessary acceptance by the City of construction or improvements; 
(4)  Reject any necessary acceptance by the City of construction or improvements; 
(5)  Prosecute the violation in accordance with the City's laws governing nuisances or as a violation of this Article that is subject to the penalties set forth in Subsection (f) below; and/or 
(6)  Remedy the conditions that are deemed in violation of this Article or the approved construction staging plan and assess the costs incurred by the City to bring the construction site into compliance with this Article as a lien against the subject property, subject to collection in the same manner as unpaid property taxes. 
(c)  In the event that the City issues a stop work order pursuant to this Section, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any construction activity on the subject construction site until a written plan is submitted to and approved by the City Manager. Such plan shall provide a detailed statement setting forth the means and methods by which the existing violation has been or will be remedied and by which the same violation will be avoided in the future. The statement shall provide such additional or clarifying information as may be reasonably requested by the City Manager. Upon its approval by the City Manager, the written plan shall be a part of the construction staging plan required by this Article, and shall be enforceable under this Article as if it had been set forth as part of the original, approved construction staging plan. 
(d)  In the event that the City remedies the conditions deemed in violation of this Article or the approved construction staging plan, the cost for the City to perform such work shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00), exclusive of any costs attributable to vehicle or equipment time, or the actual cost of remediation of the violation, whichever is greater. The failure to pay an assessment imposed by the City for City costs incurred to bring the construction site into conformance with this Article or such plan within seven (7) days shall cause all building permits for the construction site to expire. Provided that full payment of such assessment is made and all other applicable requirements for the issuance of a building permit are satisfied, a new permit may be obtained upon application and payment of the building permit fee calculated on the valuation of the remaining work. 
(e)  Any and all construction site facilities shall have been removed from the construction site at such time as the subject improvement is issued a certificate of occupancy or completion, or within ten (10) days after the construction activity has ceased, whichever first occurs. 
(f)  Upon the first conviction of a person for a violation of any provision of this Article, there shall be imposed a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Upon the second conviction of a person for violation of the same provision of this Article for which he or she was previously convicted, there shall be imposed a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Upon the third and each subsequent conviction of a person for violation of the same provision of this Article for which he or she was previously convicted, there shall be imposed a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Notwithstanding the foregoing, a violation shall not be considered a second or third and subsequent violation, subject to the increased fines described herein, if the date of the violation which results in a conviction occurs more than three (3) years after a previous conviction of the same provision of this Article. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2006; Ord. 12 1, 2007; Ord. 09 1, 2008; Ord. 14, 2010) 
Sec. 18-10-80. - Preapplication neighborhood input meeting. 
(a)  A preapplication neighborhood input meeting ( neighborhood meeting ) shall be held prior to submitting an application for a permit to construct a new single-family dwelling, commercial, community or institutional structure, or an addition to any such structure that increases the square footage by fifty percent (50%) or more or adds a second story to an existing one-story structure. An affected property owner shall mean the owner of property contiguous to or across any street from any portions of the applicant's property. A homeowners' association shall mean a homeowners' association registered with the City with jurisdiction over the applicant's property. The applicant and the City are entitled to rely on the registration information provided by the homeowners' associations to the City for purposes of preparing any notices or otherwise contacting homeowners' associations. 
(b)  The purpose of a neighborhood meeting is to inform affected property owners and homeowners' associations about proposed development and to seek input and comments about its design and potential impacts on the neighborhood which could reasonably be mitigated. A neighborhood meeting is not required to generate complete consensus on all aspects of the proposed development, nor to supplant or add to the applicable standards or requirements of this Code. 
(c)  Procedures for neighborhood meetings. Upon receipt of a complete application, the City shall set a time, date and place for the meeting during the City's normal business hours. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the neighborhood meeting date, the applicant shall be required to send written notice of the neighborhood meeting to all affected property owners and homeowners' associations by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating: (1) the purpose of the meeting and generally describing the scope of the project; and (2) the time and place of the meeting. Such notice language shall be furnished to the applicant by the City. At least seven (7) days prior to the neighborhood meeting date, the applicant shall submit to the City the following documents that are required to be available at the meeting: 
(1)  A schedule detailing the anticipated dates of construction, including the major phases of construction, such as excavation and grading, foundation work, framing, exterior finish work, interior finish work and landscaping. 
(2)  A preliminary construction staging plan meeting the requirements of Section 18-10-40 of this Article. 
(3)  A preliminary site plan, drawn to scale and in accordance with an accurate survey, including the following information: 
a.  The size and location of any proposed structures and existing structures; 
b.  The setback distances from lot lines to any proposed structures in accordance with the parcels' zoning; and 
c.  Existing contours in one-foot intervals in USGS datum. 
(4)  Building height and bulk plane drawings demonstrating the height and three-dimensional extent of the proposed structures in accordance with the parcel's zoning. The design elements of the building, including the architectural style, colors and materials, are not required. 
(d)  The applicant, or applicant's representative, shall be required to attend the meeting to present the documents submitted in accordance with this Section. Copies of any written comments submitted to the City prior to the neighborhood meeting shall be provided to the applicant, or applicant's representative, at or before the meeting. 
(e)  Compliance with the neighborhood meeting procedures in this Section is a condition precedent to submitting a building permit application. A building permit application must substantially conform to the site plan and building height and bulk plane drawings submitted under Paragraphs (c)(3) and (4) above. If a building permit application is not submitted within one hundred eighty (180) days of the neighborhood meeting date, or the site plan and building height and bulk plane drawings do not substantially conform to those submitted for the neighborhood meeting, an applicant shall be required to conduct an additional neighborhood meeting in accordance with this Section prior to submitting an application for a building permit. 
(Ord. 8 1, 2012; Ord. 3 1, 2014) 
ARTICLE XI - Service Expansion Fee 

Sec. 18-11-10. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Building means any enclosed structure without reference to use or occupancy for which a building permit is required by the ordinances of the City. 
    Building Inspector means the official charged with the administration and enforcement of the building code as adopted by the City, or his regularly authorized deputy. 
    Contractor means any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, architect or corporation required to obtain a building permit pursuant to the ordinances of the City. 
    Floor area means the area of each floor and basement included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts, courts and parking garages. 
(Ord. 7, 1979; prior code 3-5-1; Ord. 5, 1989; Ord. 9 1, 2003) 
Sec. 18-11-20. - Payment of service expansion fee. 
(a)  Any owner, architect, contractor or other person applying for a building permit in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the City shall, as a condition to obtaining such building permit, pay to the City a service expansion fee as follows: 
Service Expansion Fee Amount Building $0.90 per square foot Garage/swimming pool/spa $0.40 per square foot Sport courts (including tennis, basketball and other similar sport courts) $0.10 per square foot  
(b)  The service expansion fee shall apply to all new construction, all additions to existing structures and the substantial alterations or reconstruction of existing structures, except for churches, schools, governmental, municipal or quasi-municipal structures. 
(c)  The service expansion fee shall be due and payable at the time the building permit is issued. Under no circumstances shall the Building Inspector issue a certificate of occupancy until and unless the service expansion fee, as set forth in Subsection (a) above, has been paid in full. 
(Ord. 7, 1979; prior code 3-5-2; Ord. 8, 2001; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 35, 2004; Ord. 01, 2008) 
Sec. 18-11-30. - Effective date of provisions. 
    The service expansion fee provided for herein shall be due and payable with respect to all building permit applications filed with the City from and after November 1, 1979. 
(Ord. 7, 1979; prior code 3-5-3) 
ARTICLE XII - Marijuana Cultivation in Residential Structures 

Sec. 18-12-10. - Purpose, intent. 
    It is the intent of this Article XII to reasonably regulate certain building and use activities relating to the growing or processing, within a residential structure and certain accessory structures within the City, of marijuana by patients and primary caregivers pursuant to Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, state statutes and other applicable laws and regulations, and by other authorized persons pursuant to Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution, state statutes and other applicable laws and regulations so as to ensure that such activities are conducted in a safe manner. In furtherance of the City's intent, the City Council finds that this Article is necessary to prevent or mitigate the secondary effects and negative impacts associated with the growing and processing of marijuana plants within residential homes and neighborhoods in order to preserve the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 11 1, 2013) 
Sec. 18-12-20. - Authority and applicability. 
    The City of Cherry Hills Village is a home rule municipality and the City Council is empowered to adopt such ordinances as are necessary and convenient to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City and its residents. This Article shall apply to all persons and property situated within the municipal boundaries of the City. 
(Ord. 11 1, 2013) 
Sec. 18-12-30. - Definitions. 
    Accessory structure shall have that meaning set forth in Section 16-1-10 of this Code. 
    Authorized person means a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older lawfully permitted to engage in the personal use of marijuana, including growing and processing marijuana plants, pursuant to Article XVIII,  16 of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Contiguous , in terms of determining the area devoted to the growing, cultivating, manufacturing, preparing, processing or packaging of marijuana and marijuana plants, means an uninterrupted expanse of space on the same floor or level of the primary residence that can be measured by framing the area with four (4) or more continuous and connected straight lines. The space within a single room which is defined by permanent perimeter walls is contiguous; the space within adjoining rooms divided by a permanent wall or permanent structure but accessible via a common doorway or connected by a common hallway is contiguous; however, nonadjacent spaces separated by two (2) or more permanent walls or separated by floors or levels of the building are not contiguous. 
    Enclosed space means an area within a residential structure having a roof and all sides closed to the weather and locked to prevent unauthorized entry. 
    Growing and cultivating are interchangeable and mean and encompass all steps or stages in the process of producing, developing, tending and keeping a marijuana plant through harvest (or, in the alternative, to serve as a "mother plant"), including but not limited to planting, germination, cloning, vegetative growth, flowering and harvest. 
    Locked means secured at all points of ingress or egress with a locking mechanism designed to limit access such as with a key or combination lock. 
    Marijuana shall have the meaning set forth in Section 10-12-20 of this Code. 
    Marijuana plants mean marijuana plants, seedlings or any part thereof in a living condition that are lawfully cultivated, produced, possessed or processed pursuant to the Colorado Constitution and other applicable laws or regulations. 
    Patient shall have the meaning set forth in Section 10-11-20 of this Code. 
    Primary caregiver shall have the meaning as set forth in Section 10-11-20 of this Code. 
    Primary residence means the place that a person, by custom and practice, makes his or her principal domicile and address, and to which the person intends to return following any temporary absence, such as a vacation. Residence is evidenced by actual daily physical presence, use and occupancy of a residential structure on a lot or parcel and the use of the residential address for domestic purposes, such as, but not limited to, sleep, preparation and consumption of meals, regular mail delivery, vehicle and voter registration, or credit, water and other utility billing. A person shall have only one (1) primary residence, but such primary residence shall include, for purposes of this Article, accessory structures located on the same lot or parcel as the residential structure. 
    Processing means and encompasses all steps or stages in the process of preparing a harvested marijuana plant for utilization as a usable form of marijuana, including but not limited to cutting, manicuring, drying, curing, extracting, packaging and storing. 
    Residential structure means a structure or that portion of a structure devoted to a single-family detached dwelling; or, in the alternative, an allowed accessory building or structure associated with and on the same lot as such dwelling. For purposes of the home growing or processing of marijuana plants pursuant to Article XVIII, Section 16 or Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, such activities shall be carried out in either the dwelling or the associated accessory building or structure, but not both. 
    Single-family dwelling shall have the meaning set forth in Section 16-1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. 11 1, 2013; Ord. 10, 1, 11-7-2017) 
Sec. 18-12-40. - Regulations for growing and processing marijuana plants in residential structures. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to grow, cultivate or process marijuana or marijuana products for personal or medical use anywhere in the City other than an enclosed space within a residential structure in full compliance with the Colorado Constitution, any applicable state statutes, any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, any other applicable law and the following regulations: 
(1)  Marijuana plants may be grown, cultivated or processed only in a patient's primary residence, the primary residence of the patient's primary caregiver or the primary residence of an authorized person. 
(2)  Marijuana plants may be grown, cultivated or processed within the primary residence of a patient for himself or herself, or by the patient's primary caregiver for such patient, subject to the square footage limitations set forth in Paragraph (a)(3) of this Section. A primary caregiver may not lawfully grow, cultivate or process marijuana plants for a patient in another patient's primary residence unless such is also the primary residence of the patient. 
(3)  The growing, cultivation or processing of marijuana plants including the keeping, storage, and maintenance of all materials, supplies, tools, equipment, and paraphernalia associated with the same, shall be limited to one (1) of the following two (2) areas within a residential structure: 
a.  A maximum contiguous thirty-two (32) square foot area of enclosed space within a single-family detached dwelling; or 
b.  A maximum contiguous thirty-two (32) square foot area of enclosed space within an accessory structure separated by a minimum ten (10) foot setback from any single-family detached dwelling. 
(4)  Marijuana plants shall not be grown, cultivated or processed outdoors in the yard or other open area outside of a residential structure. 
(5)  Marijuana plants shall not be grown, cultivated or processed in any rooms used for sleeping purposes by any occupant of a residential structure. 
(6)  The use of high intensity discharge lighting, including but not limited to mercury-vapor lamps, metal halide lamps, ceramic metal halide lamps, sodium-vapor lamps, high pressure sodium lamps and xenon short-arc lamps, for the growing, cultivation or processing of marijuana plants shall be prohibited unless the enclosed space within the residential structure used for marijuana growing, cultivation or processing, including the walls, roof and doors, is constructed with a firewall assembly of Type X drywall meeting the minimum building code requirements for residential structures. 
(7)  Marijuana plants may not be processed with the use of any chemical to enhance tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in marijuana. 
(8)  The processing of marijuana or marijuana plants shall not involve the use of any chemical extraction method, including but not limited to any method using butane, acetate, isopropyl, ethyl alcohol, white gas, sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid or any substance prohibited by state law. 
(9)  The use of a residential structure for the growing, cultivation or processing of marijuana shall comply with all applicable building, fire and safety codes adopted by the City, including plumbing, electrical and all applicable zoning requirements, including but not limited to lot coverage, building height and setbacks. 
(10)  The enclosed space within which marijuana plants are grown, cultivated or processed shall be properly ventilated in accordance with all applicable building codes adopted by the City. 
(b)  If a patient, primary caregiver or authorized person grows, cultivates or processes marijuana plants within a residential structure that he or she does not own, such patient, primary caregiver or authorized person shall obtain the written consent of the property owner before commencing to grow, cultivate or process marijuana plants on the property. Such written documentation shall also include the owner's express consent to any material alterations to the residential structure associated with the growing, cultivating or processing of marijuana plants, including but not limited to alterations to walls, windows, ventilation, plumbing or electrical; shall be maintained on the premises of the residential structure; and shall be shown to any authorized City official upon request. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale marijuana or marijuana plants from or within the City. 
(Ord. 11 1, 2013; Ord. 10, 2, 3, 11-7-2017) 
Sec. 18-12-50. - Maximum number of marijuana plants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any authorized person, patient or primary caregiver to possess, grow, cultivate, or process more than the number of marijuana plants allowed under the Colorado Constitution, any applicable state statutes, any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, or any other applicable law. In no event shall the maximum number of marijuana plants within any residential structure exceed thirty (30) plants until and including December 31, 2017, and thereafter twelve (12) marijuana plants, regardless of size or stage of growth or the number of residents lawfully allowed to reside in the residential structure and to possess and grow marijuana for any purpose. 
(Ord. 11 1, 2013; Ord. 10, 4, 11-7-2017) 
Sec. 18-12-60. - Exterior impacts unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful to grow, cultivate or process marijuana plants within a residential structure in such a manner as to be perceptible from the exterior of the residential structure by means including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Common visual observation, including any form of signage; 
(2)  Odors, smells, fragrances or other olfactory stimulus generated by the cultivation, production, possession or processing of marijuana plants; 
(3)  Noise from exhaust fans, other equipment or other sources associated with or connected to such growing or processing in excess of any applicable permissible noise levels set forth in Section 7-1-30 of this Code; or 
(4)  Light pollution, glare or brightness of artificial illumination associated with the cultivation, possession or processing of marijuana plants. 
(Ord. 11 1, 2013) 
Sec. 18-12-70. - Search warrants authorized. 
(a)  The City Council declares that a violation of this Article involves a serious threat to public safety or order within the meaning of Rule 241(a)(1) of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
(b)  If the owner or occupant of a residential structure denies officials of the City's Community Development Department, Building Division or any police officer permission to inspect the residential structure, the City may request the Municipal Court to issue a search warrant for the inspection of the premises pursuant to the procedure and standards as set forth in Rule 241 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
(c)  The Municipal Court may issue a search warrant authorizing City officials to inspect a residential structure for the growing of marijuana plants in accordance with Rule 241(b) of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. Any search warrant issued pursuant to this Article XII shall fully comply with the applicable provisions of Rule 241 of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
(d)  The Municipal Court may impose such conditions on a search warrant as may be necessary to protect the private property rights of the owner of the premises to be inspected or to otherwise ensure that the warrant complies with applicable law. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to deny any authorized City official access to the property owned or occupied by such owner or occupant if the authorized person presents a warrant issued pursuant to this Article. 
(Ord. 11 1, 2013) 
Sec. 18-12-80. - Penalties and violations. 
(a)  A violation of the provisions of this Article shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  Each and every day a violation of the provisions of this Article is committed, exists or continues shall be deemed a separate offense; 
(2)  The City is specifically authorized to seek an injunction, abatement, restitution or any other remedy necessary to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the violation; 
(3)  Any remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law or in equity; and 
(4)  In addition to any other penalties that may exist under state, federal and local laws, violation of this Article shall be punishable as set forth in section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(b)  In addition to any other lawful method of enforcement, which method shall not be deemed exclusive, a violation of this Article is declared to be a public nuisance that may be abated as provided in Chapter 7, Article I of this Code. 
(Ord. 11 1, 2013) 
Sec. 18-12-90. - Most stringent law or construction applies. 
    Nothing in this Article is intended to supersede or modify applicable provisions of state law concerning the same subject. To the extent this Article is interpreted to authorize an action or activity otherwise prohibited by state law, such authorization shall mean such action or activity is not prohibited by local law. To the extent that a provision of state law is or becomes more stringent than a provision of this Article, the most stringent requirement or construction shall apply. 
(Ord. 11 1, 2013) 
CHAPTER 19 - Stormwater Quality and Control 
ARTICLE I - Stormwater Quality and Control 

Sec. 19-1-10. - Purpose and objectives. 
    The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system, as required by federal and state law, and to protect and enhance the quality of watercourses, water bodies and wetlands in a manner consistent with the federal Clean Water Act. The objectives of this Chapter are: 
(1)  To regulate and diminish the introduction of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  To establish inspection, observation, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter; 
(4)  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of pollutants into the storm drainage system; 
(5)  To require temporary and permanent stormwater runoff controls to be constructed along with development to prevent the deterioration of water quality; 
(6)  To establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and do not threaten public safety; and 
(7)  To establish timely and appropriate enforcement actions for violations of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007) 
Sec. 19-1-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Best management practices or BMPs means the specific management practices used to control pollutants in stormwater as set forth in the Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual. BMPs are of two (2) types: "source controls" (nonstructural) and "treatment controls" (structural). Source or nonstructural controls are practices that minimize pollution by reducing potential pollutants at their source before they come into contact with stormwater. Treatment or structural controls, such as constructed water quality detention facilities, remove pollutants already present in stormwater. Best management practices can either be temporary, such as silt fence used during construction activity, or permanent, such as detention facilities, to control pollutants in stormwater. 
    CDPS means the Colorado Discharge Permit System. 
    CDPS permit means a permit issued by the State of Colorado under Part 5 of the Colorado Water Quality Control Act (Title 25, Article 8 of the Colorado Revised Statutes) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the State, whether the permit is applicable to a person, group or area. 
    City means the City of Cherry Hills Village. 
    City Manager means the Cherry Hills Village City Manager or his or her duly authorized representative. 
    Clean Water Act (CWA) means the Clean Water Act, also known as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and including amendments thereto by the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 U.S.C. section 466 et seq., as amended. 
    Colorado Water Quality Control Act means Title 25, Article 8 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended. 
    Commercial means any business, trade, industry or other activity engaged in for profit. 
    Construction means to make or form by combining or arranging building parts or building elements, including but not limited to road construction and commercial, residential and parks development, and including the initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, excavating and stockpiling of materials in connection with the same. 
    Construction site means any location where construction or construction-related activity occurs. 
    Contaminated means containing harmful quantities of pollutants that exceed state or federal guidelines. 
    Contractor means any person or firm performing or managing construction work at a construction site or delivering materials to the site, including but not limited to any construction manager, general contractor, subcontractor. 
    Development means any public or private construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure within the jurisdiction of the City, as well as any man-made change or alteration to the landscape, including but not limited to mining, drilling, dredging, grading, paving, excavating and/or filling. 
    Discharge means any addition or release of any pollutant, stormwater, subsurface water, groundwater or any other substance whatsoever to the storm drainage system. 
    Disturbed area means an area of the land's surface disturbed by any work or activity upon the land by means including but not limited to grading; excavating; stockpiling soil, fill, or other materials; clearing; vegetation removal; removal or deposit of any rock, soil, or other materials; or other activities which expose soil. Disturbed area does not include disturbance caused by normal agricultural activities, not including construction activities. 
    Domestic animal waste means excrement and other waste from domestic animals, including household pets. 
    Domestic sewage means sewage originating primarily from kitchen, bathroom and laundry sources, including waste from food preparation, dishwashing, garbage grinding, toilets, baths, showers and sinks. 
    Drainageway means any natural or artificial (man-made) channel which provides a course for water flowing either continuously or intermittently to downstream areas. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), the regional office thereof, any federal department, agency or commission that may succeed to the authority of the USEPA and any duly authorized official of the USEPA or such successor agency. 
    Fertilizer means a substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop or a mixture of two (2) or more fertilizers. 
    Fire protection means any water and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person to control or extinguish a fire or to inspect or test fire equipment. 
    Fungicide means a substance that destroys or inhibits the growth of fungi. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal or vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Groundwater means any water residing below the surface of the ground or percolating into or out of the ground. 
    Harmful quantity means the amount of any substance that may cause an adverse impact to the storm drainage system and/or will contribute to the failure of the City to meet the water quality based requirements of the CDPS/NPDES permit for discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    Hazardous substance means any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302, as amended. 
    Hazardous waste means any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR, Part 261 as amended. 
    Herbicide means a chemical substance used to destroy plants, especially weeds. 
    Illegal discharge means illicit discharge. 
    Illicit connection means any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to a storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to a CDPS/NPDES permit, discharges resulting from emergency firefighting activities and discharges further exempted by this Chapter. 
    Industrial waste means any wastes produced as a byproduct of any industrial, manufacturing, agricultural, commercial, trade or business activity, as distinguished from domestic or residential waste. 
    Mechanical fluid means any fluid used in the operation and maintenance of machinery, vehicles and any other equipment, including but not limited to lubricants, antifreeze, petroleum products, oil and fuel. 
    Minimize means to reduce and/or eliminate to the extent achievable using control measures (including best management practices) that are technologically available and economically practicable and achievable in light of best industry practice. 
    Mobile commercial cleaning means washing, steam cleaning and any other method of mobile cleaning of vehicles and/or building interiors and/or exterior building surfaces that is engaged in for commercial purposes or related to a commercial activity. 
    MSDS means the Material Safety Data Sheet for hazardous chemicals that is provided at the point of sale of such chemicals under applicable law. 
    Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or MS4 means a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins and ponds owned and operated by the City, that are designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater and that are not a combined sewer or used for collecting or conveying sanitary sewage. 
    Notice of Violation (NOV) means a written notice detailing any violations of this Chapter and any action expected of the violators. 
    NPDES means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System under Section 402 of the Clean Water Act. 
    NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to EPA authority that allows the discharge of pollutants to navigable waters of the United States or waters of the State, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or area basis. 
    Oil means any kind of oil in any form, including but not limited to petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil, synthetic oil, motor oil, cooking oil, vegetable or animal fat, grease, sludge, oil refuse and oil mixed with waste. 
    Owner means a person having sufficient interest to convey property or having a possessory interest in property. The term "owner" also includes the owner's agent. 
    Part of a larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities will be taking place at different times on different schedules under one (1) plan. An example would be a commercial development with multiple separate buildings constructed over the course of multiple construction schedules. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or its legal representatives, agents or assigns, including all federal, state and local governmental entities. 
    Pesticide means a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel or mitigate any pest. 
    Petroleum product means a product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil that is capable of being used as a fuel or lubricant in a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor oil, gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol-blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil and #1 and #2 diesel. 
    Pollutant means any substance to which water pollution may be attributable, including but not limited to dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, septic waste, sewage sludge, rubbish, garbage, solid waste, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, sediment, rock, dirt, sand, mud, soil, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste, litter, debris, yard waste, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, domestic animal waste, mechanical fluid, oil, motor oil, used oil, grease, petroleum products, antifreeze, surfactants, solvents, detergents, cleaning agents, paint, heavy metals, toxins, household hazardous waste, small quantity generator waste, hazardous substances and hazardous waste. 
    Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water that renders the water harmful, detrimental or injurious to humans, animal life, plant life, property or public health, safety or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
    Potable water means water that has been treated to federal Safe Drinking Water Act standards and/or is safe for human consumption. 
    Private drainage system means all privately owned grounds, improved surfaces, structures or systems, excluding the municipal separate storm sewer system, that contribute to or convey stormwater, including but not limited to, roofs, gutters, downspouts, lawns, driveways, pavement, roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins, ponds, draws, swales, streams and any ground surface. 
    Qualified person means a person who possesses the required certification, license and appropriate competence, skills and ability as demonstrated by sufficient education, training and/or experience to perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the regulatory requirements and generally accepted industry standards for such activity and who may, for certain duties, be required to be a professional engineer licensed in the State or as required under Section 12-25-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
    Receiving waters means creeks, streams, rivers, lakes, estuaries or other bodies of water into which surface water and/or treated or untreated waste are discharged, either naturally or in man-made systems. 
    Release means to dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, inject, leach, dispose or otherwise introduce into the Storm Drainage System. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes that consist of: (A) combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves and similar materials; and (B) noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
    Sanitary sewage means the domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the sewage treatment plant for treatment. 
    Sanitary sewer system means the system of pipes, conduits and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
    Sediment means soil, mud, dirt, gravel and rocks that have been disturbed, eroded and/or transported naturally by water, wind or gravity, and/or mechanically by any person, vehicle or equipment. 
    Septic tank waste means any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, grease interceptors, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and aerated tanks. 
    Site means the land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
    Solid waste means any garbage, rubbish, refuse, yard waste and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, construction, mining or agricultural operations or from residential, community and institutional activities. 
    Storm drainage system means all surfaces, structures and systems that contribute to or convey stormwater, including private drainage systems, to the municipal separate storm sewer system, and any nonmunicipal drain or pipe, channel or other conveyance, including natural and man-made washes and ditches for conveying water, groundwater, drainage water or unpolluted water from any source, excluding sewage and industrial wastes, to waters of the State and United States. 
    Storm Water Management Plan or SWMP means a specific individual construction plan that describes the best management practices (BMPs), as set forth in the Volume 3 of the 1999 Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual, as amended, or its successor, that will be implemented at a site to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants. The purpose of a SWMP is to identify possible pollutant sources to stormwater and to set out BMPs that, when implemented, will reduce or eliminate any possible water quality impacts. 
    Stormwater means surface runoff resulting from precipitation and other storm events. 
    Surface water means water bodies and any water temporarily residing on the surface of the ground, including oceans, lakes, reservoirs, rivers, ponds, streams, puddles, channeled flow and runoff. 
    Toxic means a substance that is harmful or poisonous according to the MSDS standards. 
    Uncontaminated means not containing harmful quantities of pollutants that exceed state or federal guidelines. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is an unintentional and temporary noncompliance because of factors beyond reasonable control. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed or inadequate treatment, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
    Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual or USDCM means Volumes 1, 2, and 3 of the 1999 Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual, as amended, or its successor, produced by the Urban Drainage and Flood Control District, with Volumes 1 and 2 providing guidance for planning and design of drainageway channels and hydraulic structures, and with Volume 3 providing guidance for the selection and design of stormwater quality best management practices. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility or the community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with any incidental groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
    Waters of the State means any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, inside the territorial limits of the State and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the State or inside the jurisdiction of the State. 
    Waters of the United States means all waters which are currently used, have been used in the past, or are susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and the flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of "Waters of the United States" at 40 C.F.R. Section 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act. 
    Wetland means any area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, tree limbs, brush, soil, rocks or debris that result from landscaping, gardening, yard maintenance or land clearing operations. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007; Ord. 10 1, 2012) 
Sec. 19-1-30. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall release or cause to be released into the storm drainage system any discharge that is not composed entirely of uncontaminated stormwater, except as allowed by Section 19-1-40. Common stormwater contaminants which cannot be released into the storm drainage system include herbicides and lawn chemicals, construction debris and wastes, wastewater, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment, dirt and toxic substances, including but not limited to substances defined above as "pollutants." 
(b)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system are prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(c)  No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic sewage or industrial waste to the storm drainage system or allow such a connection to continue. Any existing connection shall be removed. 
(d)  No person shall maliciously damage, destroy or interfere with any best management practices implemented pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007; Ord. 10 1, 2012) 
Sec. 19-1-40. - Exemptions. 
    The following nonstormwater discharges are exempt from the prohibitions established by this Chapter unless they are found by the City to be significant sources of pollutants to the MS4. Meeting exemptions identified in this Section does not imply or determine that a CDPS permit is not required. 
(1)  Intermittent uncontaminated discharge from landscape irrigation, lawn watering, or irrigation return flows. 
(2)  Uncontaminated discharge from foundation, footing or crawl space drains and sump pumps. 
(3)  Uncontaminated groundwater, including rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration into storm drains, pumped groundwater and springs. 
(4)  Diverted stream flows and natural riparian habitat or wetland flows. 
(5)  Uncontaminated discharges from the occasional noncommercial or charity washing of vehicles or occasional not-for-profit car washing events. 
(6)  De-chlorinated and uncontaminated swimming pools and hot tubs. 
(7)  Discharges approved by the authorized public agency as being necessary to protect property and/or public health and safety, such as flows from firefighting. 
(8)  Waterline flushing and other infrequent discharges from potable water sources and waterline repair work as necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(9)  Street wash water after mechanical cleanup (sweeping) has taken place. 
(10)  Discharges authorized by and in compliance with a CDPS or NPDES permit and discharges compliant with CDPHE Policies and Guidance. 
(11)  Runoff associated with normal agricultural activities, not including construction activities. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007; Ord. 10 1, 2012) 
Sec. 19-1-50. - Requirements applicable to certain dischargers. 
    Process waters generated from any industrial or commercial source, including but not limited to carpet and rug cleaners and mobile commercial cleaning operations, shall not discharge to the storm drainage system without a valid CDPS discharge permit. In the absence of a CDPS discharge permit, substances used in mobile commercial cleaning operations shall be reclaimed via wet vacuum sweeping or other type of containment before they enter the storm drainage system.(Ord. 06 1, 2007) 
Sec. 19-1-60. - Release reporting and cleanup. 
    Notwithstanding any other requirement of law, as soon as any person responsible for any premises, facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage system, the municipal separate storm sewer system or waters of the State, that person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, notification to the City Manager, containment, abatement and cleanup of such release. In the event of a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007; Ord. 10 1, 2012) 
Sec. 19-1-70. - Best management practices. 
    The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment or of a disturbed area shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from the accidental discharge of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system or waters of the State through the use of structural and nonstructural best management practices. Further, any person responsible for premises, which are, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural best management practices to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007) 
Sec. 19-1-80. - General permit requirements. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity resulting in any of the following total disturbed areas without first obtaining a permit pursuant to this Section: 
(1)  One (1) acre or more. 
(2)  Less than one (1) acre if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development or sale. 
(3)  The City shall also require a permit regardless of the size of the total disturbed area in conjunction with approval of a final subdivision plat, special use permit, building permit or expanded use permit, if the construction activities are adjacent to a watercourse or wetlands. 
(b)  Permit application. Applications for permits shall be filed on a form prescribed by the City. 
(1)  In support of the application, the applicant shall submit all information required on the City's form and any additional information requested by the City. 
(2)  The application shall be signed by all persons responsible for compliance with the permit throughout the permit's validity. 
(3)  The application shall include a Storm Water Management Plan (a "SWMP") which must (i) include an erosion and sediment control plan; (ii) include a detailed description of the best management practices to be implemented at the site; and (iii) comply with all standards set forth in this Chapter. 
(c)  Land disturbance activities shall not proceed until permit approval is received from the City. 
(d)  Waste disposal. Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste, rubbish, discarded building materials, chemicals, sanitary wastes and any other pollutants or waste on any construction site shall be controlled through the use of best management practices. Waste containers shall be provided and maintained by the owner or contractor on construction sites where there is the potential for release of waste. Uncontained waste, rubbish and other pollutants or toxins that may blow, wash or otherwise be released from the site are prohibited. 
(e)  Ready-mixed concrete, or any materials resulting from the washing or cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing or used in transporting or applying ready-mixed concrete, shall be contained in a designated area on construction sites for proper disposal. All washing-out of concrete mixer truck bowls and chutes and release of these materials into storm drains is prohibited. 
(f)  Erosion and sediment control. Best management practices shall be implemented to prevent the release of sediment from construction sites and development. Disturbed areas shall be minimized and disturbed soil, including but not limited to that on construction sites and entrances and exits therefrom, shall be managed to prevent tracking, blowing and fugitive emissions release. Any water used in cleaning operations shall not be disposed into the storm sewer system. Sediment, dirt and mud tracked onto streets shall be removed immediately by sweeping, scooping and shoveling at the owner's expense. Sediment not removed within the specified time limits as stated in a notification will be removed by the City or designated contractor. Such removal costs will be billed to the property owner and, if not paid, become a lien on the property. 
(g)  Permit issuance or denial. The permit may be denied if the applicant fails to provide the information required by this Chapter. If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the grounds for denial and of the corrective actions that must be taken to obtain a permit. 
(h)  Fees. Fees for any permit required by this Chapter shall be paid per the schedules on the permit form. No permit shall be issued until and unless the fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007; Ord. 10 1, 2012) 
Sec. 19-1-90. - Technical standards and specifications. 
    All best management practices designed to meet the requirements of this Chapter shall comply with the Urban Drainage and Flood Control District's Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual , Volume 3, as amended, or its successor. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007) 
Sec. 19-1-100. - Storm Water Management Plan. 
(a)  The Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the most recent SWMP guidance document prepared by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(b)  The area included in the SWMP shall be presumed to include the entire property area, unless the SWMP specifically excludes certain areas from disturbance. 
(c)  The SWMP must address all phases of development, including but not limited to sanitary sewer and storm drainage system construction, waterline, street and sidewalk construction, grading, installation of other utilities, and the construction of all buildings and landscaping. 
(d)  The SWMP shall be prepared under the direction of a qualified person, as defined in Section 19-1-20 of this Chapter. 
(e)  The SWMP shall provide the name, address and phone number of the project owner for purposes of correspondence and enforcement. 
(f)  The SWMP shall specifically describe and provide construction and operational details concerning all best management practices necessary to meet the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007) 
Sec. 19-1-110. - Implementation of Approved Storm Water Management Plans. 
(a)  The best management practices set forth in an approved Storm Water Management Plan shall be installed and maintained by a qualified person, as defined in Section 19-1-20 of this Chapter. 
(b)  The owner or its representative shall have the Storm Water Management Plan on site at all times during construction and shall be prepared to respond to the maintenance requirements of the best management practices required by the Storm Water Management Plan. 
(c)  The owner or its representative shall inspect all best management practices at least every fourteen (14) days, and within twenty-four (24) hours after any precipitation or snow melt event that causes surface runoff, and when specifically requested by the City. Inspections of best management practices shall be conducted by a qualified person, as defined in Section 19-1-20 of this Chapter. 
(d)  Based upon inspections performed by the owner or by authorized City personnel, modification of the Storm Water Management Plan shall be required if at any time the specified best management practices do not meet the objectives of this Chapter. 
(e)  Construction site BMPs must be implemented and maintained in operable condition at all times. 
(f)  Minor Modifications to SWMP: Based on inspections performed by the owner or by City personnel, minor modifications to the SWMP will be necessary if at any time the specified BMPs do not meet the objectives of this Chapter or equivalent or better BMPs are implemented. All minor modifications shall be implemented immediately and recorded on the owner's copy of the SWMP that shall be located on site at all times. The modified SWMP shall be made available to City personnel during inspections. Major Modifications to SWMP: Whenever there is a significant change in design, construction, operation or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the hydrology or potential for discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or receiving waters, a revised SWMP shall be submitted to the City for review and approval. 
(g)  Upon completion of a construction project and before a certificate of occupancy or other final approval of the City's Building Official shall be granted, the City shall be provided a written certification signed by a qualified person stating that the completed project is in compliance with the approved Storm Water Management Plan. All applicants are required to submit "as-built" plans for any permanent best management practices after final construction is completed. A digital copy of the as-built plans is required in current AutoCAD format. A final inspection by the City is required before the release of any performance securities may occur. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007; Ord. 10 1, 2012) 
Sec. 19-1-120. - Post-construction requirements for permanent best management practices. 
(a)  Owners that are subject to the requirements of this Chapter, specifically including but not limited to Section 19-1-80 of this Article, are required to address stormwater runoff quality through the use of permanent best management practices and shall maintain those best management practices in perpetuity and in accordance with the requirements of this Section. If the permittee can document that permanent BMPs exist as part of an original or previous subdivision or building process, no new BMPs will be required if the existing BMPs meet the requirements of this Chapter, specifically including but not limited to Section 19-1-90, Technical standards and specifications. 
(1)  All permanent best management practices of any site including, without limitation, detention basins, retention basins, ponds, inlets, outlets, outfall ditches and structures for which the owner thereof or his or her predecessor-in-interest obtained approval from the City for the construction or establishment, shall be maintained in good repair and in substantially the form, condition and nature which was represented at the time they were constructed. It is the intention of this Section that such permanent best management practices, having once been approved for construction or development, shall not be allowed to deteriorate to a condition which is in any respect inferior to the condition or state upon which the original approval for construction or development was based. For purposes of this Section, either or both the owner or tenant of the structure or real property shall be considered the responsible party. 
(2)  Maintenance of all permanent best management practices shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the City and recorded against the title of the subject property. The covenant shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the permanent best management practices. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed, detailing when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the permanent best management practices. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections by the City to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. The covenant shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection or any required maintenance by the City, or its contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this Chapter. The covenant shall be memorialized on the subdivision plat, annexation plat, development agreement or other instrument, or in a separate form acceptable to the City and shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder. 
(b)  Inspections of permanent best management practices. 
(1)  All permanent best management practices must undergo, at the minimum, periodic inspections by the City, as deemed appropriate by the City Manager, to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include, but are not limited to: the removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets, ponds and detention/retention basins, outlet structures and drainage pipes; grass cutting and vegetation removal; and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found by City inspection or otherwise must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the City Manager. The inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the permanent best management practices. 
(2)  Inspection programs may be established by the City on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the CDPS stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include but are not limited to reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices. 
(3)  Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a permanent best management practice shall make records of its installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least two (2) years. These records shall be made available to the City during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007; Ord. 10, 2009; Ord. 10 1, 2012) 
Sec. 19-1-130. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Whenever the City Manager has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any private premises, any condition that constitutes a violation of this Chapter or any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, the City Manager shall have the right to request entry upon the private premises at any reasonable time to investigate whether the owner or occupant of the premises is complying with all requirements of this Chapter or such permit. In the event that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter has been made, the City Manager is hereby empowered to seek assistance from the City Attorney and the Municipal Court in obtaining such entry. Investigation may include, but is not limited to, the following: the sampling of any suspected discharge, the taking of photographs, interviewing of any person having any knowledge related to the suspected discharge or violation and access to any and all facilities or areas within the premises that may have any effect on the discharge or alleged violation. 
(b)  Whenever the City Manager or his designee finds that any person has violated any provision of this Chapter or any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, the City Manager and all authorized personnel under the supervision of the City Manager may order compliance by verbal direction, written notice of violation, or implement other enforcement action under this Section. In addition to or in lieu of the issuance of a written notice of violation, whenever the City Manager or his designee determines that any activity is occurring that is not in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter or any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, the City Manager may order the activity stopped upon service of written notice upon the responsible owner and/or operator. The owner and/or operator shall immediately stop all activity until authorized in writing by the City Manager to proceed. If the owner and/or operator cannot be located, the notice to stop activity shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the area where the activity is occurring and shall state the nature of the violation. It shall be unlawful for any owner and/or operator to fail to comply with any order of the City Manager made pursuant to this Subsection. 
(c)  In the event that a violation of this Chapter or of any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter constitutes an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to enter upon the subject property, without giving notice, to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation. 
(d)  If the City abates a violation of this Chapter, within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs, by personal delivery or by mail to the last known address of the owner as shown in the records of the County Assessor. The notice shall be effective upon the date of mailing or personal delivery. The property owner may file a written protest to the City Manager objecting to the amount of the abatement costs within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of the notice. 
(e)  If no protest is filed, then the charges shall become due and payable on the date set forth in the notice, which date shall be after the expiration of the time in which to file a protest. 
(f)  In the event a protest is filed, a hearing considering such protest shall be held before the City Manager or his or her designee within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the written protest. The property owner shall be given notice of the hearing in the manner set forth in Subsection (4) of this Section. Hearings shall be conducted informally. Rules of civil procedure and evidence shall not determine the conduct of the hearing or the admissibility of evidence. All testimony shall be given under oath, and a tape recording or other evidence of the verbatim content of the hearing shall be made. The burden of persuasion in the hearing shall be upon the protester. The standard of proof to be utilized by the City Manager or his or her designee in making findings and decisions shall be that of competent evidence. If any charges are upheld upon completion of such hearing, then such charges shall become due and payable ten (10) days after the issuance of the decision of the City Manager or his or her designee. The City Manager's or his or her designee's decision with respect to any protest may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of Subsection (h) of this Section. 
(g)  If the amount due is not paid within ten (10) days after the decision of the City Manager or his or her designee or after the expiration of the time in which to file a protest under this Chapter, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. The assessment shall be certified by the City Treasurer to the office of the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as the collection of general property taxes. 
(h)  The City Manager may order City representatives to terminate an illicit connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Any expense related to such action by the City or its contractors or agents shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner. If the City terminates an illicit connection, within thirty (30) days after such termination, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of termination, including administrative costs, by personal delivery or by mail to the last known address of the owner as shown in the records of the County Assessor. The notice shall be effective upon the date of mailing or personal delivery. If the property owner fails to pay such cost within the time period stated in the notice, which time period shall not be less than fifteen (15) days after the effective date of the notice, then the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property in the amount of the assessment. The assessment shall be certified by the City Treasurer to the office of the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as the collection of general property taxes. 
(i)  Where necessary or desirable for the reasonable implementation of this Chapter, the City Manager may, by written notice, order any owner of a construction site or subdivision development to post surety, in a form approved by the City Attorney and not to exceed a value determined by the City Manager to be reasonably necessary to achieve consistent compliance with this Chapter. The City may deny approval of any building permit, subdivision plat, site development plan or any other City permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy, until such surety has been filed with the City. 
(j)  Except as set forth in Subsections (d) and (f) with respect to protests of an amount of abatement costs, any person wishing to appeal any decision, action, assessment, determination or order made and issued by the City Manager or his or her designee in interpreting, enforcing or implementing the provisions of this Chapter shall file an appeal to the City Board of Adjustment and Appeals within thirty (30) days of the decision, action, assessment, determination or order of the City Manager. Any such appeal shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of Section 16-3-30 of this Code. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007; Ord. 10 1, 2012) 
Sec. 19-1-140. - Penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful and an offense for any person to do or perform, or cause or permit to be done or performed, any act which is prohibited or declared to be unlawful by this Chapter or to fail to do or perform, or cause or permit a failure to do or perform, any act required by this Chapter. Further, it is unlawful and an offense for an owner to fail to comply with the requirements of any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter or any order of the City Manager made pursuant to the provisions of Section 19-1-130 above. Violators shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Section 1-4-20 of this Code. Each day or part of a day during which any violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, or in violation of the provisions of any permit or order issued under this Chapter, is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare and is declared and deemed a public nuisance. Any court of competent jurisdiction may enjoin violations of this Chapter upon proof of such violations. If any person violates any provision of this Chapter or the orders or permits issued hereunder, or discharges into the storm drainage system or into state waters contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, the City may commence an action in a court of record for appropriate legal and equitable relief. In such action, the City may recover from the defendant reasonable attorney fees, court costs, deposition and discovery costs, expert witness fees, and other expenses of investigation, enforcement action, administrative hearings, and litigation, if the City prevails in the action or settles at the request of the defendant. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage to the City or to the storm drainage system occasioned by such violation. 
(c)  Any person who knowingly makes, authorizes, solicits, aids or attempts to make any false statement, representation or certification in any hearing, or in any permit application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this Chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, bypasses or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device, testing method or testing samples permitted or required under this Chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum fine authorized in Section 1-4-20 of this Code per day for each violation or imprisonment not to exceed one (1) year, or both. 
(d)  The remedies provided for in this Chapter are cumulative and the exercise of any one (1) or more remedies shall not prejudice any other remedies that may otherwise be pursued for a violation of this Chapter or any order or permit issued under this Chapter. The remedies listed in this Chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007; Ord. 10 7, 2013) 
Sec. 19-1-150. - Upset condition. 
(a)  An upset condition determination constitutes an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with this Chapter, or with any order or permit issued under this Chapter, when the terms of this Chapter or any order or permit issued under this Chapter are met. An owner who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset must demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and that the causes of the upset can be identified; 
(2)  The facility or operation was at the time being properly operated; 
(3)  Notice of the upset was submitted as required in Section 19-1-60; and 
(4)  Remedial measures were complied with as required. 
(b)  Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding the one seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset has the burden of proof. 
(Ord. 06 1, 2007) 
APPENDIX 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Appendix A  Fee Schedule 
Appendix B  Annexations 
Appendix C  Street Name Changes 
Appendix D  Vacations of Streets and Alleys 
Appendix E  Vacation of Easements and Other City-Owned lands 
Appendix F  Sale of City Properties 
Appendix G  Resolution Log 
Appendix H  Ordinance Log 
APPENDIX A - FEE SCHEDULE 
    NOTE : In the event of a conflict between the fees, costs, deposits, occupation taxes and other charges listed in this Appendix A and the text of any individual section of the Code, the provisions of the applicable section of the Code shall control. 
Municipal Code-Based Fees, Costs and Deposits Code Section Fee/Charge Amount 2-4-80 Court costs - trial to the Court / trial by Jury Up to $15.00 / up to $45.00 2-4-80 Jury trial fee (Defendant) $25.00 2-4-80 Detention - rate of satisfaction of fine $10.00/day of 24 hours 2-4-80 Witness fees $5.00/day 2-4-120 Appeals fee, bond Double the judgment/not less than $50.00/not more than $2.00/day of sentence 2-4-130 Jury fees $5.00 if called 
$10.00 if selected 6-1-50 Business license fee $25.00 6-2-150 Liquor License application fee New license - $500.00 
License renewal - 50.00 
Modification of premises - 100.00 
Transfer of ownership - 500.00 
Transfer of location - 500.00 
Change of corporate structure - 100.00 
Special events permit (malt, vinous, spirituous liquors) - 25.00 
Special events permit (malt beverage) - 10.00 
Temporary permit - 100.00 
Manager's registration - 75.00 
Late renewal - 500.00 6-2-200 Annual occupation tax for liquor license Class A Operators - $1,000.00 
Class B Operators - 200.00 
Class C Operators - 1,000.00 
Class D Operators - 800.00 
Class E Operators - 1,000.00 
Class F Operators - 750.00 
Class G Operators - 750.00 
Class H Operators - 750.00 
Class I Operators - 500.00 6-3-60 Security guard business license application fee Initial - $100.00 
Renewal - 50.00 Additional fees 
1 through 9 security guards - 50.00 
10 through 19 security guards - 100.00 
20 or more security guards - 150.00 6-4-90 Security alarm system permit fee $25.00 6-4-100 False alarm response service charge schedule 1st and 2nd responses - no charge 
3rd response - $100.00 
4th and each successive 
response - $200.00 6-4-130 Security alarm system permit reinstatement fee $100.00 7-5-310 Dog tag registration fee $10.00 per dog 11-2-90 Public right-of-way permit fee See Construction and Excavation Standards 11-2-120 Performance bonds and letters of credit Total cost of construction or $5,000.00, whichever is greater 11-5-40 Petition for vacation $100.00 plus $10,000.00 deposit 15-1-30 Annexation fee $300.00 16-2-30 Board of Adjustment applications/appeals fee $200.00 16-2-30 Application for rezoning/amendment to zoning map fee $300.00 plus $100.00 for >1 unit created by rezoning 16-2-30 Amendment to/construction within floodplain boundaries fee $300.00 plus $50.00/lot or unit 16-2-30 Rezoning deposit $5,000.00 plus $100.00/each unit of increased density 16-3-70 Application for variance fee $200.00 16-3-90 Land development account for review services $2,000.00 initial deposit 16-14-90 License Application Fee 
Annual License Renewal Fee $750.00 
$500.00 16-14-100 Building permit application fees for review services $2,000.00 initial deposit 16-16-70 Temporary uses and structures fee $20.00 application and review fees 16-17-90 Development permit application fees for review services $3,000.00 initial deposit 16-18-50 Conditional use permit application fees for review services Fee - $500.00 
Initial deposit - $3,000.00 16-19-60 Vested property rights application fee/review services fee Application fee - $200.00 
Initial deposit - $2,000.00 16-20-50 Nonprofit use of property fee Application fee - $300.00 
Review services initial deposit - $5,000.00 16-21-60 Major events permit application Application fee - $300.00 16-21-80 Major events permit review Review services initial deposit - $5,000.00 17-3-20 Subdivision preliminary plat submittal fee $300.00 plus $100.00 per lot 17-3-20 Subdivision approval/plat amendments review services fee $5,000.00 initial deposit plus $200.00 per lot 17-3-20 County filing fee $10.00 per page 17-3-30 Land dedication or cash payment fee 7.5% of the gross area of all land being subdivided or fair market value payment 17-3-30 Development fee $5,500.00 per lot 17-3-330 Minor subdivision, minor plat amendment application fee $150.00 plus escrow deposit (see 17-3-20) and land dedication requirements (see 17-3-30) 17-6-30 Administrative review fee Application fee - $150.00 
Escrow deposit - $3,000.00 18-1-20(11) Permit, plan review and elevator inspection fees Tables 1A - 1-E below: Table 1-A
Building Permit Fees Total Valuation Fees $1.00 to $2,000.00 $20.00 $2,001.00 and up 1% of valuation Table 1-B
Electrical Permit Fees For Nonresidential Buildings and Residential Alteration or Additions Project Valuation Fees Up to $300.00 $50.00 To $2,000.00 $55.00 To $50,000.00 $21.75 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of the total valuation To $500,000.00 $20.50 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of the total valuation plus $57.50 Over $500,000.00 $19.50 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of the total valuation plus $632.50 Table 1-C Electrical Permit Fees For New Residential Buildings Building Area Fees Not more than 1,000 sq. ft. $51.75 Over 1,000 sq. ft. and not more than 1,500 sq. ft. $69.00 Over 1,500 sq. ft. and not more than 2,000 sq. ft. $86.25 Over 2,000 sq. ft. $4.60 per 100 sq. ft. in excess of 2,000 sq. ft. Table 1-D
Plan Review Fees Project Type Fees Nonresidential Structures Including: Churches, Schools, Nonprofit Recreational and Commercial Facilities Minimum $1,500.00 for first 10 hours - additional plan review at $150.00 per hour New Home/Scrape and Rebuild - more than 50% of Existing Square Footage $900.00 Additions/Scrape and Rebuild - less than 50% of Existing Square Footage $450.00 Remodel With No New Square Footage $250.00 Accessory and Recreational Structures $200.00 18-1-20(11) Additional Plan Review $150.00 per hour, minimum 1 hour Investigation Fee Same fee as building permit fee or $150.00, whichever is more Reinspection Fee $100.00 Duplicate Inspection Record Card $50.00 Drainage Review $150.00 per hour, minimum 1 hour Engineering Review - for review of all lots located within the designated 100-year floodplain and for review of drainage plans as required for all new structures and additions that increase square footage by more than 50% $150.00 per hour, minimum 1 hour Table 1-E
Elevator Inspection Fees Annual Certificates of Inspection Fees For each elevator $250.00 For each escalator or moving walk $250.00 For each dumbwaiter $250.00 18-11-20 Service expansion fee Building - $.90 per square foot 
Garage/pool - $.40 per square foot 
Tennis courts - $.10 per square foot  
(Ord. 7 1, 2003; Ord. 9 1, 2003; Ord. 7 37, 2004; Ord. 8, 2004; Ord. 9 1, 2004; Ord. 08 1, 2005; Ord. 06 1, 2006; Ord. 01, 2008; Ord. 04 1, 2008; Ord. 20 1, 2008; Ord. 15, 2010; Ord. 21 11, 2010; Ord. 23 1, 2010; Res. 4 2, 2015 ) 
APPENDIX B - ANNEXATIONS 
The following described properties are hereby annexed according to City Charter and the laws of the State of Colorado, to the City: 
The Northeast Quarter of Section One, Township Five South, Range Sixty-eight West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado. (Ord. 1, Series of 1946) 
The Northwest Quarter and the North Half of the Southwest Quarter and the Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter and the East Half of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter and the North Half of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section Six, Township Five South, Range Sixty-seven West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado. (Ord. 11, Series of 1946) 
The Northwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado. (Ord. 1, Series of 1949) 
Blocks Fourteen-C (14C), Fifteen-B (15B), Sixteen-A (16A), Seventeen-F (17F), Eighteen-E (18E), and Nineteen-D (19D) inclusive, Denver University Addition Annex, being a portion of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado. (Ord. 1, Series of 1953) 
The North One-Half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, Arapahoe County, Colorado. (Ord. 16, Series of 1955) 
That part of the North Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, 6th Principal Meridian, formerly described as Block 16, Denver University Addition, now vacated and including the vacated alley in said Block, excepting that portion and rights in connection therewith conveyed to the City and County of Denver by deed recorded August 26, 1938, in Book 406, Page 503, Arapahoe County records; that portion of the South Half of East Nassau, formerly known as College Avenue, between South Colorado Boulevard and South Albion Street, formerly known as Edgar Street, now vacated by act of Arapahoe County Commissioners on December 13, 1949, and recorded in Book 658, Page 60, Arapahoe County records; that part of South Albion Street, formerly known as Edgar Street, from the centerline of what was formerly East Nassau Avenue (formerly known as College Avenue) to the North right-of-way line of the High Line Canal, now vacated by act of Arapahoe County Commissioners, on October 9, 1950, and recorded in Book 694, Page 122, Arapahoe County records, all of the foregoing being in the County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado. (Ord. 6, Series of 1958) 
The North One-Half of the North One-Half of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West, 6th Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado. (Ord. 5, Series of 1959) 
Mansfield Heights Filing No. One and parcels of land excepted from said subdivision, but lying contiguous to or within the external boundaries of said Mansfield Heights Filing No. One which said land is more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the center corner of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, 6th P.M., being the point of intersection of the centerlines of Mansfield Avenue and South Dahlia Street, the point of beginning. Thence South along the centerline of South Dahlia Street, 1320.31 feet, more or less, to the point of intersection with the centerline of Oxford Avenue; thence West along the centerline of Oxford Avenue, 645.57 feet, more or less, to the point of intersection of the centerline of Oxford Avenue, Oxford Place and South Cherry Street; thence South along the centerline of Oxford Place 68.70 feet; thence Southwesterly along the centerline of Oxford Place, on a curve to the right with a radius of 130 feet, a distance of 161.09 feet; thence Southwesterly along the centerline of Oxford Place, on a tangent to said curve, 68.90 feet to a point; thence at a right angle to the right a distance of 30 feet to the Southwest corner of Lot 12, Block 3, Mansfield Heights Filing No. One; thence North along the West boundary of Mansfield Heights Filing No. One as extended past the tracts excepted from said Mansfield Heights Filing No. One to the Northwest corner of Lot 22, Block 3, Mansfield Heights Filing No. One, which point is 130.02 feet, more or less, South of the centerline of Mansfield Avenue. Thence East along the North line of said Lot 22, Block 3, Mansfield Heights Filing No. One, as extended, to the centerline of South Cherry Street, thence North along the centerline of South Cherry Street to the point of intersection with the centerline of Mansfield Avenue; thence East along the centerline of Mansfield Avenue 650.57 feet, more or less to the point of beginning, all located in the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado. (Ord. 7, Series of 1960) 
Cherryridge, according to the plat thereof filed February 24, 1954 and bearing Reception No. 521108, Plat Book 11 at Page 34, in the records of the Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County, Colorado, said subdivision being a part of the South One-Half of the Northwest Quarter of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West, 6th P.M. Arapahoe County, Colorado. (Ord. 8, Series of 1960) 
The South One-Half of the Northeast Quarter of Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, lying East of the Highline Ditch; Plot 33, Clark Colony together with that portion of Union Street and Holly Street lying adjacent thereto; the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter, Section 8, Township 5 South, Range 67 West; and Charlou Park Addition, a subdivision as shown on the map recorded April 18, 1955, under Reception No. 553719 in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County. (Ord. 11, Series of 1960) 
Charlou Park Second Addition as shown on the recorded plat thereof in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County. (Ord. 2, Series of 1961) 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of South Bellaire Street and the centerline of Mansfield Avenue; thence Easterly along said centerline of Mansfield Avenue to the centerline of South Cherry Street; thence Southerly along said centerline of South Cherry Street to the North line of Lot 22, Block 3, Mansfield Heights - Filing No. One, as extended; thence Westerly along said North line of Lot 22 to the West boundary of Mansfield Heights - Filing No. One; thence Southerly along the said West boundary, as extended past the tracts excepted from said Mansfield Heights - Filing No. One to the Southwest corner of Lot 12, Block 3, Mansfield Heights - Filing No. One; thence on a line at 90 to the centerline of Oxford Place, a distance of 30 feet to said centerline; thence Southwesterly, Westerly and Northwesterly along said centerline of Oxford Place to the centerline of South Bellaire Street, thence Northerly along said centerline of South Bellaire Street to the centerline of Mansfield Avenue and the point of beginning, except Lots 3 through 8, inclusive, Block 5 Mansfield Heights Filing No. Two. (Ord. 5, Series of 1962) 
A tract or parcel of land in the Northeast Quarter of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th P.M. in Arapahoe County, Colorado, said tract or parcel being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the Northeast corner of said Section 11, thence Southerly along the East line of said Section 11 a distance of 495.20 feet to a point, thence West and parallel with the North line of said Section 11 a distance of 60 feet to a point on the Westerly right-of-way line of South University Boulevard; thence North 8756'30" West a distance of 15 feet; thence along the arc of a curve to the right, having a radius of 352.61 feet, a distance of 335.38 feet (the chord of this arc bears N 5824'45" West a distance of 322.9 feet); thence North 319'45" West a distance of 182.8 feet; thence along the arc of a curve to the left having a radius of 262.63 feet, a distance of 268.14 feet to the South line of East Quincy Avenue (the chord of this arc bears N 6024'45" West a distance of 256.65 feet); thence North and parallel with the East line of said Section 11, 30 feet to the North line of said Section 11, thence Easterly along the North line of said Section 11 to the point of beginning. (Ord. 9, Series of 1964) 
A tract or parcel of land in the Northeast Quarter of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West, of the 6th P.M. in Arapahoe County, Colorado, said tract or parcel being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the Northeast corner of said Section 11, thence Southerly along the East line of said Section 11 a distance of 495.20 feet to a point, thence West and parallel with the North line of said Section 11 a distance of 30 feet to the true point of beginning, thence West and parallel with the North line of said Section 11 a distance of 30 feet to a point on the Westerly right-of-way line of South University Boulevard, thence N 8756'30" West a distance of 15 feet, thence along the arc of a curve to the right, having a radius of 352.61 feet, a distance of 335.38 feet (the chord of this arc bears N 5824'45" West a distance of 322.9 feet), thence N 319'45" West a distance of 182.8 feet, thence along the arc of a curve to the left having a radius of 262.63 feet, a distance of 268.14 feet to the South line of East Quincy Avenue (the chord of this arc bears N 6024'45" West a distance of 256.65 feet), thence North and parallel with the East line of said Section 11, 30 feet to the North line of said Section 11, thence Westerly along the North line of said Section 11, 666.3 feet more or less to the West line of the East One-Half of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 11, thence South along the West line of the East One-Half of said Section 11, 2636.5 feet to the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 11, thence East along said South line 666.0 feet to a point 670 feet West of the East line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 11, thence North parallel to the East line of said Northeast Quarter 1101 feet, thence East parallel to the North line of said Northeast Quarter 320 feet, thence North parallel to the East line of said Northeast Quarter 340 feet, thence East parallel to the North line of said Northeast Quarter 320 feet, to a point 30 feet West of the East line of said Northeast Quarter, thence North parallel to the East line of said Northeast Quarter 699.3 feet to the true point of beginning. (Ord. 4, Series of 1967) 
Beginning at a point on the South line of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the 6th Principal Meridian 686 feet East of the Southwest corner of said Section 6, thence North parallel to the West line of said Section 6 for a distance of 990 feet more or less, said course being on the present City limits of Cherry Hills Village, thence East along the South line of Block 19D of Denver University Addition Annex 238 feet, thence North along the East line of said Block 19D and also Block 14C 660 feet, thence West along the North line of Blocks 14C and 15B to the centerline of former South Albion Street now vacated 598 feet, thence North along the centerline of former South Albion Street 330 feet to the centerline of former East Nassau Avenue, thence West along said centerline 326 feet to the centerline of South Colorado Boulevard, thence North along the centerline of South Colorado Boulevard 660 feet more or less to the Northwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, thence East along the North line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 6, 944 feet more or less to the centerline of South Bellaire Street, thence South along said centerline 2730 feet, thence East along the projected South line and the South line of Lot 2, Block 5, Mansfield Heights, Filing No. 2, 150.39 feet, thence South along the East line of Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of said Block 6, 798 feet, thence West along the South line of said Lot 8 and the South line extended 150.39 feet to the centerline of South Bellaire Street, thence South along the centerline of South Bellaire Street 25.82 feet, thence along the arc of a curve to the left, the radius of said curve being 79.68 feet for a distance of 58.19 feet, thence on a tangent to said curve 107.89 feet, thence along the arc of a curve to the left, the radius of said curve being 139.08 feet for a distance of 116.90 feet, thence tangent to said curve also being the centerline of East Oxford Place for a distance of 426.46 feet, thence along the arc of a curve to the left, the radius of said curve being 437.25 feet, for a distance of 145.0 feet, thence tangent to said curve 68.90 feet, thence along the arc of a curve to the left, the radius of said curve being 130.0 feet for a distance of 161.09 feet, thence North along the centerline of South Cherry Street 68.70 feet, thence on an angle 8002'15" to the right for a distance of 645.57 feet to the East line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 6, thence North along the East line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 6, 1320.31 feet to the center of said Section 6, thence East along the North line of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 6, 2642.16 feet to the Northeast corner of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 6, thence North along the East line of said Section 6, 10.88 feet to the centerline of Happy Canyon Road, thence South 4435'35" East 3708.45 feet to the North Quarter corner of Section 8, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, thence South on the West line of the Northeast Quarter of Section 8, Township 5 South, Range 67 West to the center of said Section 8, thence West along the South line of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 8 2649.4 feet to the centerline of South Holly Street, thence North along the centerline of South Holly Street 2645.31 feet to the centerline of East Quincy Avenue, thence West along the centerline of East Quincy Avenue 4448.16 feet to the point of beginning. (Ord. 8, Series of 1967) 
Beginning at the Northwest corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the 6th P.M. Thence Northerly 8920'30" East, 2496.94 feet to the Northeast corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 7. 
Thence Southerly 008'15" East, 232.92 feet along the East line of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 7 to a point on the Southerly right-of-way line of the Highline Canal. 
The following courses and distances are along the Southerly and Westerly line of said Highline Canal: 
Thence Southeasterly 155.80 feet along the arc of a curve to a point tangent, said arc being concave to the Northeast and having a radius of 337.06 feet and being subtended by a chord which bears South 6817'40.5" East, 154.42 feet; 
Thence South 8132'10" East, 451.30 feet to a point of curve to the right; 
Thence Southeasterly 72.37 feet along the arc of said curve to the right to a point tangent; said arc having a radius of 47.88 feet and a delta angle of 8636'; 
Thence South 503'50" West, 291.20 feet to a point of curve to the left; 
Thence Southeasterly 413.54 feet along the arc of a curve to the left to a point tangent, said arc having a delta angle of 5144' and a radius of 458.00 feet; 
Thence South 4640'10" East, 273.10 feet to a point of curve to the right; 
Thence Southerly 56.79 feet along the arc of a curve to the right, to a point on the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 7, said arc having a radius of 47.94 feet; 
Thence leaving the Westerly bank of said Highline Canal; 
Thence South 8919'30" West, 160.30 feet along the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 7 to a point on the Northerly right-of-way line of said Highline Canal; 
Thence North 7516'10" West, 417.57 feet along the Northerly right-of-way line of said Highline Canal to a point of curve to the left; 
Thence Southwesterly 397 feet along the arc of a curve to the left to a point on the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 7, said arc having a radius of 349.40 feet and being subtended by a chord bearing South 7210'13" West, 376.09 feet, said arc being on the North line of said Highline Canal. 
Thence South 8919'30" West, 32.59 feet along the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 7 to the center of said Section 7; 
Thence South 008'15" East, 46.06 feet along the East line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 7 to a point on the Northerly right-of-way line of said Highline Canal; 
The following courses and distances are along the North line of said Highline Canal: 
Thence Southwesterly, 156.52 feet along the arc of a curve concave to the Southeast, said arc having a radius of 349.40 feet and being subtended by a chord which bears South 1728'02.5" West, 155.26 feet; 
Thence South 437'50" West, 71.90 feet to a point of curve to the right; 
Thence Southwesterly 108.11 feet along the arc of a curve to the right to a point tangent, said arc having a radius of 78.59 feet and a delta angle of 7849'; 
Thence South 8326'50' West, 400.40 feet to a point of curve left; 
Thence Southwesterly 325.95 feet along the arc of a curve to the left, to a point tangent said arc having a radius of 208.51 feet and a delta angle of 8934'; 
Thence South 607'10" East, 247 feet to a point of curve to the right; 
Thence Southwesterly 128.37 feet along the arc of curve to the right to a point tangent, said arc having a radius of 55.64 feet and a delta angle of 13212'; 
Thence North 5355'10" West, 321.50 feet to a point of curve left; 
Thence Northwesterly 274.88 feet along the arc of a curve to the left, said arc having a radius of 280.41 feet and a delta angle of 5610', to a point of compound curve; 
Thence Southwesterly 146.14 feet along the arc of a curve to the left, said arc having a radius of 457.97 feet and a delta angle of 1817'; 
Leaving the Northwesterly right-of-way line of said Highline Canal; 
Thence South 8924'20" West, 1088.06 feet to a point on the West line of said Section 7. 
Thence North 05'30" East, 735.95 feet along the West line of said Section 7 to the West Quarter corner thereof; 
Thence North 8344'10" West, 215.81 feet; 
Thence North 6600' West, 340.88 feet; 
Thence North 5631' West, 455.71 feet; 
Thence North 4157' West, 617.49 feet to a point on the West line of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th P.M.; 
Thence North 002'15" East along the West line of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 12 to the Northwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 12; 
Thence Easterly along the North line of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 12 to the Northeast corner thereof, the point of beginning. (Ord. 11, Series of 1967) 
Commencing at the Southwest corner of Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, thence East along the South line of Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West to the Southeast corner of said Section 7, thence along the East line of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 7 also along the present City limits of the City of Cherry Hills Village to a point thirty feet East of the Southeast corner of Tract 33 in a subdivision of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 7, thence West to the Southwest corner of said Tract 33, thence North along the West line of said Tract 33 and extended West line to the South line of the Northeast Quarter of Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, thence West along said South line to a point on the Easterly right-of-way line of the High Line Canal, thence North and West along said Easterly right-of-way line to the West line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 7, thence South along said West line to the Southerly right-of-way line of the High Line Canal, thence Southeasterly along the Southerly and Westerly right-of-way line of the High Line Canal to the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 7, thence S 8919'30" West, 160.3 feet along the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 7 to a point on the Northerly right-of-way line of the High Line Canal, thence Westerly and Southerly along said Canal right-of-way to a point on the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 7, thence South 8919'30" West 32.59 feet along the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 7 to the center of said Section 7, thence S 008'15" East 46.06 feet along the East line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 7 to a point on the Northerly right-of-way line of the High Line Canal, the following courses and distances are along the North line of said High Line Canal, thence Southwesterly, 156.52 feet along the arc of a curve concave to the Southeast, said arc having a radius of 349.40 feet and being subtended by a chord which bears S 1728'02.5" West, 155.26 feet, thence S 437'50" West, 71.90 feet to a point of curve to the right, thence Southwesterly, 108.11 feet along the arc of a curve to the right to a point tangent, said arc having a radius of 78.59 feet and a delta angle of 7849', thence S 8326'50" West, 400.40 feet to a point of curve to the left, thence Southwesterly 325.95 feet along the arc of a curve to the left, to a point tangent said arc having a radius of 208.51 feet and a delta angle of 8934' thence S 607'10" East, 247 feet to a point of curve to the right, thence Southwesterly 128.37 feet along the arc of a curve to the right to a point tangent, said arc having a radius of 55.64 feet and a delta angle of 13212", thence N 5355'10" West, 321.50 feet to a point of curve to the left, thence Northwesterly 274.88 feet along the arc of a curve to the left, said arc having a radius of 280.41 feet and a delta angle of 5610' to a point of compound curve, thence Southwesterly 146.14 feet along the arc of a curve to the left, said arc having a radius of 457.97 feet and a delta angle of 1817', leaving the Northwesterly right-of-way line of said High Line Canal, thence S 8924'20" West, 1088.06 feet to a point on the West line of said Section 7, thence South along the West line of said Section 7 to the point of beginning. (Ord. 21, Series of 1967) 
Commencing at the Southwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th Principal Meridian also being a point on the present City limits of the City of Cherry Hills Village, thence East along the South line of Sections 11 and 12 in Township 5 South, Range 68 West to the Southeast corner of said Section 12, thence North along the East line of said Section 12 to a point on the present City limits of the City of Cherry Hills Village, thence North to the East Quarter corner of said Section 12, thence West along the North line of the South One-Half of said Section 12 to the Southeast corner of Cherryridge also being a point on the present City limits of the City of Cherry Hills Village, thence continuing West to the Southwest corner of Cherryridge, leaving the present City limits at this point and continuing West to the West Quarter corner of said Section 12, thence South along the East line of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West (being the West line of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West) to the Southeast corner of the North One-Half of the North One-Half of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 11, leaving the present City limit at this point and continuing South to the Southeast corner of the North One-Half of the South One-Half of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West, thence West along the South line of the North One-Half of the South One-Half of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 11 to the West line of the East One-Half of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 11, thence South along the West line of the East One-Half of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 11 also being along the present City limits of the City of Cherry Hills Village to the point of beginning. (Ord. 22, Series of 1967) 
The South One-Half of the North One-Half and the North One-Half of the South One-Half of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th P.M., Arapahoe County, Colorado, an unincorporated area of approximately 20 acres entirely contained within the boundaries of the City which has been entirely surrounded by said City for more than three years. (Ord. 3, Series of 1971) 
The South One-Half of the North One-Half of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter and the North One-Half of the South One-Half of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter, all in Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th P.M., Arapahoe County, Colorado, an unincorporated area of approximately 20 acres entirely contained within the boundaries of the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, which has been entirely surrounded by said City for more than three years. (Ord. 6, Series of 1971) 
Beginning at a point on the South line of the Northwest Quarter of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, said point being 1,963.9 feet West of the Southeast corner of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 12, said point also being the Southeast corner of Lot 3, Todd's Estates, thence North and parallel to the West line of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 12, 660.0 feet, more or less, being the Northeast corner of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 12, thence West 477.0 feet, more or less, to a point on the East line, extended southerly, of Green's East Broadway Heights, thence North 279.94 feet, more or less, to the Northeast corner of Lot 15, Block 8, Green's East Broadway Heights, thence West 183.0 feet, more or less, to the West line of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 12, thence South along the West line of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 12 to the South line of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 12, thence East along the South line of the Northwest Quarter of said Section 12 to the point of beginning, is an unincorporated area of approximately 11.25 acres entirely contained within the boundaries of the City which has been entirely surrounded by said City for more than three years. (Ord. 6, Series of 1973) 
Commencing at the East Quarter corner of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, thence North 8344'10" West, 215.81 feet, thence North 6600' West, 340.88 feet, thence North 5631' West, 455.71 feet, thence North 4157' West 617.49 feet to a point on the West line of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 12, thence North 002'15" East along the West line of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 12 to the Northwest corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 12, thence West along the South line of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 12 to the Southwest corner of the Northwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 12, thence South along the West line of the Southwest Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 12 to the Southwest corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 12, thence East along the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 12 to the point of beginning, is an unincorporated area of approximately 53 acres entirely contained within the boundaries of the City which has been entirely surrounded by said City for more than three years. (Ord. 7, Series of 1973) 
The East 44 feet of the West 686 feet of the South 990 feet of the South One-Half Southwest Quarter, Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, 6th Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado. (Ord. 11, Series of 1973) 
APPENDIX C - STREET NAME CHANGES 
The names of the streets, avenues or roads, or portions thereof, hereinafter described and situated in the City, are hereby changed as follows: 
New Name Designation Cherry Lane Drive All that portion of South Clermont Street between Cherry Lane Drive and East Mansfield Avenue shall henceforth be known as Cherry Lane Drive. All that portion of East Jefferson Avenue between Cherry Lane Drive and South Dahlia Street shall henceforth be known as Cherry Lane Drive. All that portion of East Kenyon Road between Cherry Lane Drive and South Dahlia Street shall henceforth be known as Cherry Lane Drive. Crest Road All that portion of South Dexter Street between East Hampden Avenue and a point seventy-five (75) feet south of the south boundary of East Kenyon Road shall henceforth be known as Crest Road. (Ord. 7, Series of 1953) Lynn Road All that portion of Orchard Avenue, situate in Cherry Hills Subdivision and all that portion of Circle Road, situate in said subdivision be and the same are hereby changed to Lynn Road, and said Orchard Avenue and said Circle Road, which connects with said Orchard Avenue, shall henceforth be known and designated by the name Lynn Road. (Ord. 6, Series of 1948) Middle Road All that portion of East Jefferson Avenue between South Albion Street and Parkway Drive shall henceforth be known as Middle Road. (Ord. 7, Series of 1953) Nassau Avenue All that part of said Rancho Road running east and west in Cherry Hills Village as shown by said plat, be and the same is hereby changed to Nassau Avenue. (Ord. 3, Series of 1949) Parkway Drive All that portion of South Clermont Street between East Hampden Avenue and Cherry Lane Drive shall henceforth be known as Parkway Drive. All that portion of South Bellaire Street between Cherry Lane Drive and East Mansfield Avenue shall henceforth be known as Parkway Drive. (Ord. 7, Series of 1953) South Emerson Street All that part of Rancho Road running north and south as shown by the plat of Cherry Hills Rancho, Second Amended Filing, be and the same is hereby changed to South Emerson Street. (Ord. 3, Series of 1949) Sunset Drive All of the roads within Country Homes Land Company Addition shall henceforth be known as Sunset Drive. Viking Drive All of Cherry Moor Lane and all of the roadways within Viking Acres and all the roadways within Harper Subdivision No. 2 shall henceforth be known as Viking Drive. (Ord. 7, Series of 1953) (Subdivision) A street name change in the Cherry Vale Meadows Subdivision (Res. 1, 1988) East Radcliff Avenue A change in the spelling of the street (Res. 6, 1988)  
APPENDIX D - VACATIONS OF STREETS AND ALLEYS 
The following described portions of public streets and alleys are hereby declared and ordained to be vacated and any interest of the City, if any such interest exists, is hereby deemed to be relinquished: 
The north ten (10) feet and the south ten (10) feet of East Layton Avenue between South Clarkson Street and South Franklin Street. 
East Kenyon Avenue between South Corona Street and South Franklin Street. 
East Union Avenue between South Clarkson Street and South Franklin Street. 
East Chenango Avenue between South Clarkson Street and South Race Street. 
South Ogden Street between East Quincy Avenue and East Stanford Avenue. 
South Ogden Street between East Layton Avenue and East Chenango Avenue. 
South Downing Street between East Layton Avenue and East Chenango Avenue. 
South Lafayette Street between East Jefferson Avenue and East Kenyon Avenue. 
South Lafayette Street between East Layton Avenue and East Chenango Avenue. 
South Franklin Street between East Jefferson Avenue and East Kenyon Avenue. 
South Marion Street between East Jefferson Avenue and East Kenyon Avenue. (Ord. 13, Series of 1946) 
All that portion of Pine Avenue lying between the west line of Colorado Boulevard and the east line of Thalia Street. 
All of the alley lying between East Kenyon Avenue and East Lehigh Avenue in Block Twelve, South University Park, Cherry Hills Village. 
All that portion of the westerly side of South Downing Street between East Union Avenue and East Layton Avenue lying west of the west line of South Downing Street between East Tufts Avenue and East Union Avenue as extended. 
That part of South Williams Street between East Quincy Avenue and East Radcliffe Avenue. 
That part of East Radcliffe Avenue between South Williams Street and South High Street. (Ord. 3, Series of 1948) 
All that part of Rancho Road as shown by the plat of Cherry Hills Rancho, Second Amended Filing, lying between Lots 10 and 11, and all that part of said Rancho Road lying between Lots 6, 7 and 8 as shown by said plat. (Ord. 3, Series of 1949) 
All that portion of Rancho Road lying between Lots 12 and 13, Cherry Hills Rancho Second Amended Filing. 
All that portion of Lehigh Avenue west of South Colorado Boulevard. (Ord. 2, Series of 1950) 
All that portion of South Williams Street between East Radcliffe Avenue and East Tufts Avenue. 
All that portion of South Emerson Street between East Radcliffe Avenue and East Stanford Avenue. 
All that portion of South High Street between East Radcliffe Avenue and East Tufts Avenue. 
All of the alleys in Blocks 4, 5, 12 and 13, South University Place Second Filing. 
All of Thalia Street between East Mansfield Avenue and East Quincy Avenue. 
All of East Oxford Street between South Colorado Boulevard and South Monroe Street as extended; and 
All of East Princeton between South Colorado Boulevard and South Monroe Street as extended. (Ord. 5, Series of 1950) 
All of the alleys in Blocks 12, 13 and 14, and all of the alley in the south one-half (S1/2) of Block 11, South University Place Annex. 
All that part of South Dexter Street between East Kenyon Avenue and East Mansfield Avenue; and 
All that part of East Lehigh Avenue between South Cherry Street and South Dahlia Street. (Ord. 8, Series of 1950) 
All of Thalia Street, also known as South Jackson Street, between Mansfield Avenue, also known as Patterson Street or Patterson Avenue, and Quincy Avenue, also known as Breen Street or Breene Avenue. 
All of Oxford Avenue, also known as Logandale Street or Logandale Avenue, between South Colorado Boulevard and Florence Street, also known as South Monroe Street as extended. 
All of Princeton Avenue, also known as Strauss Street or Strauss Avenue, between South Colorado Boulevard and Florence Street, also known as South Monroe Street as extended. (Ord. 2, Series of 1951) 
All alleys in Blocks 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16; the alley in the south 1/2 of Block 11; the alley lying between Lots 33 to 48, inclusive, on the east thereof, and Lots 1 to 15, inclusive, on the west thereof in Block 1; and the alley lying between Lots 25 to 42, inclusive, on the east thereof, and Lots 7 to 24, inclusive, on the west thereof in Block 8; all in South University Place Annex. 
The alley lying between Lots 25 to 34, inclusive, on the east thereof, and Lots 15 to 24, inclusive, on the west thereof in Block 9; and the entire alley in Block 16; all in South University Place Second Addition. 
All that portion of South Dexter Street commencing seventy-five (75) feet south of the south boundary of its intersection with East Kenyon Road and running thence south to the north boundary of East Mansfield Road. 
All that portion of South Cherry Street lying between its intersection with the south boundary of East Hampden Avenue and the north boundary of East Mansfield Road. 
All that portion of South Clermont Street lying between its intersection with the south boundary of East Hampden Avenue and the north boundary of East Mansfield Road. 
All that portion of East Jefferson Road lying between its intersection with the west boundary of South Dexter Street and the west boundary of South Clermont Street. 
All that portion of East Kenyon Road lying between its intersection with the east boundary of South Cherry Street and the west boundary of South Birch Street. 
All that portion of East Lehigh Road lying between its intersection with the west boundary of South Dahlia Street and the west boundary of South Bellaire Street. 
All that portion of South Bellaire Street lying between its intersection with the north boundary of East Mansfield Road and the north boundary of East Lehigh Street. (Ord. 3, Series of 1951) 
All that portion of South Birch Street, lying between the south boundary of East Hampden Avenue and the north boundary of East Mansfield Road. (Ord. 6, Series of 1951) 
All of South Gilpin between East Quincy and East Radcliffe Avenue. (Ord. 2, Series of 1952) 
That portion of the alley in Block 5, bounded by Lots 9 through 16 inclusive on the west and Lots 33 through 40 inclusive on the east, South University Place Annex. (Ord. 3, Series of 1952) 
The east 1/2 of that portion of the alley in Block 1 lying between the north boundary of Lot 48, thence south to the north boundary of Lot 36; all that portion of said alley bounded on the east by the north boundary of Lot 36 and the south boundary of Lot 25 and on the west by the north boundary of Lot 13 and the south boundary of Lot 24, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
The entire alley in Block 2, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
The east 1/2 of that portion of the alley in Block 3 lying between the north boundary of Lot 48, thence south to the north boundary of Lot 44; all that portion of said alley bounded on the east by the north boundary of Lot 44 and the south boundary of Lot 25 and on the west by the north boundary of Lot 5 and the south boundary of Lot 24, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
The east 1/2 of that portion of the alley in Block 6 lying between the north boundary of Lot 48 and the north boundary of Lot 40; all that portion of said alley bounded on the east by the north boundary of Lot 40 and the south boundary of Lot 25 and on the west by the north boundary of Lot 9 and the south boundary of Lot 24, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
All that portion of the alley in Block 7 bounded on the east by the north boundary of Lot 48 and the north boundary of Lot 28 and on the west by the north boundary of Lot 1 and the north boundary of Lot 21; the west 1/2 of said alley lying between the north boundary of Lot 21 and the south boundary of Lot 24, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
The west 1/2 of the alley in Block 8 lying between the north line of Lot 1 and the north line of Lot 9; the east 1/2 of the alley lying between the north line of Lot 38 and the north line of Lot 36; all that portion of said alley bounded on the east by the north line of Lot 36 and the south line of Lot 25 and on the west by the north line of Lot 13 and the south line of Lot 24, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
All that portion of the alley in Block 9 not previously vacated by Ordinance 2, Series of 1950, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
The entire alley in Block 10, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
The entire alley in Block 11, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
The entire alley in Block 14, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
The entire alley in Block 15, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
The west 1/2 of South Bellaire from its intersection with the south boundary of East Hampden Avenue, thence south to the north line of Lot 36, Block 2; all that portion of South Bellaire Street bounded on the east by the north line of Lot 13, Block 1, thence south to the north line of Lot 9, Block 8, and on the west by the north line of Lot 36, Block 2, thence south to the north line of Lot 40, Block 7; the west 1/2 of South Bellaire Street from the north line of Lot 40, Block 7, to the north line of Lot 33, Block 7; the east 1/2 of South Bellaire Street from the north line of Lot 17, Block 8, to the south line of Lot 24, Block 8; all that portion of South Bellaire Street from its intersection with the north boundary of East Kenyon Road, thence south to its intersection with the north boundary of East Lehigh Road, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
All of South Ash Street from its intersection with the south boundary of East Hampden Avenue, thence south to its intersection with the north boundary of East Mansfield Road, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
All that portion of East Jefferson Road from its intersection with the west boundary of the alleys in Blocks 1 and 8, thence west to its intersection with the east boundary of South Albion Street, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
All that portion of East Kenyon Road from its intersection with the east boundaries of Blocks 8 and 9, being its intersection with the west boundary of Parkway Drive, thence west to its intersection with the west boundary of South Bellaire Street; the south 1/2 of East Kenyon Road from its intersection with the west boundary of South Bellaire Street, thence west to the centerlines of the alleys in Blocks 7 and 10; all that portion of East Kenyon Road from its intersection with the centerlines of the alleys in Blocks 7 and 10, thence west to its intersection with the east boundary of South Albion Street, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
All that portion of East Lehigh Road from its intersection with the west boundary of South Bellaire Street, thence west to its intersection with South Albion Street, situate in South University Place Second Addition. (Ord. 2, Series of 1953) 
That portion of the alley in Block 1, South University Place Annex, commencing at the north line of Lot 16 and Lot 33 thence south to its intersection with East Jefferson Road, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
The west 1/2 of the alley in Block 1, South University Place Second Addition, commencing at the north boundary of Lot 9 thence south to the north boundary of Lot 13, situate in South University Place Second Addition. 
The west 1/2 of the alley in Block 7, South University Place Second Addition, lying between its intersection with the north boundary of East Kenyon Road thence north for a distance of one hundred (100) feet. 
The east 1/2 of South Bellaire Street from its intersection with the north line of Lot 9, Block 1, South University Place Second Addition, thence south to its intersection with the north line of Lot 13 of said block, situate in South University Place Second Addition. (Ord. 4, Series of 1953) 
All that portion of South Birch Street, also known as Preston Street, lying between the south boundary of East Hampden Avenue, also known as Maryland Avenue, and the north boundary of East Mansfield Road, also known as Clinton Avenue. 
All that portion of East Lehigh Road, also known as Pauling Avenue, lying between its intersection with the west boundary of South Dahlia Street, thence west to the west boundary of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Avenue, and all that portion of East Lehigh Road, also known as Pauling Avenue, from the west boundary of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Avenue, thence west to the east boundary of South Albion Street, also known as Edgar Street. 
The west 1/2 of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Street, from its intersection with the south boundary of East Hampden Avenue, also known as Maryland Avenue, thence south to the north line of Lot 36, Block 2, South University Place Second Addition; all that portion of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Street, bounded on the east by the north line of Lot 13, Block 1, South University Place Second Addition, thence south to the north line of Lot 9, Block 8, South University Place Second Addition and on the west by the north line of Lot 36, Block 2, South University Place Second Addition, thence south to the north line of Lot 40, Block 7, South University Place Second Addition; the west 1/2 of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Street, from the north line of Lot 40, Block 7, South University Place Second Addition, thence south to the north line of Lot 33 of said Block 7; the east 1/2 of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Street, from the north line of Lot 17, Block 8, South University Place Second Addition, thence south to the south line of Lot 24 of said Block 8; all that portion of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Street, from its intersection with the north boundary of East Kenyon Road, also known as Prairie Avenue, thence south to its intersection with the north boundary of East Mansfield Road, also known as Clinton Avenue. 
All of South Ash Street, also known as Hoffman Street, from its intersection with the south boundary of East Hampden Avenue, also known as Maryland Avenue, thence south to its intersection with the north boundary of East Mansfield Road, also known as Clinton Avenue. 
All that portion of East Jefferson Road, also known as Wendell Avenue, from its intersection with the west boundary of the alleys in Blocks 1 and 8, South University Place Second Addition, thence west to its intersection with the east boundary of South Albion Street, also known as Edgar Street. 
All that portion of East Kenyon Road, also known as Prairie Avenue, from its intersection with the east boundaries of Blocks 8 and 9, South University Place Second Addition, thence west to its intersection with the west boundary of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Street; the south 1/2 of East Kenyon Road, also known as Prairie Avenue; from its intersection with the west boundary of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Street, thence west to the centerlines of the alleys in Blocks 7 and 10, South University Place Second Addition; all that portion of East Kenyon Road, also known as Prairie Avenue, from its intersection with the centerlines of the alleys in said Blocks 7 and 10, thence west to its intersection with the east boundary of South Albion Street, also known as Edgar Street. (Ord. 1, Series of 1954) 
The east 1/2 of the alley in Block 7, South University Place Second Addition, bounded on the north by the north line of Lot 28 and on the south by the south line of Lot 25. 
The west 1/2 of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Street, from the north line of Lot 33, Block 7, South University Place Second Addition, thence south to the south line of Lot 25 of said Block 7. 
The north 1/2 of East Kenyon Road, also known as Prairie Avenue, from its intersection with the west boundary of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Street, thence west to the centerlines of the alleys in Blocks 7 and 10, South University Place Second Addition. 
All of South Ogden Street between East Stanford Avenue and East Tufts Avenue. 
All of East Stanford Avenue between South Downing Street and South Lafayette Street. (Ord. 2, Series of 1954) 
All that portion of South Clermont Street, also known as Beacon Street, as shown on the plat of South University Place Annex, lying within the boundaries of Plots 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 29, 30 and 31, Cherry Hills Annex. (Ord. 4, Series of 1954) 
All that portion of East Quincy Avenue beginning at the east line of South University Boulevard and extending eastwardly four hundred eighty (480) feet. (Ord. 12, Series of 1955) 
That part of Sunset Road, now known as Sterling Lane, lying north of a line between the northeast corner of Lot 8, Block 4, Cherry Vale Acres, and the northwest corner of Lot 1, Cherry Vale Acres Second Filing. 
All of the unnamed street lying immediately adjacent to the north line of Cherry Vale Acres and Cherry Vale Acres Second Filing; extending from the east line of South Franklin Street to the east end of said unnamed street. 
That part of Summit Boulevard as shown on the plat of Cherry Vale Acres, extending from the north line of Lot 8, Block 1, extended easterly, to the north line of Lot 6, Block 1, extended southeasterly. 
That part of Summit Boulevard and Eastwood Place as shown on the plats of Cherry Vale Acres and Cherry Vale Acres Second Filing, extending from the north line of Lot 1, Cherry Vale Acres Second Filing, extended easterly, to the north line of said subdivision. 
All of Sterling Avenue in Cherry Vale Acres and Cherry Vale Acres Second Filing, East of Summit Boulevard. 
All of Valley View Place in Cherry Vale Acres, north of the north line of Belleview Avenue. 
All of the streets, named or unnamed, east of and adjoining Block 3, Cherry Vale Acres, and north of the north line of Belleview Avenue; and any extensions of said street or streets to the north or northeast of said Block 3. (Ord. 1, Series of 1956) 
All that portion of South Lane in Cherry Hills Village Acres lying west of the east line of Plots 6 and 7. (Ord. 2, Series of 1956) 
All of Nassau Street, also known as Pine Street, between Thalia Street, also known as South Jackson Street, (now vacated) and Florence Street, also known as South Monroe Street as extended. (Ord. 3, Series of 1956) 
Commencing at a point on the south line of Lot 1, Block 4, Cherry Vale Acres, 103 feet east of the southwest corner of said lot, the place of beginning; thence north 8848' east 34 feet; thence north 72 east 81 feet; thence northeasterly on an arc with a radius of 50 feet approximately 15 feet to a point 40 feet north 7230' west of the southwesterly corner of Lot 1, Block 5, Cherry Vale Acres Second Filing; thence north 20 east and parallel to the west line of Lot 1, Block 5, Cherry Vale Acres 144 feet to a point on the southerly boundary of Cherry Vale Acres, Third Filing, which point is 40 feet on a bearing of north 7230' west of the northwesterly corner of Lot 1, Block 5, Cherry Vale Acres, Second Filing; thence north 7230' west 20.87 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 8, Block 4, Cherry Vale Acres; thence along the northwesterly line of Summit Lane, formerly known as Sunset Road, and the northwest line of Sterling Avenue as each was originally platted in a southwesterly direction approximately 238.16 feet to the place of beginning. (Ord. 4, Series of 1956) 
The alley in Block 1, South University Park. 
That part of South Harrison (Alcesta) Street lying north of the extended south lines of Blocks 1 and 2, South University Park and south of the south line of Hampden Avenue. 
Cherry Vale Drive from the east line of Franklin Street to the eastern end of Cherry Vale Drive. The intersection of Cherry Vale Drive and Summit Boulevard. 
All of Summit Boulevard adjacent to Lots 4 and 5, Block 5, Cherry Vale Acres, Filing No. Three. 
The westerly twenty (20) feet of Summit Boulevard adjacent to Lot 1, Cherry Vale Acres Second Filing. 
All of Summit Boulevard from the north line of Lot 8, Block 1, Cherry Vale Acres extended easterly across said Boulevard, to the southwesterly line of Lot 1, Cherry Vale Acres Second Filing extended southeasterly across said Boulevard. 
The easterly 10 feet of Summit Boulevard adjoining Lots 1 and 5, Block 7, and Lot 1, Block 8, Cherry Vale Acres, Filing No. Three and the easterly 10 feet of Summit Boulevard contiguous to Belleview Place. 
That part of Sterling Avenue included in Cherry Vale Acres, Filing No. Three. 
All of Belleview Place as shown on Plat of Cherry Vale Acres, Filing No. Three. 
All ditch and utility easements granted to the City on the plat of Cherry Vale Acres, Filing No. Three. (Ord. 6, Series of 1956) 
East Oxford Avenue (formerly Vernon Avenue) between South Colorado Boulevard and South Bellaire Street. 
South Albion Street (formerly Edgar Street) between the produced north lines of Blocks 16-A and 15-B, Denver University Addition Annex, and the produced south lines of Blocks 17-F and 18-A of said subdivision. 
South Ash Street (formerly Hoffman Street) between the produced north lines of Blocks 14-C and 15-B of Denver University Addition Annex and the produced south lines of Blocks 18-E and 19-D of said subdivision. 
South Bellaire Street (formerly Lindell Street) between the produced north line of Block 14-C, Denver University Addition Annex and the produced south line of Block 19-D of said subdivision. (Ord. 2, Series of 1958) 
That portion of South Bellaire Street, also known as Lindell Street, lying between the north line of Lot 9 and the south line of Lot 16, Block 8, South University Place, Second Filing; 
All that portion of East Jefferson Road, also known as Wendell Avenue, lying between the west line of the alley as projected, between Blocks 1 and 8, South University Place Annex thence east to the west line of vacated South Clermont Street, also known as Beacon Street, lying between Blocks 1 and 8, South University Place Annex, and all of the alleys in Block 8, South University Place Annex, and Block 8, South University Place Second Filing. 
All of that portion of Crest Road, formerly known as South Dexter Street, also known as Fayette Street from the south line of East Hampden Avenue to the north line of Cherry Lane Drive, formerly known as East Kenyon Road and also known as Prairie Avenue. 
All that portion of Cherry Lane Drive, formerly known as East Jefferson Road and also known as Wendell Avenue, from the west line of South Dahlia Street to a point 100 feet east of the west line of Plot 11, Cherry Hills Annex. (Ord. 5, Series of 1958) 
That part of South Gilpin Street lying between East Radcliffe Avenue (formerly Cherry Avenue) and East Stanford Avenue (formerly Malcom Avenue) and presently dividing Block 9 and Block 10, Cherry's Gardens. 
The alley in the north 1/2 of Block 5, South University Park. (Ord. 3, Series of 1959) 
That portion of South Madison Street contiguous to the west boundary line of Lots 3 through 10, Block 5, South University Park. 
That portion of Rancho Road which is contiguous to and separates Plot 4 and Plot 5, Cherry Hills Rancho, 3rd Amended Filing, and that portion of the said Rancho Road which forms the northerly boundary of the aforesaid Plot 4 and of Plot 2, Cherry Hills Rancho 2nd Amended Filing; subject, however, to existing rights-of-way or easements for public utilities. (Ord. 2, Series of 1960) 
The west 1/2 of the alleyway adjacent to Lots 1 to 8 inclusive, Block 6, South University Place Second Addition, except that portion of said alleyway falling within the boundaries of East Jefferson Road. (Ord. 2, Series of 1962) 
The west 1/2 of South Race Street lying south of East Radcliffe Avenue and north of the centerline of Little Dry Creek. 
East Radcliffe Avenue lying east of South High Street and west of the centerline of South Race Street. (Ord. 3, Series of 1962) 
The dedicated public way, road or street lying between Lots 25 and 26, Cherry Hills Rancho 2nd Amended Filing and Cherry Hills Rancho Third Amended Filing, designated on the plat of Cherry Hills Rancho 2nd Amended Filing as "Rancho Road for Water Mains" and designated on the plat of Cherry Hills Rancho Third Amended Filing as "Rancho Road B". 
Provided, however, said vacation is subject to the following condition and reservation: 
There is reserved to the utility owners the continued use of and the right to maintain and operate an existing water line and to install, maintain and operate any other utility service over a strip of land 10 feet in width being 5 feet on each side of the centerline of said vacated roadway. (Ord. 3, Series of 1963) 
That portion of the alley situate in Block 3, South University Park, lying between the south line of Hampden Avenue and the north line of Jefferson Avenue. 
That portion of the alley situate in Block 4, South University Park, lying between the south line of Hampden Avenue and the north line of Jefferson Avenue. 
That portion of South Garfield Street lying between the south line of Hampden Avenue and the north line of Jefferson Avenue in South University Park. (Ord. 3, Series of 1965) 
All that part of that certain unnamed street lying between Lots 15 and 16, Devonshire Heights amended plat, lying south and easterly of the line 50 feet distant from and parallel to the southeasterly lot line of Lot 42, Devonshire Heights amended plat. 
That portion of Lynn Road, described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the south line of Lot 1, Cherry Hills Subdivision, and east right-of-way line of South University Boulevard; thence east 20 feet along the south line of said Lot 1; thence south 60 feet more or less to the north line of Lot 11, Cherry Hills Subdivision; thence west along said north line, Lot 11, 20 feet to the east right-of-way line of South University Boulevard; thence north along said right-of-way line, South University Boulevard, to the point of beginning. (Ord. 3, Series of 1965) 
That portion of South Jackson Street lying between the south line of Hampden Avenue and the north line of Jefferson Avenue and that portion of the alley situate in Block 2, South University Park lying between the south line of Hampden Avenue and the north line of Jefferson Avenue. (Ord. 5, Series of 1965) 
The following described public way, road or street is hereby vacated subject to the existing easements and rights-of-way for utilities: 
A tract or parcel of land, Vacated Roadway Area No. 1, of the Department of Highways, State of Colorado, Project No. U 040-1 (1), containing 26,329 square feet more or less in the northeast 1/4 of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West, of the Sixth Principal Meridian, said tract or parcel being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point which is south 004'30" west along the east line of the northeast 1/4 of Section 11, a distance of 30 feet, and south 8902' west, parallel with the north line of the northeast 1/4 of Section 11, a distance of 75 feet from the northeast corner of the northeast 1/4 of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West, of the 6th Principal Meridian: 
1.  Thence south 8902' west, parallel with the north line of the northeast 1/4 of Section 11, a distance of 407feet. 
2.  Thence north 5022' west, to the north line of the northeast 1/4 of Section 11, a distance of 46.1 feet. 
3.  Thence north 058' west, normal to the north line of the northeast 1/4 of Section 11, a distance of 30 feet. 
4.  Thence north 8902' east, parallel with the north line of the northeast 1/2 of Section 11, a distance of 453.1 feet. 
5.  Thence south 933'30" west, a distance of 61 feet, more or less to the point of beginning. 
The above described parcel contains 26,329 square feet, more or less. (Ord. 10, Series of 1965) 
The following described public way, road or street is hereby vacated subject to the existing easements and rights-of-way for utilities: 
That portion of East Quincy Avenue described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the west right-of-way line of South University Boulevard which lies south 004'30" west, a distance of 30 feet, and south 8902' west, a distance of 75 feet from the northeast corner of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West; thence south 8902' west parallel with the north line of Section 11, a distance of 367.06 feet; thence north 04'30" east, a distance of 60 feet; thence north 8902' east and parallel with the south line of Section 2, Township 5 South, Range 68 West, a distance of 367.06 feet; thence south 004'30" west, a distance of 60 feet to the point of beginning. 
Located in the northeast 1/4 of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West and the southeast 1/4 of Section 2, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th Principal Meridian. (Ord. 4, Series of 1966) 
All of Sedgwick Place as dedicated and described on the amended plat of Devonshire Heights. Specifically, the public street hereby vacated is described as all of Sedgwick Place located to the southwest of Sedgwick Drive and located between Lots 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24 and specifically including that portion of Sedgwick Place located between Lots 23 and 24, all as recorded on the amended plat of Devonshire Heights. (Ord. 10, Series 1968; ratified by Ord. No. 12, Series 1968) 
That portion of Chenango Street or Avenue lying between Tracts 45, 46, 51 and 52, as shown on the recorded plat of the subdivision of the southeast 1/4 of Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, without reservation of easements or rights-of-way. The Council recognizes that all or a portion of the above described public street or avenue may have been or was vacated by Resolution No. 495-64 by the Board of County Commissioners of Arapahoe County as recorded January 13, 1965, in Book 1571 at Page 323 of the records of the Clerk and Recorder for Arapahoe County, and excepts from the vacation herein those portions of the above described Chenango Street or Avenue heretofore vacated. (Ord. 16, Series of 1968) 
All of the public streets, roads, ways and alleys as dedicated and described on a portion of the plat of Denver University Addition, Third Filing, more particularly described as follows, is hereby vacated: 
That part of the North 1/2 of the Southeast 1/4 of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, commencing at the northwest corner of said North 1/2; thence easterly along the north line of said North 1/2 north 8958'20" east a distance of 30.48 feet to the true point of beginning, thence continuing along the north line of the said North 1/2 north 8958'20" east a distance of 1,394 feet; thence south 0001'40" east a distance of 320.97 feet; thence south 8958'20" west a distance of 50 feet; thence south 1133'32" east a distance of 206.55 feet; thence south 7826'28" west a distance of 64.07 feet to a point of curvature; thence along a curve to the right with a radius of 225 feet and a central angle of 409'31" an arc distance of 16.33 feet; thence on a radial line south 0724'10" east a distance of 145 feet; thence south 6238'56" west a distance of 30.62 feet; thence south 2415'20" west a distance of 329.85 feet; thence south 1828'00" west a distance of 144.67 feet; thence south 0951'21" west a distance of 188.38 feet to the south line of said north 1/2 of the southeast 1/4; thence along said south line south 8959'32" west a distance of 1106.92 feet to the easterly line of South Dahlia Street; thence along the said easterly line of South Dahlia Street north 0055'55" east a distance of 1323.33 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. (Ord. 7, Series of 1969) 
The following described public way, road or street is hereby vacated subject to existing easements and rights-of-way for water, sewer and utilities: 
That portion of the street known as South Forest Circle, as shown on the plat of Cherry Hills East, Third Filing, recorded on June 7, 1966, as Reception No. 1014101 of the records in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County, Colorado, located between Lots 17 and 18, Block 7 and Lots 1, 2 and a part of Lot 3, Block 5, more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the southwest corner of said Lot 17, Block 7; thence on a curve to the southeast, having a radius of 115 feet and an arc distance of 94.03 feet; thence south 1400" east a distance of feet 32, thence on a curve to the left, having a radius of feet 190 feet, and an arc distance of 123.91 feet; thence south 5122' east a distance of 133 feet; thence on a curve to the left, having a radius of 25 feet, and an arc distance of 39.27 feet, to a point on the northwest right-of-way of East Princeton Avenue; thence south 3838' west, along said right-of-way, a distance of 100 feet; thence on a curve to the northwest, having a radius of 25 feet, and an arc distance of 39.27 feet; thence north 5122' west, a distance of 133 feet; thence on a curve to the right, having a radius of 240 feet, and an arc distance of 156.52 feet; thence north 1400' west, a distance of 32 feet; thence on a curve to the left, having radius of 65 feet and an arc distance of 53.15 feet; thence north 2909'10" east, a distance of 50 feet to the point of beginning. (Ord. 4, Series of 1972) 
That portion of Grande Avenue lying between South Lafayette Street (also known as South Lafayette Lane) and South Franklin Street, without reservation of easements or rights-of-way. The Council recognizes that said Grande Avenue is identified in that certain subdivision known as Swastika Acres No. 2, and further that the north 1/2 of said Grand Avenue being vacated herein was heretofore platted over in that certain subdivision known as Line Subdivision. In order to clarify any question that may have heretofore existed, however, it is the intent of the City Council by this Ordinance to reflect that the entire portion of said Grande Avenue hereinbefore described be vacated. (Ord. 2, Series of 1976) 
The alley located within Block 17, and as the same extends to the centerline of now vacated Lehigh Avenue, South University Park. 
The alley located within Block 18, and as the same extends to the centerline of now vacated Lehigh Avenue, South University Park. 
The alley located within Block 19, and as the same extends to the centerline of now vacated Lehigh Avenue, South University Park. 
South Jackson Street as the same adjoins Lots 47 and 48, Block 17 and Lots 1 and 2, Block 18, and as the same extends to the centerline of now vacated Lehigh Avenue, South University Park; and 
South Harrison Street as the same adjoins Lots 41 through 48, inclusive, Block 18 and Lots 1 through 8, inclusive, Block 19, and as the same extends to the centerline of now vacated Lehigh Avenue, South University Park. (Ord. 1, Series of 1977) 
The following described portions of public streets are hereby declared and ordained to be vacated, and title to the lands included therein shall vest, subject to the same encumbrances, liens, limitations, restrictions and estates as the land to which they accrue, in accordance with the provisions of all applicable Colorado laws, to-wit: 
That portion described as Parcel "A" and that portion described as Parcel "B" as set forth and described on that certain survey prepared by Bell Surveying Company, dated May 10, 1978, No. 10, 399A, which said survey is attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 4, Series of 1978) 
South Jackson Street between the north line of East Mansfield Avenue on the south, and the north line of now vacated East Lehigh Avenue on the north, all located within South University Park. (Ord. 6, Series of 1978) 
That portion of Catherine Street adjacent to and abutting on the westerly side, Lots 1 through 6, Block 8, University Park Heights, a subdivision located within the City, together with the west 1/2 of that certain alley and roadway immediately adjacent to and abutting said Lots 1 through 6 on the easterly side thereof. (Ord. 7, Series of 1978) 
That portion of Rancho Road contiguous to, located between and separating Lots 24 and 25, Cherry Hills Rancho, Second Amended Filing, a subdivision within the City; subject, however, to all existing rights-of-way or easements for public utilities which are retained and not vacated. Ownership of said vacated roadway shall vest in the appropriate abutting property owners in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 9, Series of 1978) 
Streets and alleys to be vacated within South University Park, all being in the Northeast one-quarter of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, City of Cherry Hills Village, County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado, more particularly described as follows: 
East Jefferson Avenue from the west right-of-way line of South Monroe Street westerly to its intersection with the Highline Canal. 
East Kenyon Avenue from the centerline of South Harrison Street westerly to its intersection with the Highline Canal. 
South Madison Street between Blocks 6 and 7 and northerly to its intersection with the Highline Canal. 
South Monroe Street from the south right-of-way line of East Jefferson Avenue southerly to its intersection with the Highline Canal. 
South Garfield Street from the south right-of-way line of East Jefferson Avenue to its intersection with the Highline Canal. 
South Jackson Street adjacent to Lots 41 through 48, Block 9 and adjacent to Lots 1 through 8, Block 10. 
South Jackson Street adjacent to Lots 37 through 48, Block 14 and adjacent to Lots 1 through 12, Block 13. 
The west 1/2 of South Harrison Street adjacent to Lots 35 through 48, Block 13. 
The entire alley adjacent to Lots 13 through 36, Block 5. 
The entire alley in Blocks 7, 8, 9, 14 and 15. 
The entire alley adjacent to Lots 1 through 12 and adjacent to Lots 37 through 48, Block 13. 
The east 1/2 of the alley adjacent to Lots 35 and 36, Block 13. (Ord. 6, Series of 1997) 
Cherry Lane Drive, which is located south from Hampden Avenue within the City of Cherry Hills Village, is hereby declared to be vacated. (Ord. 8, Series of 1997) 
The remaining public interest in the alley in Block 13 South University Park Subdivision, being in the Northeast 1/4 of Section 1, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Prime Meridian, is hereby vacated in accordance with law. (Ord. 7, Series of 2001) 
Beginning at the northeast corner of Lot 2, Klikoff Subdivision as recorded under Reception No. 225744 of the Arapahoe County records; thence north 8928'24" east, 30.00 feet; then south 0000'08" east, 874.13 feet, along the west line of Lot 1 and Lot 2, Tamblyn County records, to the intersection of a permanent and perpetual roadway easement recorded at Book 5710 at Page 554 of the Arapahoe County records; thence north 8959'52" west, 30.00 feet, to the west line of Lot 2, said Klikoff Subdivision; thence north 0000'08" west, 873.86 feet, along the west line of said Lot 2, to the point of beginning. (Ord. 7, Series of 2002) 
Commencing at the east quarter corner of said Section 7, thence 8928'22" west, a distance of 30.00 feet to a point on the westerly right-of-way line of South Holly Street extended; thence south 0000'25" east, along said west right-of-way line extended and said west right-of-way line, a distance of 1307.21 feet to the north right-of-way line of East Chenango Avenue, said point being the point of beginning; thence south 0000'25" east, along said west right-of-way, a distance of 30.00 feet to the south right-of-way line of said East Chenango Avenue; thence south 8929'54" west, along said south right-of-way, a distance of 1027.20 feet to a point of non-tangent curve; thence along the arc of a curve to the left, having a central angle of 7101'58", a radius of 45.00 feet, chord which bears north 5429'01" east, 52.28 feet, an arc distance of 55.79 feet to the north right-of-way of said East Chenango Avenue and a non-tangent line; thence north 8929'54" east, along said north right-of-way, a distance of 984.64 feet to the point of beginning. (Ord. 8, Series of 2002) 
That portion of South Harrison adjacent to the property addressed as 3875 South Harrison Street. (Ord. 15, Series of 2002) 
That portion of Greenbriar Drive adjacent to Lot 3 of the Charlou Park Addition, also known as 6301 Greenbriar Drive. (Ord. 3, Series of 2003) 
The approximately southernmost 30 feet of the 60-foot-wide right-of-way of Old Hampden Avenue lying within the City of Cherry Hills Village located between U.S. Highway 285 (commonly known as Hampden Avenue) and South Lafayette Street more particularly described as follows: 
From a starting point of: NW corner Tract 2 (Monument 1) S 89 - 53' - 30" E - 182.81' (Monument 4) thence S 89 - 53' - 30" E - 82.00' thence along an arc of 61.10' on a radius of 731.40' with a chord of N 60 - 49' - 18" E - 61.09' thence N 90 - 06' - 30" W 318.07' thence S 00 - 06' - 30" W 29.89' to point of beginning. (Ord. 4, Series of 2004) 
A vacation of a portion of Meade Lane as dedicated on the plat of Meade Subdivision as recorded in the records of Arapahoe County August 10, 1966, at Plat Book 18 Page 88, lying in the Northwest 1/4 of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, City of Cherry Hills Village, County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the Northwest corner of Tract 2, Meade Subdivision; thence S 3717'56" E along the northeasterly right of way line of Meade Lane 411.88 feet; thence S 0000'48" E 4.58 feet to a point of tangent curve; thence along the arc of said curve to the left having a radius of 280.00 feet, a central angle of 3717'08", a distance of 182.21 feet to a point on the southwesterly line of said Meade Lane; thence N 3717'56" W along the southwesterly line of said Meade Lane 576.73 feet to the south right of way line of East Quincy Avenue; thence N 4442'40" E along said southerly right of way line 60.59 feet to the point of beginning; containing 27,764.5 square feet more or less. (Ord. 6, Series of 2005) 
In addition, a vacation of a portion of E. Quincy Ave. lying in the Northwest 1/4 of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, City of Cherry Hills Village, County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the Northwest corner of Tract 2 Meade Subdivision, recorded in the records of Arapahoe County August 10, 1966, at Plat Book 18 Page 88; thence S 4442'40" W 530.86 feet to a point lying 85.30 feet east of the west line of the Northwest 1/4 of said Section 12; thence N 0003'29" E parallel with said west line, 113.55 feet; thence N 8707'27" E 7.77 feet to a point of tangent curve; thence the following six (6) courses along a line lying 60 feet southeasterly of the north right of way line of E. Quincy Ave. as shown on the plat of Cherry Hills School Filing No. 1, recorded in the records of Arapahoe County September 24, 1982, at Plat Book 58 Page 53; (1) thence along the arc of said curve to the left having a radius of 205.00 feet, a central angle of 2659'46" a distance of 96.59 feet to a point of compound curve; (2) thence along the arc of said curve to the left having a radius of 685.00 feet, a central angle of 1414'56" a distance of 170.35 feet; (3) thence N 4552'45" E 35.00 feet to a point of tangent curve; (4) thence along the arc of said curve to the left having a radius of 905.00 feet, a central angle of 1026'56" a distance of 165.04 feet; (5) thence N 3525'49" E 5.00 feet to a point of tangent curve; (6) thence along the arc of said curve to the right having a radius of 837.15 feet, a central angle of 0806'24" a distance of 118.45 feet to a point of compound curve; thence along the arc of said curve to the right having a radius of 200.00 feet, a central angle of 3055'36" a distance of 107.95 feet to a point on the northwesterly line of said Tract 2; thence S 4442'40" W along the northwesterly line of said Tract 2 a distance of 233.10 feet more or less to the point of beginning, containing 15,464 square feet more or less. The basis of bearings is the North line of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West being N 8916'32" E as evidenced by the corners as shown on Exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 06, Series of 2005) 
A parcel of land being a portion of the Southeast Quarter of Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, of the 6th Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado being described as follows 
Basis of bearings: the north line of the Southeast Quarter of Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the 6th Principal Meridian monumented by a #6 rebar with 3-1/4" aluminum cap stamped "CEN1/4 Sec 7 T5S R67W LS 10717" at the northwest corner and a 3" brass cap in range box stamped "D.W.D East 1/4 Sec 7 T5S R67W LS 1137" at the northeast corner. Being assumed to bear N8953'59"E a distance of 2641.50 feet. 
Commencing at the northwest corner of the Southeast Quarter; thence on the North line of said Southeast Quarter, N8953'59"E a distance of 187.90 feet; thence S0006'01"E a distance of 30.00 feet, to a point of non-tangent curve on the southerly right-of-way line of the Highline Canal being the point of beginning; thence on said southerly right-of-way line of the Highline Canal the following two (2) courses: 
1. On the arc of a curve to the right whose center bears S2949'34"E, having a radius of 224.40 feet, a central angle of 4453'31" and an arc length of 175.82 feet, to a point of tangent; 
2. S7456'03"E a distance of 83.00 feet; thence S8953'59"W a distance of 250.08 feet, to the point of beginning. Containing a calculated area of 4,672 square feet or 0.1073 acres. (Ord. 10, Series of 2010) 
A part of the NW1/4 Section 12, T5S, R68W, 6 th P.M. City of Cherry Hills Village Arapahoe County, Colorado 
A parcel of land, 10 feet wide, lying within Meade Lane, as shown on the plat of Cherry Hills Village Center, recorded at Reception Number B5163027, County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado, being more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the northeast Corner of Lot 1, Block 1, Cherry Hills Village Center; thence S 89 16' 32" E, a distance of 30.00 feet to the Centerline of said Meade Lane and the point of beginning; thence continuing S 89 16' 32" E, a distance of 10.00 feet; thence S 00 00' 48" E, along a line 10 feet East of and parallel to the centerline of said Meade Lane, a distance of 552.26 feet to a point of the northeasterly line of vacated Meade Lane extended; thence N 37 17' 56" W, along said northeasterly line, a distance of 16.50 feet; thence N 00 00' 48" W, along said Centerline of Meade Lane, a distance of 539.26 feet to the point of beginning. 
Said parcel contains 5,457.6 square feet, more or less. (Ord. 1-Series of 2012) 
APPENDIX E - VACATION OF EASEMENTS AND OTHER CITY-OWNED LANDS 
The following described properties are hereby declared ordered to be vacated by the City: 
A fifteen-foot strip conveyed to Arapahoe County for road purposes by a quit claim deed recorded in Book 326 at Page 263, Arapahoe County records; more particularly described as the west 15 feet of Block 18, Cherry's Broadway Gardens. (Ord. 4, Series of 1960) 
All easements as shown on the plat of Devonshire Heights, recorded April 11, 1960, as Reception No. 715916. 
The following described parcel of land located in the northeast 1/4 of Section 1, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th P.M., lying west of the Highline Canal, as dedicated and delineated on the plat of Devonshire Heights, and being more particularly described as follows, to-wit: 
All of that part of the dedicated public way or public street lying between Lots 29 and 30, east of the west property line of Devonshire Heights, and west of a straight line which is the east property line of Lots 29 and 30 extended, this straight line bearing north 029'50" east. (Ord. 7, Series of 1961) 
The following described tract of land as dedicated in instrument recorded September 17, 1952, in Book 772, at Page 567, and being more particularly described as follows, to-wit: 
A strip of land 20 feet in width, 10 feet to be taken from the west side of Acre 11, and , 10 feet from the east side of Acre 10, extending the full distance of said acres. Also a strip of land off the south side of Acre 10, extending from South Emerson Street projected on the east and Clarkson Street on the west, said strip being 20 feet in width; all in Swastika Acres No. 1. (Ord. 4, Series of 1963) 
A tract or parcel of land, Barricade Area No. 1, of Colorado Department of Highways' Project No. U041-1 (2) containing 271 square feet more or less in Cherry Vale Acres, Filing No. Four, a subdivision in the southeast 1/4 of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West, of the Sixth Principal Meridian, said tract or parcel being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the southeast corner of Lot 4, Block 9, Cherry Vale Acres, Filing No. Four, a subdivision in the southeast 1/4 of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian. 
Thence north 844' west along the east line of said Lot 4, Block 9, a distance of 2.1 feet. 
Thence north 2644' east a distance of 12.3 feet. 
Thence north 8942' east, parallel with the south line of Section 11, a distance of 78.5 feet, to the west line of Lot 2, Block 10. 
Thence along the arc of a curve to the left with a radius of 20 feet, a distance of 3.3 feet, the chord of which bears south 2532'30" east, a distance of 3.3 feet. 
Thence south 8942' west, parallel with the south line of Section 11, a distance of 78 feet. 
Thence south 2644' west, a distance of 11.2 feet to the south line of Lot 5, Block 9. 
Thence south 8942' west, parallel with the south line of Section 11, a distance of 2 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. (Ord. 9, Series of 1965) 
The following described easement located in Cantitoe, as dedicated and delineated on the plat of said subdivision, and being more particularly described as follows: 
All of that part of the dedicated twenty-foot bridle path and public utility easement designated on the plat of Cantitoe as the north 20 feet of Tract 8, Cantitoe. (Ord. 1, Series of 1966) 
All of the easement for bridle path for daylight nonvehicular and pedestrian traffic, as dedicated and described on the perimeter of the amended plat of Devonshire Heights, with the exception of the west 596.17 feet of the south 12 feet thereof, and without affecting the utility easement located on said perimeter. (Ord. 6, Series of 1970) 
That portion of the bridle path easement along the south line of Plot 4, White's Subdivision, Arapahoe County, Colorado, described as follows: 
Commencing from the southwest corner of said Plot 4, thence east 28 feet along the south plot line, thence north 12 feet to the point of beginning; thence east 60 feet, thence north 8 feet, thence west 60 feet, thence south 8 feet to the point of beginning. (Ord. 2, Series of 1973) 
The following described bridle path easements: 
1.  The sixteen-foot bridle path easement on the east side of Lot 10, Meade Subdivision, except as to the south 16 feet thereof which continues in existence as a part of the sixteen-foot bridle path easement now located on the south 16 feet of said Lot 10. 
2.  The sixteen-foot bridle path easement located on the east side of what was formerly known as Lot 9, Meade Subdivision. 
3.  The sixteen-foot bridle path easement located on the east, northeast and north lot lines of what was formerly known as Lot 8, Meade Subdivision. 
4.  The twenty-foot bridle path easement located on the west and south lot lines and a portion of the east lot line of what was formerly known as Plot 4, White's Subdivision. 
The vacation of the portions of land described in Subsections 1 through 4 above shall in no way affect the existence and continued existence of all of those bridle path easements now reflected on the said Petry-Garnsey Resubdivision, all of which shall continue and remain in full force and effect. 
In order to clarify any uncertainty that may exist, the City Council further declares that that certain lease agreement dated January 1, 1971 by and between N. Paul Isbell and the City, recorded in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County on July 21, 1971, in Book 1943, at Pages 23 and 24, be and the same is hereby declared to be terminated and of no force and effect whatsoever. (Ord. 3, Series of 1979) 
The following described bridle path easements: 
1.  The sixteen-foot bridle path easement between Lot 1 and Lot 2 of the Allen Subdivision. 
2.  The sixteen-foot bridle path easement between Lot 2 and Lot 3 of Olson Subdivision. (Ord. 12, Series of 1980) 
A portion of an existing sanitary sewer easement, set forth in the following legal description is hereby declared to be vacated: 
A part of Lot 1, Block 1, Cherry Hills Meadow, a subdivision plat on record in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County in Book 76 at Page 32, being a part of the Southwest one-quarter of the Southwest one-quarter of Section 2, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Lot 1; thence S 8841'21" W, along the North line of said Lot 1, a distance of 53.01 feet to the point of beginning: thence S 0407'14" E, a distance of 195.23 feet; to the South line of said Lot 1; thence S 8841'21" W, along the South line of said Lot 1, a distance of 21.00 feet; thence N 0000'34" W, parallel to and 60 feet from the East line of said Lot 1, a distance of 195.05 feet to the North line of said Lot 1; thence N 8841'21" E, along said North line, a distance of 7.00 feet to the point of beginning, containing 2730 square feet more or less. (Ord. 13, Series of 1985) 
The five-foot drainage and utility easement along the southern boundary of Lot 3, Block 5, of the Chaumont Subdivision within the City of Cherry Hills Village, be and is hereby declared to be vacated. (Ord. 14, Series of 1985) 
The following described bridle path easements: 
1.  That the easterly 211 lineal feet of the bridle path easement on Plot 7, Polichio Subdivision be and is hereby vacated. 
2.  That the entire bridle path on Plot 3, Polichio Subdivision be and is hereby vacated. 
3.  That the westerly 200 lineal feet of the bridle path easement on Plot 3, White's Subdivision be and is hereby vacated. (Ord. 9, Series of 1996) 
The following right-of-way is to be reserved for a utility easement: 
1.  That the portion of Random Road which is 20 feet in width and lies south of the main Random Road roadway to serve Plot 5, in Polichio Subdivision, within the City of Cherry Hills Village, is hereby declared to be vacated. 
2.  That the area of the right-of-way vacated in Section 1, be reserved for a twenty-foot utility and recreational trail easement, within the City of Cherry Hills Village. (Ord. 10, Series of 1996) 
A recreational trail and drainage easement across Lot 5, Buell Mansion Subdivision. (Ord. 4, Series of 1998) 
That the sixteen-foot-wide recreational trail easement shown on the Cherry Hills Park 1 subdivision plat (Arapahoe County Clerk & Recorder Reception No. A7107627) shall be vacated upon the recording of this Ordinance with the County Clerk for the County of Arapahoe after recordation of the Cherry Hills Park 1, 3rd Amendment plat. (Ord. 4, Series of 2001) 
The City Council finds that the portion of Fairfax Street lying within the area described below in this Section 2 is no longer necessary for use by the general public and that no land would, by such vacation of right-of-way, be left without access (via public or private drive or thoroughfare) to an established public road. The Council further finds that the vacation of the portion of Fairfax Street described herein is in the best interests of the City. Based upon such findings, the City's title to or claim to ownership of the portion of Fairfax Street described in Exhibits A & B is hereby vacated. Parking shall be prohibited, and signs shall be erected by the City to prohibit parking, within and along the portion of the public right-of-way that is accessible to public vehicular traffic and known as Fairfax Street located north of the northernmost boundary of Chenango Avenue and south of the southernmost boundary of the right-of-way for Union Avenue. (Ord. 7, Series of 2002) 
A parcel of land located in the southeast quarter of Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the east quarter corner of said Section 7; thence S 8928'22" W, a distance of 30.00 feet to a point on the westerly right-of-way line of South Holly Street extended; thence S 0000'25" E, along said west right-of-way line extended and said west right-of-way line, a distance of 1307.21 feet to the north right-of-way line of East Chenango Avenue, said point being the point of beginning; thence S 0000'25" E, along said west right-of-way, a distance of 30.00 feet to the south right-of-way line of said East Chenango Avenue; thence S 8929'54" W, along said south right-of-way, a distance of 1027.20 feet to a point of non-tangent curve; thence along the arc of a curve to the left, having a central angle of 7101'58", a radius of 45.00 feet, chord which bears N 5429'01" E, 52.28 feet, an arc distance of 55.79 feet to the north right-of-way of said East Chenango Avenue and a non-tangent line; thence N 8929'54" E, along said north right-of-way, a distance of 984.64 feet to the point of beginning. 
Reserving unto the City of Cherry Hills Village a permanent and perpetual easement in, to, over, through and across the property described above for the construction, maintenance, operation, use, removal, repair and replacement of a public recreational trail, which easement shall include use for non-motorized recreational trail activities such as but not limited to pedestrian, bicycle, and equestrian use. (Ord. 8, Series of 2002) 
Ditch and utility easements over and across Plot 5, except the West 12 feet of said Plot 5 , Block 6, Cherry Vale Acres, Filing No. 4, Arapahoe County, Colorado, as reflected on the plat of Cherry Vale Acres Filing No. 4, a Re-Subdivision of Cherry Vale Acres Filing No. Three and a Subdivision of the Unplatted Part of the SW 1/4 SE1/4 Section 11, T5S, R68W Of the 6 th P.M. dated October 24, 1956, and recorded on October 25, 1956, in Plat Book 13, Page 11. (Ord. 14, Series of 2002) 
Part of a 16.00 foot wide trail easement over and across a portion of the Northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, City of Cherry Hills Village, County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado, and recorded at Reception Number A8152106, more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the NW corner of Lot 4A, the Buell Mansion Subdivision Filing 2, as filed at Reception No. B3176228, Plat Book 246 at Page 57, Arapahoe County, which has a North line that bears S8914'40"E between two monuments; thence S8914'40"E along said North line a distance of 247.97 feet; to a point on the North line of said Lot 4A; thence S4255'37"a distance of 15.59 feet; thence S4704'23"E a distance of 6.62 feet to the point of beginning; thence S4704'23"E a distance of 23.38 feet; thence N4255'37"E a distance of 21.32 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 156.00 feet, a central angle of 0556'39" and a chord that bears S5533'47"E a distance of 16.18 feet; thence S4255'37"W a distance of 39.71 feet; thence N4704'23"W a distance of 57.04 feet; thence S8914'40"E a distance of 23.83 feet to the point of beginning. Containing 1129 square feet, 0.0259 acres. (Ord. 11, Series of 2004) 
In addition, part of a 10.00 foot wide utility easement over and across a portion of the Northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, City of Cherry Hills Village, County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado, and recorded at Reception Number A7161666, more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the NW corner of Lot 4A, The Buell Mansion Subdivision Filing 2, as filed at Reception No. B3176228, Plat Book 246 at Page 57, Arapahoe County, which has a North line that bears S8914'40"E between two monuments; thence S8914'40"E along said North line a distance of 247.97 feet to a point on the North line of said Lot 4A being the point of beginning; thence S4255'37"W a distance of 15.59 feet; thence S4704'23"E a distance of 30.00 feet; thence N4255'37"E a distance of 27.35 feet; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 150.00 feet, a central angle of 0351'18" and a chord that bears S5444'23"E a distance of 10.09 feet; thence S4255'37"W a distance of 38.70 feet; thence N4704'23"W a distance of 50.00 feet; thence N4255'37"E a distance of 16.53 feet; thence S8914'40"E a distance of 13.49 feet to the point of beginning. Containing 890 square feet, 0.0204 acres. (Ord. 11, Series of 2004) 
In addition, a 16.00 foot wide trail easement over and across a portion of the Northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, City of Cherry Hills Village, County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado, more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the NW corner of Lot 4A, The Buell Mansion Subdivision Filing 2, as filed at Reception No. B3176228, Plat Book 246 at Page 57, Arapahoe County, which has a North line that bears S8914'40"E between two monuments; thence S8914'40"E along said North line a distance of 247.97 feet to a point on the North line of said Lot 4A being the point of beginning; thence S8914'40"E a distance of 31.68 feet; thence along a curve to the left a distance of 6.55 feet having a radius of 140.00 feet, a central angle of 0240'44" and a chord that bears S5153'03"E a distance of 6.55 feet; thence S4255'37"W a distance of 16.23 feet; thence N8914'40"W a distance of 31.54 feet; thence N4704'23"W a distance of 6.62 feet; thence N4255'37"E a distance of 15.59 feet to the point of beginning. Containing 610 square feet or 0.0140 acres, more or less. (Ord. 11, Series of 2004) 
An 8.00-foot wide utility easement over and across aportion of the Northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, City of Cherry Hills Village, County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado, more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at the center quarter corner of said Section 1; thence N8913'58"W, along the South line of the Northwest quarter of said Section 1, a distance of 1156.62 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 1 The Reserve at Cherry Hills, the point of beginning; thence continuing N8913'58"W along the said South line of the Northwest quarter of Section 1 a distance of 8.00 feet; thence N0018'01"E a distance of 430.21 feet; thence S8914'40"E a distance of 8.00 feet to a point on the East line of said Lot 1; thence S0018'01"W along the East line of said Lot 1 a distance of 430.21 feet to the point of beginning. Containing 3442 square feet, or 0.0790 acres, more or less. The basis of bearings is the South line of the Northwest quarter of said Section 1, monumented at the West 1/4 corner with a brass cap PLS 11434 and at the center 1/4 corner with an aluminum cap PLS 19003, which is considered to bear N8913'58"W. (Ord. 01, Series of 2005) 
A two-foot strip of land located within Lot 1, The Buell Mansion Subdivision Filing 4, more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at a point on the South line of said Lot 1 and from which the Southwest corner of said Lot 1 bears N8913'58"W, a distance of 276.00 feet, all bearings contained herein are relative thereto; thence N0017'50"E, a distance of 16.00 feet to the True Point of Beginning; thence N8913'58"W, a distance of 283.33 feet to a point on the West line of said Lot 1; thence N2413'58"W and along the West line of said Lot 1, a distance of 2.21 feet, to a point 18.00 feet North of the South line of said Lot 1; thence S8913'58"E, a distance of 284.25 feet; thence S0017'50"W, a distance of 2.00 feet to the True Point of beginning, City of Cherry Hills Village, County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado (Ord. 18, Series of 2008) 
APPENDIX F - SALE OF CITY PROPERTIES 
Upon and after the effective date hereof, and unless and until further action is taken by the City, the following described parcels of real property shall be sold, conveyed, transferred, developed, utilized and improved only as such parcel, and no portion of any such parcel shall be sold, transferred or conveyed unless it shall be so sold, transferred or conveyed with all remaining portions of real property located in such parcel: 
Parcel 1: Lots 47 and 48, Block 17; Lots 1 through 11, the north 1/2 of Lot 12, the north 1/2 of Lot 37 and Lots 38 through 48, Block 18; all of the vacated alley lying within Block 17 and adjoining Lot 47, Block 17; the south 1/2 vacated Lehigh Avenue as the same adjoins (a) Lot 48, Block 17, (b) vacated South Jackson Street, (c) Lots 1 and 48, Block 18, (d) vacated alley lying within Block 18; and (e) vacated west 1/2 of South Harrison Street; vacated alley lying within Block 18 as the same adjoins Lots 1 through 11, Lots 38 through 48, the north 1/2 of Lot 12 and the north 1/2 of Lot 37, and as the same extends to the centerline of now vacated Lehigh Avenue; vacated South Jackson Street as the same adjoins Lots 47 and 48, Block 17 and Lots 1 and 2, Block 18; and as the same extends to the centerline of now vacated Lehigh Avenue; and the west 1/2 of vacated South Harrison Street as the same adjoins all of Lots 41 through 48, Block 18 and as the same extends to the centerline of now vacated Lehigh Avenue; all in South University Park. 
Parcel 2: All Lots 3 through 24 and 25 through 42, Block 17; the west 1/2 of vacated alley lying within Block 17 adjoining Lots 3 through 6, Block 17; all of vacated alley lying within Block 17, as the same adjoins Lots 7 through 24, and Lots 25 through 42, Block 17; all in South University Park. 
Parcel 3: The south 1/2 of Lots 12 and 37, Lots 13 through 24 and 25 through 36, Block 18; and vacated alley lying within Block 18, as the same adjoins the aforesaid property, all in South University Park. 
Parcel 4: Lots 13 through 24 and 25 through 35, Block 19; west 1/2 vacated alley lying within Block 19 as the same adjoins Lot 13, Block 19, and all of vacated alley lying within Block 19 as the same adjoins Lots 14 through 24 and Lots 25 through 35, Block 19, all in South University Park. 
Parcel 5: Lots 1 through 10 and Lots 36 through 48, Block 19; the east 1/2 of vacated alley lying within Block 19 as the same adjoins Lots 36 through 38, Block 19; all of vacated alley lying within Block 19 as the same adjoins the aforesaid Lots 1 through 10 and Lots 39 through 48, and as the same extends to the centerline of now vacated Lehigh Avenue; south 1/2 of vacated Lehigh Avenue as the same adjoins Lots 1 and 48, Block 19, and as the same adjoins the east 1/2 of vacated South Harrison Street; and east 1/2 of vacated South Harrison Street as the same adjoins Lots 1 through 8, Block 19, and as the same extends to the centerline of now vacated Lehigh Avenue, all in South University Park. 
Upon recordation of the within Appendix F, each of the hereinabove described parcels of real property shall qualify as a single-family residential building site for single-family construction thereon, under the laws, rules and regulations of the City. (Ord. 1, Series of 1977) 
APPENDIX G - RESOLUTION LOG 
Res. No. Date Title 1945 None 8/28/45 Approving on behalf of Cherry Hills Village a sanitation and disposal plant survey by the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission for the proposed sanitation and sewage disposal plant and trunk lines therefor for the municipalities of Englewood, Sheridan, Littleton and Cherry Hills Village, provided that such survey is without cost or other obligation of any kind, either present or future, to Cherry Hills Village None 8/28/45 Pending adoption of sanitation ordinances and the licensing of garbage collectors, Messrs. Linzy and Dolph be given the exclusive right to haul garbage within the limits of Cherry Hills Village 1946 None 6/17/46 Whereas Cherry Hills Village, Colorado was incorporated as a municipal corporation during the year 1945, and 
Whereas the Board of Trustees in preparing its first budget for said municipal corporation had no experience on which to base its budget for the year 1946, by reason of which moneys provided for certain funds proved to be less than the actual requirements and moneys provided for other funds are more than ample; 
Now, therefore, be it resolved that out of the amount appropriated to the general fund for the indebtedness of the year 1945, the following amounts be transferred to the following funds: 
 to liability insurance ..... $15.00 
 to Town Treasurer, bond premium ..... $10.00 
 to Town Marshal, bond premium ..... $ 5.00 
 to Town Marshal, purchase of equipment ..... $15.75 1947 None 7/7/47 Granting to Public Service Company of Colorado a permit to excavate two trenches and to install two gas mains and a metal regulator 1948 No # 2/2/48 Upon the conditions hereinafter set forth, granting to the Public Service Company of Colorado a permit to excavate a trench across South University Boulevard connecting the existing gas main of the Public Service Company of Colorado located on the west side of South University Boulevard with Cherry Hills Schoolhouse, and to install such pipe and other equipment as are necessary to supply the Cherry Hills Schoolhouse with gas. This permit is granted on the following terms and conditions, to-wit 1949 None 1/31/49 An arrangement regarding the situation concerning the remodeled barn on Mr. John Meade's premises at 2500 East Quincy Avenue; made with Mr. Meade be limited to five years time in which he is to obtain materials and erect a dwelling upon the premises in which to house persons employed on the premises None 3/28/49 Whereas, Caldwell Martin was one of the founders of Cherry Hills Village and has served as a Trustee of this Village since its incorporation, and has given cheerfully and without stint of his time and energy to the affairs of the Village, particularly in the critical days of its organization and whereas, by reason of his removal from the Village, Mr. Martin has been unable to continue as a Trustee and has submitted his resignation... None 5/16/49 Whereas, Mr. E. G. Heckendorff, Mr. Walter Beans, Mrs. Mary P. Beans and others did, on May 16, 1949, file with the Clerk and Recorder of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, a petition for the annexation of the Northwest Quarter (NW1/4) of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado to Cherry Hills Village... 1953 None 4/6/53 Whereas it has been the experience of Cherry Hills Village that without public water supply and public sewage facilities, it is impossible for a home builder to provide his own domestic sewage or water supply on a site of less than two and one-half (21/2) acres, and that where either sewage or water is available, at least one and one-fourth (11/4) acres is essential to protect domestic water well or sewage system, and... None 11/2/53 Whereas the State Highway Department has a program for the widening of East Hampden Avenue on the north boundary of Cherry Hills Village, and proposes to take twenty (20) feet additional on each side of East Hampden Avenue for such widening, and... None 12/7/53 Whereas, the Board of Trustees of Cherry Hills Village, has, in accordance with the provisions of Senate Bill 170, enacted by the 1953 General Assembly of Colorado, determined the total mileage of the City street system lying within the corporate limits of said Town of Cherry Hills Village, and has duly prepared the required map designating arterial highways or streets by number; and... None 12/21/53 Whereas it appears that a certain tract of land in the northwest corner of Cherry Hills Village was subdivided by the owner thereof without complying with the subdivision ordinance of said Village; and whereas the Village Building Inspector thereafter granted a building permit on at least one portion of said subdivided tract; and... 1954 None 5/17/54 Approving the purchase of 2.602 acres in the NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th P.M., according to the survey of David L. Nicholl dated April 26, 1954, upon the following condition: the purchase price of fifteen hundred dollars ($1500.00) per acre... None 10/18/54 Granting an excavation permit to Garrett-Broomfield & Company, of Denver, Colorado, for itself, its successors and assigns, to excavate a trench along east Quincy Avenue between Village Road and Vista Road, and along Said Vista road for a distance of 2500 feet more or less, for the construction or extension of a water pipe line six inches in diameter... 1955 None 10/10/55 Whereas, Joseph F. Little was one of the founders of Cherry Hills Village and has served as its Mayor since its incorporation, and has given untiringly and without thought of personal sacrifice of his time and energy to the affairs of the Village during the entire ten years of its corporate being, .... Now, therefore, be it resolved that the Board of Trustees, with deep regret, accept Mr. Little's resignation as Mayor of the Village... 1957 None 3/18/57 (Again 4/4/57) Refusing to consent to being included within the boundaries of the Blue River - South Platte Water Conservancy District and expressly objecting to being so included... None 9/16/57 Authorizing Mr. Ferguson to draw up a contract for purchase along lines outlined by the negotiating committee for five acres of land owned by Mr. Shofroth to be signed by the officers of the Village... 1958 1 5/19/58 Whereas, there has been proposed an amendment to Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, popularly known as the "Simpson Plan," which provides for the creation of new cities and counties of Denver, Colorado Springs and Pueblo, for further annexation by such cities and counties, for the formation of other and further cities and counties, for future unilateral annexation of further and additional territories by cities and counties and by home rule cities, and for other and further powers and purposes in support thereof as set forth therein; and 1959 None 3/2/59 Whereas, the Urban Mayors' Association through its executive committee, has investigated possible solutions to metropolitan problems; and whereas, a principal of a Metropolitan Cooperative Commission has evolved from these studies and has been approved by the Urban Mayors' Association; Now None 5/18/59 Acknowledging the work done by State Representative Peter H. Dominick on behalf of the residents of Cherry Hills Village and the County of Arapahoe... 1960 None 8/1/60 Accepting a petition for annexation to the Town of Cherry Hills Village of that particular area in Arapahoe County, Colorado adjacent to the Village and described as Mansfield Heights 1961 None 4/19/61 Accepting the petition for annexation of Charlou Park, Second Addition None 8/7/61 Opposing the granting of commercial zoning for the purpose of construction of a regional shopping center on that property on East Hampden Avenue known as the KLZ Site 1962 None 1/15/62 Adopting and sending the following resolution to David Dunklee for use in the case of the Four-County Metropolitan Improvement District Court case: A resolution finding and determining and certifying to the Four-County Metropolitan Capital Improvement District that an emergency exists with reference to the need of the Town of Cherry Hills Village for each of certain capital improvement projects and capital equipment acquisitions, and requesting that such projects and acquisitions be placed in first priority... None 2/5/62 The Board of Trustees is informed that the following described real property located in the County of Arapahoe and State of Colorado may be nominally held in the name of the Town of Cherry Hills Village but that said property, if in fact owned by the Village, is not useable for any Village function or purpose 1964 None 2/17/64 Calling for a bond election of Tuesday, April 7, 1964, for the purpose of getting approval of the voters to issue bonds for the purpose of the erection of a public building for municipal purposes, and in an amount not to exceed $75,000 at an annual interest rate not to exceed 5% per annum 1965 None 2/8/65 Whereas, the Town proposes to issue general obligation public building bonds to provide funds with which to erect a public building in said Town, said bonds to be issued in the amount of $75,000... 1966 None 1/17/66 Whereas St. George's Episcopal Church has acquired a parcel of property larger than originally contemplated, and, whereas, such parcel is not overly desirable for residential purposes and was in part being used as an unauthorized dumping ground, thus creating health and sanitary problems... None 3/7/66 Entering into a lease-purchase agreement for an International truck, subject to a ruling by the Village Attorney that such an agreement is legal None 8/15/66 Whereas, a petition for annexation of the property described in Exhibit A attached hereto has been duly filed with the Clerk of the Town of Cherry Hills Village and duly forwarded to the Board of Trustees of Cherry Hills Village... None 12/5/66 Acknowledging that the plot plan, attached hereto and incorporated as a part of this resolution, complies with the requirements of the zoning ordinance of Cherry Hills Village, including the setback requirements and area requirements of the ordinance, and is in full compliance with the spirit of the ordinance with respect to spacing improvements thereon None 12/19/66 Requesting that the Division of Commerce and Development provide this municipality with planning assistance None 12/19/66 Personnel policy 1967 None 1/21/67 Relating to the annexation of contiguous, unincorporated territory in parts of Sections 5, 6, 8 and 9, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian None 3/21/67 Relating to the intention of the City Council to provide for amendments to the Charter by increasing the number of Councilmen to eight and re-districting the area in the event of dissolution of the Town of Greenwood Village and its annexation to the City of Cherry Hills Village None 3/21/67 Relating to the annexation of contiguous, unincorporated territory in parts of Sections 5, 6 and 8, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian None 5/1/67 Memorial resolution acknowledging the death of Joseph F. Little, recording appreciation for all that he did for the welfare of the City None 9/11/67 Relating to the annexation of contiguous, unincorporated territory in Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian None 10/16/67 Relating to the annexation of contiguous, unincorporated territory in Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, State of Colorado 1968 1 2/5/68 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1967 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1967 2 3/11/68 
(Also 2/5/68) Approving the application for use of Lot 15, Pheasant Ridge, for private club purposes by Pheasant Ridge Aqua and Racket Club 3 5/20/68 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1968 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1968 4 8/6/68 Affirming the exclusive jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment over applications for variances to nonconforming structures 5 8/6/68 Authorizing the City of Cherry Hills Village to enter into a contract with the Colorado State Planning Office with respect to a federal planning grant for comprehensive planning 5 - B 11/4/68 Authorizing the Mayor, on behalf of the City, to execute a bridle path easement with Kent School, Inc., and the Denver Country Day School 1969 1 1/20/69 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1968 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1968 None 4/17/69 Memorial resolution for George J. Stemmler, recording grateful appreciation for all that he did for the welfare of the City 1970 1 1/19/70 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1969 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1969 3 2/2/70 Submitting to the qualified electors of the City of Cherry Hills Village an amendment to Paragraph 2 of Section 8.3 of Article VIII of the Charter, providing that the Planning and Zoning Commission "may" rather than "shall" hold a hearing or hearings relative to zoning and changes in the zoning ordinance, and further providing that the Planning and Zoning Commission "may" rather than "shall" make recommendations thereon to the Council 4 2/2/70 (Amended 3/2/70) Submitting to the qualified electors of the City of Cherry Hills Village an amendment to Section 13.13, Article XIII of the Charter, providing for procedures in amending the Charter by changing reference to Section "14.10" to Section "13.10" of the Charter and providing that Charter questions submitted by the electors of Cherry Hills Village shall be submitted in accordance with Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado 5 2/16/70 Submitting to the qualified electors of the City of Cherry Hills Village an amendment to Section 13.15, of Article XIII of the Charter, providing that in the absence of Charter provisions or ordinances adopted by Council, the statutes of the State of Colorado governing municipalities now classified as "cities" rather than "towns" shall be in effect None 4/13/70 Designating the First National Bank of Englewood a depository for the City's funds, and orders for the payment of money and other negotiable instruments may be endorsed for deposit by any of the officers of the corporation or its agents... 1971 1 1/4/71 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for the fiscal year 1970 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1970 None 10/5/71 Approving in principle the proposed setting aside of approximately eight acres of land in the Meade Subdivision in the vicinity of the Village Center 2 11/16/71 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1971 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1971 1972 1 1/18/72 Authorizing the transfer certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1971 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1971 1973 1 1/16/73 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1972 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1972 2? (No number listed) 2/20/73 Relating to regional suburban police: Whereas, local law enforcement agencies have the responsibility for handling crime and other situations necessitating crisis intervention or protection... 3 7/17/73 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1973 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1973 4? (No number listed) 9/18/73 Consenting to an underground pipeline for irrigation water purposes in place of an open irrigation lateral ditch, such pipeline to be located beneath a portion of the existing Cherry Hills bridle path 5 12/4/73 Resolved that the Council...hereby: 
1. Assures the Federal Insurance Administration that it will enact as necessary, and maintain in force for those areas having flood or mudslide hazards, adequate land use and control measures... 
2. Vests the Planning and Zoning Commission of Cherry Hills Village with the responsibility, authority and means to... 
3. Appoints the Building Inspector to maintain for public inspection and to furnish upon request a record of elevations... 
4. Agrees to take such other official action as my be reasonably necessary to carry out the objectives of the program 6 12/4/73 Resolved by the Council...as follows: 
1. That the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review all building permit applications... 
2. That the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments... 
3. That the Planning and Zoning Commission shall require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood water... 7 12/4/73 Resolved by the Council...as follows: 
1. That the Building Inspector shall require the issuance of a permit for any excavation, grading, fill or construction...and 
2. That the Planning and Zoning Commission shall require review of each permit application... 1974 1 1/15/74 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1973 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1973 2 2/19/74 Submitting to the qualified electors of the City of Cherry Hills Village an amendment to Section 2.5, of Article II of the Charter providing that elective officers shall have resided in the area comprising the City at the time of his election or appointment for not less than one year rather than the present five-year residence requirement 3 2/19/74 Submitting to the qualified electors of the City of Cherry Hills Village an amendment to Paragraph (d) of Section 4.5 of Article IV of the Charter, providing that after final passage of an ordinance it shall be published 4 3/19/74 Stating that the City of Cherry Hills Village does not object to the organization of City of Cherry Hills Village Sanitation District 5 5/21/74 Indicating the City's intent to join with other general purpose units of local government in the Denver area to develop and implement a plan resulting in a coordinated waste treatment management system for the area 6 8/6/74 Increasing the fee prescribed in said Section 10 a 2 of Ordinance No. 2, Series of 1970 as amended, for the filing of any application or appeal with the Board of Adjustment from $15.00 to $25.00 7 9/3/74 Creating a Conservation Trust Fund pursuant to state statute in order to qualify for distribution of state moneys for conservation trust fund purposes 8 10/1/74 Exempting certain property from the application of the subdivision ordinance of the City of Cherry Hills Village 1975 1 2/4/75 Concerning an intergovernmental contract for energy and resource recovery from solid waste 2 2/4/75 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1974 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1974 3 2/18/75 Exempting certain property from the application of the subdivision ordinance of the City of Cherry Hills Village 4 2/18/75 Authorizing construction within the one-hundred-year flood plain area 5 4/1/75 Exempting certain property from the application of the subdivision ordinance of the City of Cherry Hills Village 5 4/15/75 Authorizing negotiations for purchase of or condemnation of property or interests therein in relation to the Dahlia and Oxford Street and Drainage Project within the City of Cherry Hills Village 6 5/6/75 Authorizing construction within the one-hundred-year flood area 7 5/6/75 Approving declaration of additional protective covenants 7 12/16/75 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1975 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1975 1976 1 3/16/76 Authorizing construction of a flood channelization project within the one-hundred-year flood plain area and authorizing an amendment of the one-hundred-year flood plain boundaries as reflected upon the City zoning map 2 8/17/76 Whereas, it has come to the attention of the City Council of Cherry Hills Village that consideration is being given to the adoption of what has been commonly referred to as the "super grid plan"... 3 10/25/76 Authorizing participation in a circuit rider management assistance program and authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the Denver Regional Council of Governments pursuant thereto 1977 2 -Should be 1) 1/4/77 Whereas, officials of the Counties of Arapahoe, Jefferson and Douglas, the City and County of Denver, the Cities of Littleton, Englewood and Lakewood met in reference to solutions to the transportation problems in the urbanized areas in southwest metropolitan Denver and as the result of said meeting, the City of Cherry Hills Village desires to advise and petition the Ad Hoc Commission, the Governor of Colorado and the Colorado State Highway Commission... 2 1/4/77 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1976 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1976 3 4/5/77 Supporting the immediate construction of the Foothills Water Treatment Complex 4 4/19/77 concerning a proposal for the creation of a Metropolitan Council in the Denver region 5 5/3/77 Expressing support for the proposed South Suburban Recreation and Park District bond program known as Update '77 6 6/10/77 Recommending to Arapahoe County Commissioners the acquisition of Plaza South Building in the Greenwood Plaza Complex as the Arapahoe County Judicial Center 7 10/18/77 Increasing to $50 the fee to be charged for any application or appeal filed with the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 8 12/6/77 Directing the closure of Town of Cherry Hills Village Public Building Bond Fund 1978 2 1/17/78 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1977 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1977 1 1/20/78 Stating the intent to issue a street cut permit to the Denver Water Board for Conduit No. 27 3 3/7/78 Authorizing the transfer of certain unencumbered appropriation balances for fiscal 1977 to certain other accounts for fiscal 1977 3 - B 5/16/78 Authorizing temporary construction of fences within the designated flood plain 5 9/5/78 Exempting certain property from the application of the subdivision ordinance of the City of Cherry Hills Village..." 6 12/19/78 declaring that the recommended contribution rate for the Police Pension Fund would place an undue hardship on the taxpayers 7 12/19/78 supporting the immediate installation of an actuated traffic signal at the intersection of South Franklin Street and East Belleview Avenue 1979 1 4/3/79 Supporting the Denver region element of the State Implementation Plan through commitment to implement specific air pollution control measures and to consider for implementation those additional measures recommended as the result of further evaluations to be conducted under the continuing air quality planning process 2 4/17/79 Authorizing changes of street names and addresses in the Cherry Hills Farm Subdivision and on East Layton Drive 3 5/1/79 Establishing procedures of financial disbursements 4 9/18/79 Encouraging the State Board of Parks and Recreation to permit multi-jurisdictional police firearms training on Chatfield Dam parks lands 5 11/6/79 Authorizing construction of a flood channelization project within the one-hundred-year flood plain area and authorizing an amendment of the one-hundred-year flood plain boundaries as reflected upon the City zoning map 1980 1 3/18/80 Stating the City's intent to become affiliated with the Fire and Police Pension Association 2 3/4/80 Stating the City's intent to issue a street cut permit to the Denver Water Board for Conduit No. 27 3 3/4/80 Authorizing construction of a flood channelization project within the one-hundred-year flood plain area and authorizing an amendment of the one-hundred-year flood plain boundaries as reflected upon the City zoning map 4 8/5/80 Authorizing the transfer of funds from the General Fund Contingency Account for a traffic study 5 8/19/80 Directing the closure of the City of Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 1 Fund 6 8/19/80 Designating an Emergency Response Authority for hazardous material incidents 7 9/16/80 Authorizing the Division of Block 1, Cherry's Broadway Gardens into two parcels as provided by the exemption provision of the subdivision regulation of the City of Cherry Hills Village 8 10/21/80 Authorizing the transfer of funds from the General Fund Contingency Account for posting of street load limit regulations 9 10/21/80 Approving the proposed creation of the Chaumont in Cherry Hills Metropolitan District 10 11/18/80 Establishing a deferred compensation plan for City employees 1981 1 1/6/81 Ratifying an agreement with the Denver Water Board Conduit No. 27 2 5/19/81 Authorizing the amendment of the lot line between Lots 2 and 3 of Block 6, Cherry Vale Acres, Filing No. Four 3 8/18/81 Declaring the intention of the City Council to create a special improvement district within the City, to be designated as "Special Improvement District No. 2," adopting details and specifications therefor and ordering publication and mailing of notice of hearing to the owners of the property to be assessed for improvements in said district 4 9/15/81 Authorizing the division of Lot 7, Cherry Hills Subdivision into two parcels as provided by the exemption provision of the City's subdivision regulations 5 11/17/81 Pertaining to covenants and the keeping and raising of animals in the City 6 12/15/81 Entering into an intergovernmental agreement with certain other Colorado Municipalities to form an organization to be known as the Colorado Interlocal Risk Sharing Pool 7 12/15/81 Accepting an agreement with the Colorado Department of Highways for replacement of a bridge over the Highline Canal on Colorado Boulevard 1982 1 2/2/82 Approving the findings of the Cherry Hills Village CATV Review Team; authorizing that a nonexclusive cable television permit in the City of Cherry Hills Village be awarded to Mountain States Video Communications Company, Inc.; and providing authority for and terms of the permit agreement 2 1/19/82 Setting forth an administrative procedure and an agreement with the City of Englewood for sewer stubs in Cherry Hills Village 3 2/16/82 Submitting to the registered qualified electors of the City of Cherry Hills Village, at the regular election to be held on Tuesday, April 6, 1982, the question of issuing general obligation bonds of the City for the purpose of expanding the Village Center 4 2/2/82 Setting forth a procedure to implement an Open Space Preservation Program in Cherry Hills Village 5 3/16/82 Setting forth its position on a proposed resort hotel development on property owned by the Temple H. Buell Trust 6 4/20/82 Reaffirming its support for the Centennial Parkway C-470 project 7 4/20/82 Providing notice of sale of Special Improvement District No. 2 special improvement bonds in the amount of $100,000 8 6/15/82 Authorizing a change in a street address on South Dahlia Street 9 6/15/82 Giving direction to the Planning Commission on a proposed resort hotel 9-A 7/20/82 Approving a petition to form the Charlou Park Water District 10 7/6/82 Providing for the notice of sale of general obligation bonds, Series 1982, in the principal amount of $450,000 11 8/3/82 Awarding $450,000 in general obligation bonds for the expansion of the Village Center 12 8/17/82 Setting a public hearing on the proposed assessment roll for Special Improvement District No. 2 in the City of Cherry Hills Village 13 9/7/82 Amending Resolution No. 10 of the City adopted on July 6, 1982, relating to the notice of sale of the City's general obligation bonds, Series 1982, in the principal amount of 450,000 14 9/7/82 Setting a public hearing on the proposed assessment roll for Special Improvement District No. 2 in the City of Cherry Hills Village 15 9/7/82 Transferring to Mesa County, Colorado, the allocation of the City of Cherry Hills Village to finance mortgage loans to provide more adequate residential housing facilities for low and middle income families and persons, and authorizing the execution and delivery by the City of an allocation transfer agreement and a delegation agreement 16 9/21/82 Pertaining to a proposed resort hotel development on property owned by the Temple H. Buell Trust 17 10/7/82 Supporting initiative efforts to require recycling of beverage containers 18 11/16/82 Commending meritorious service of Mr. Thomas A. Trento 19 11/16/82 Closing the Bridle Path Bank Account 20 12/7/82 Urging federal antitrust exemption legislation for municipalities 21 12/7/82 Expressing opposition to variances requested for a church at the intersection of Holly Street and Belleview Avenue 22 12/21/82 Amending the Conservation Trust Fund of the City 23 12/21/82 Requesting the South Suburban Metropolitan Recreation and Parks District to begin land acquisition for the Open Space Program 1983 1 1/18/83 Recognizing the achievements of W. Richard McMartin, City Attorney 2 8/2/83 Transferring to Arapahoe County, Colorado, the allocation of the City of Cherry Hills Village, under Section 29-4-803 and Section 29-4-805 of C.R.S. 1973, as amended, for the financing of mortgage loans to provide more adequate residential housing facilities for low and middle income families and persons within the County, and elsewhere within the State of Colorado; and authorizing the execution and delivery by the City of an allocation transfer agreement 3 9/6/83 Authorizing the naming of Foxhill Road 4 9/6/83 Granting a license to use City property for access to Huntwick Lane 5 9/20/83 Concerning Belleview Avenue and expressing the desire of the City Council to a have a landscaped center median 6 10/4/83 Submitting to the qualified registered electors of the City at the general election to be held on November 8, 1983 the question of whether an ordinance should be adopted by the City Council imposing a use tax on the privilege of using or consuming building materials for the construction or improvement of any building or other structure in the City 7 10/18/83 Approving a certain lease purchase agreement and authorizing the Mayor to execute the same on behalf of the City of Cherry Hills Village 8 10/18/83 Repealing Resolution No. 6, Series of 1983, and postponing indefinitely the general election to be held on Nov 8, 1983, which was to consider the question of whether an ordinance should be adopted by the City Council 9 11/15/83 Adopting revised regulations for Chapter 38 of the Uniform Building Code relating to fire protection systems 10 12/6/83 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with certain other Colorado municipalities to form the Intergovernmental Risk Sharing Pool for workers compensation 1984 1 None 2 2/7/84 Amending the agreement for a Deferred Compensation Plan with ICMA Retirement Corporation and expanding the City's participation in this Plan 3 4/9/84 Commending the service of Robert I. St. Clair as Mayor from 1982 to 1984 4 4/9/84 Commending the service of Donald J. Egan as City Councilman from 1980 to 1984 5 6/19/84 Adopting a new Official Zoning Map 6 12/18/84 Recognizing the achievements of Frederick Powell and commending his service to the citizens of Cherry Hills Village 1985 1 3/5/85 Exempting the resubdivision of Lot 14 Cherry Hills Annex Subdivision, from the subdivision process of the City of Cherry Hills Village 2 None 3 3/19/85 Declaring the intention of the City Council to create a special improvement district within the City, to be designated as Special Improvement District No. 3, adopting details and specifications therefor, and ordering publication and mailing of notice for hearing to the owners of the property to be assessed for improvements in said district 4 7/16/85 Setting the date of sale for bonds of Special Improvement District No. 3 5 7/16/85 Setting a public hearing on the proposed assessment roll for Special Improvement District No. 3, in the City of Cherry Hills Village 6 8/6/85 Providing for the sale of special assessment bonds for Special Improvement District No. 3, for the purpose of paying the cost of constructing and installing certain street paving and improvements for the District 7 9/17/85 Submitting to the qualified registered electors of the City at a special election to be held on November 5, 1985, the question of whether an ordinance should be adopted by the City Council imposing a use tax on motor vehicles purchased outside the City by residents for use or storage within the City 8 11/19/85 Accepting an agreement with the Colorado Department of Highways for landscape improvements in the median area of Belleview Avenue 9 12/7/85 Approving and authorizing support for maintaining the designation of the Denver Regional Council of Governments as the Area Agency on Aging (AAA) 10 12/7/85 Recognizing the contribution of George G. Anderman to Three Pond Park 11 12/7/85 In recognition of Martin Luther King's Birthday 12 12/17/85 Expressing the intent of the City of Cherry Hills Village to withdraw from the Colorado Fire and Police Pension Association 1986 1 2/4/86 Declaring the intention of the City Council to create a Special Improvement District within the City of Cherry Hills Village, to be designated as Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement Dist No. 4, and adopting details and specifications therefor 2 2/18/86 Declaring the intention of the City Council to create a Special Improvement District within the City, to be designated as Special Improvement Dist No. 5, adopting details and specifications therefor, and ordering publication and mailing of notice of hearing for the owners of the property to be assessed for improvements in said district 3 4/1/86 Creating an escrow bank account at Intrawest Bank of Southglenn for the storm sewer system to be constructed in the Charlou Park Subdivision 4 4/1/86 Providing for a notice of sale of bonds for Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 4 5 4/1/86 Exempting the subdivision of the property at 4150 East Quincy Avenue from the subdivision process of the City of Cherry Hills Village 6 4/1/86 Exempting the resubdivision of Tract 50, Clark Colony, from the subdivision process of the City of Cherry Hills Village 7 4/1/86 Exempting a replat of a portion of Lots 1, 12, 113 and all of Lot 2, along with a portion of vacated South Dexter and a portion of vacated East Jefferson Road, Cherry Hills Annex Subdivision from the subdivision process of the City of Cherry Hills Village 8 4/14/86 Providing for a notice of hearing on assessments for Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 4 9 5/6/86 Providing for a notice of hearing on assessments for Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 4 10 None 11 6/3/86 Setting a public hearing on the proposed assessment roll for Special Improvement District No. 5, in the City of Cherry Hills Village 12 6/3/86 Setting the date for the sale of bonds for Special Improvement District No. 5 13 7/1/86 Calling for the issuance of bonds for Special Improvement District No. 5 14 7/15/86 Establishing a money purchase retirement plan for commissioned police officers 15 8/19/86 Recognizing the role of the Denver Regional Council of Governments in furthering the intergovernmental pursuit of regional cooperation 16 10/14/86 Approving the creation of the East Cherry Hills Water District 17 11/18/86 For the Denver Better Air Campaign 18 11/18/86 Accepting an agreement with the Colorado Department of Highways for landscape improvements in the median area of Belleview Avenue 1987 1 6/2/87 Accepting an agreement with the Colorado Department of Highways for landscape improvements in the median area of Belleview Avenue between University Boulevard and Colorado Boulevard (extended) 2 12/15/87 Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with certain other Colorado municipalities to form the Colorado Intergovernmental Risk Sharing Pool for Workers' Compensation 3-6 Not Used 7 12/5/87 Providing for the appointment of a successor paying agent and registrar for Special Improvement District No. 1, and a successor paying agent for Special Improvement District No. 2, and Cherry Hills Village General Obligation Bonds, Series of 1982 1988 1 1/19/88 Authorizing a street name change in the Cherry Vale Meadows Subdivision 2 4/11/88 Accepting an agreement with the Colorado Department of Highways for landscape improvements in the median area of Belleview Avenue between Fairfax Street and Colorado Boulevard (extended) 3 6/7/88 Approving the proposed dissolution of the Chaumont in Cherry Hills Metropolitan District 4 11/1/88 Supporting non-woodburning on high pollution days to improve the air quality in the metropolitan Denver area 5 11/1/88 Creating the Cherry Hills Park and Trail Committee and establishing guidelines for its operation 6 12/6/88 Authorizing a street name change in the spelling of East Radcliff Avenue 7 12/20/88 Declaring the "Old Hire" Policemen's Pension Fund to be idle 1989 1 3/21/89 Transferring budget allocations from the administration-miscellaneous account to other expense accounts within the General Fund 2 4/18/89 Declaring the "Old Hire" Policemen's Pension Fund to be idle 3 None 4 9/5/89 Setting forth a disbursal policy for Police Pension Old Hire idle funds and declaring other police-related activities 5 9/19/89 Granting a license to use City property for access to Huntwick Lane 6 10/3/89 Submitting to the qualified registered electors of the City at a special election to be held on November 7, 1989, the question of whether an ordinance should be adopted by the City Council imposing a use tax on leased motor vehicles 7 12/5/89 Providing for the appointment of a successor paying agent and registrar for Special Improvement District No. 1, and a successor paying agent for Special Improvement District No. 2, and Cherry Hills Village General Obligation Bonds, Series of 1982 1990 1 5/15/90 Concerning the proposed Church Area Traffic Plan 2 5/15/90 Establishing a smoking policy for City buildings and vehicles 3 6/19/90 Authorizing the naming of Huntwick Court in the Cherrymoor South Subdivision 4 7/17/90 Concerning Special Improvement District No. 4 1991 1 3/5/91 Establishing a smoking policy for City buildings and vehicles 2 4/2/91 Declaring the intention of the City Council to create a Special Improvement District within the City, to be designated as Special Improvement Dist No. 6, adopting details and specifications therefor, and ordering publication and mailing of notice of hearing to the owners of the property to be assessed for improvements in said District 3 4/2/91 Re-establishing the emergency telephone service charge for funding of the E-911 system within Arapahoe County 4 7/5/91 Establishing procedures and fees for the Water and Sewer Consolidation Project 5 10/15/91 Setting a public hearing on the proposed assessment roll for Special Improvement District No. 6 in the City of Cherry Hills Village 6 11/19/91 Directing that notice of the sale of bonds be provided to prospective purchasers 7 12/17/91 Setting a date for the sale of special assessment bonds for Special Improvement District No. 6 1992 1 1/21/92 Creating a designated fund balance in the General Fund 2 12/1/92 Concurring with the dissolution of the Tamarac Water & Sanitation District and the Village Heights Water District and accepting the transfer of said districts' water service assets, functions and responsibilities to the City 3 12/14/92 A resolution accepting the transfer and assignment of the Highline Park Water & Sewer District's water service assets and contract rights to the City 4 12/14/92 Concurring with the dissolution of the East Belleview Water & Sanitation District and accepting the transfer of said district's water service assets, functions and responsibilities to the City 1993 1 3/16/93 Adopting a master plan for the City of Cherry Hills Village 2 6/15/93 Increasing the service availability fee for water and sewer taps 3 7/20/93 Concurring with the dissolution of the South Gilpin Street Water Users Association, and accepting the transfer of said district's water service assets, functions and responsibilities to the City 4 7/20/93 Supporting the appropriation of a minimum stream flow in Little Dry Creek 5 9/7/93 Authorizing the Greater Metro Cable Consortium to file for and regulate basic cable television service rates on behalf of the Cherry Hills Village 6 11/2/93 Concurring with the dissolution of the Meade Lane Water District and accepting the transfer of said district's water service assets, functions and responsibilities to the City 7 11/2/93 Concurring with the dissolution of the Cherry Hills Rancho Water & Sanitation District, and accepting transfer of said district's water and sanitary sewer assets, functions and responsibilities to the City 1994 1 2/15/94 Submitting to the qualified electors of the City at the regular election to be held on April 5, 1994, the question of whether certain revisions to the City Charter should be approved 2 4/11/94 Commending the service of Bruce Smith as City Council Member from 1986 to 1994 3 4/11/94 Designating the Park and Trail Committee as the City's Tree Board and specifying duties and responsibilities 4 4/19/94 Establishing a water line extension policy for the Fairfax-Belleview Loop 5 4/19/94 Establishing a water line extension policy for the Quincy-Holly Loop 6 6/21/94 Supporting the Scientific and Cultural Facilities District 7 6/21/94 Adopting customer service standards for cable television permits in Cherry Hills Village 8 6/21/94 Designating the Castlewood Fire Protection District as the emergency response agency for hazardous material incidents occurring within the corporate limits of the City of Cherry Hills Village 9 6/21/94 Setting a public hearing for August 2, 1994, on a petition for annexation received from the Cherry Hills Heights Subdivision 10 7/19/94 Adopting a budget calendar for fiscal year 1995 11 8/30/94 Concurring with the dissolution of the Cherry Hills Park Water Company and accepting transfer of said district's water assets, functions and responsibilities to the City 12 10/4/94 Adopting a pre-tax premium conversion plan for the employees of the City 13 11/1/94 Accepting the territory in the South University Place Subdivision into the City's water service area 14 11/1/94 Authorizing the City of Cherry Hills Village to join with other local government entities as a participant in the Colorado Local Government Liquid Asset Trust (Colortrust) to pool funds for investment 15 12/6/94 Accepting the public dedication of a portion of Blackmer Road 1995 1 1/17/95 Establishing a Utility Enterprise Fund within the Cherry Hills Village budget 2 3/7/95 Adopting a Health Care Spending Account Plan and Dependent Care Assistance Plan for the employees of the City 3 4/4/95 Expressing its support for the extension of the RTD Light Rail Project into the Southwest Corridor 4 6/6/95 Concurring with the dissolution of the Cherryridge Water & Sanitation District, and accepting transfer of said district's water and sanitary sewer assets, functions and responsibilities to the City 5 6/20/95 Denying the rezoning application for Cherry Hills Park 6 6/20/95 Amending the fee schedule of the Utility Enterprise Fund 7 8/15/95 Adopting a budget calendar for fiscal year 1996 8 10/17/95 Amending the budget calendar for consideration of the 1996 budget 1996 1 3/19/96 Designating April 26, 1996, as Arbor Day 2 3/19/96 Authorizing the naming of the private road in Todd's Estate Subdivision 3 4/16/96 Authorizing a change of address for Parcel C of the Blackmer Hill Subdivision to 4970 South Fairfax Street 4 4/16/96 Expressing its support for the South Suburban Park & Recreation District's proposed bond issue 5 5/7/96 Authorizing the City Clerk to appoint judges of election and to set their compensation 6 5/21/96 Adopting design standards for wastewater collection facilities within the City of Cherry Hills Village service area 7 7/16/96 Authorizing a change of address for Lot 3, The Allen Subdivision, to 8 Walden Lane 8 8/6/96 Adopting a budget calendar for fiscal year 1997 9 10/1/96 Amending the fee schedule for the Utility Enterprise Fund 10 10/15/96 Establishing policies for street rights-of-way that contain water lines 1997 1 1/7/97 Authorizing a change of address for a lot on the North One-half of Tract 34, Clark Colony Subdivision, to 4650 South Forest Street 2 1/7/97 Authorizing a change of address for Lot 1, Village Heights Subdivision, to 1 Vista Road 3 5/20/97 Authorizing a change of address for the following addresses... 4 7/15/97 Concurring with the dissolution of the Cantitoe Water District, and accepting transfer of said district's water assets, functions and responsibilities to the City 5 10/7/97 Concurring with the dissolution of the Cherry Hills Subdivision Water District, and accepting transfer of said district's water assets, functions and responsibilities to the City 6 9/12/97 Authorizing the conditional approval of a service plan for the formation of the Hampden and University Metropolitan District 7 12/16/97 Exempting Bethany Lutheran Church from the full subdivision process as permitted by Section 7-3-9A of the Municipal Code 1998 1 1/20/98 Disapproving the Hampden and University Metropolitan District Service Plan 2 1/20/98 Concerning special district service plans and statements of purpose 3 3/17/98 Exempting Mr. and Mrs. James Sullivan from the full subdivision process as permitted by Section 7-3-9A of the Municipal Code 4 4/13/98 Adopting a funding program for maintenance of drainageways in the Village 5 4/21/98 Exempting Lots 2 and 3, Cherry Hills Park 1 Subdivision, from the full subdivision process as permitted by Section 7-3-9A of the Municipal Code 6 4/13/98 Exempting Lots 9 and 10, Cherry Hills Park 1 Subdivision, from the full subdivision process as permitted by Section 7-3-9A of the Municipal Code 7 6/13/98 Authorizing a preliminary order of the Council of the Cherry Hills Village, adopting preliminary plans and specifications for Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 7, describing materials to be used, determining the number of installments and time for payment, establishing an estimate of the cost of the improvements to be funded by the District, approving a map of the boundaries of the District, and a schedule showing the approximate amounts to be assessed upon the property within the District; and authorizing a public hearing on the proposed District, and ordering publication of notice of the same 8 7/21/98 Adopting a budget calendar for the 1999 budget 9 7/21/98 Renaming a portion of the Kenyon Avenue right-of-way to Covington Drive 10 10/98 Withdrawn by applicant 11 7/21/98 Amending Resolution No. 7, Series of 1998, which authorized a preliminary order of the City Council of the City of Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 7 and authorized a public hearing on the proposed District, and ordered publication of notice of the same 12 7/21/98 Increasing the inclusion fee for water and sewer consolidation projects 13 7/21/98 Accepting a grant of easement for public trails from Vyron Properties, Incorporated - Highline Meadows in Cherry Hills 14 7/21/98 Accepting a grant of easement for public trails from Denver First Church of the Nazarene - Highline Meadows in Cherry Hills 15 7/21/98 Accepting a grant of utility easement from Vyron Properties, Incorporated - Highline Meadows in Cherry Hills 16 7/21/98 Declaring the intention to create a special improvement district within the City, to be designated as Special Improvement District No. 8, adopting details and specifications therefor, and ordering publication and mailing of notice of hearing to the owners of the property to be assessed for improvements in said District 17 9/1/98 Calling a special election to be held on November 3, 1998, for the purpose of voting on the question of whether to approve an amendment to the City Charter 18 None 19 8/18/98 Accepting a recreational trail easement across Lots 4 and 5, Buell Mansion Subdivision 20 10/6/98 Concerning the buffers in the R-3A Zone District 21 None 22 12/1/98 Exempting Mr. and Mrs. James David Grown from the full subdivision process as permitted by Section 7-3-9A of the City Code 23 12/15/98 Changing the address of the property at 4595 South Downing Street to 1195 East Tufts Avenue 1999 1 1/19/99 Approving TCI - AT&T transfer of control of cable franchise 2 2/2/99 Exempting Lots 13 and 14, Cherry Hills Park 1 Subdivision, from full subdivision process as permitted by Section 7-3-9A of the City Code 3 Not Adopted Exempting Lots 13 and 14, Cherry Hills Park 1 Subdivision, from full subdivision process as permitted by Section 7-3-9A of the City Code 4 4/6/99 Exempting Lots 9 and 10, Block 2, Highline Meadows at Cherry Hills Subdivision from full subdivision process as permitted by Section 7-3-9A of the City Code 5 Not Adopted Changing the address from 3641 South Downing Street to 2 Downing Way 6 Not Adopted Changing the address from 3601 South Downing Street to 3 Downing Way 7 4/6/99 Setting a public hearing on the proposed assessment roll for Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 7 and providing for mailing and publication of the public hearing 8 4/20/99 Exempting St. Mary's Academy property from full subdivision process as permitted by Section 7-3-9A of the City Code 9 4/20/99 Amending Resolution No. 7 dated 4/699 by setting a public hearing on the proposed assessment roll for Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 7 10 5/18/99 Concerning proposed issuance of Special Assessment Bonds Series 1999A and Series 1999B. authorizing public sale, official notice, etc. 11 6/15/99 Exempting Lot 102 and Tract Q, Buell Mansion from the full subdivision process 12 6/15/99 Exempting Tracts 7 and 8, Cantitoe Subdivision from the full subdivision process 13 9/7/99 Establishing the Parks and Trails Committee 14 6/15/99 Exempting Lots 1 and 2, Cherry Hills Park "A" from the full subdivision process 15 6/15/99 Exempting the property at 4480 South University Boulevard from the full subdivision process 16 6/15/99 Re-setting the date for the public sale of bonds for the City Special Improvement District No. 7 17 6/15/99 Authorizing the Mayor to execute a bargain and sale deed for the sale of Tracts A and B of the Buell Mansion Subdivision 18 6/15/99 Accepting a vehicular access easement for handicapped persons and maintenance purposes over Tract S, Buell Mansion Subdivision 19 7/20/99 Accepting the water system assets of the homeowners in the area of Viking Drive and establishing fees for the repair and maintenance of said system 20 7/20/99 Re-setting the date for the public sale of bonds for Special Improvement District No. 7 21 8/17/99 Adopting the budget calendar for the 2000 budget 22 8/17/99 Setting the ballot issues for November 23 10/5/99 Exempting Lots 26 and 27, Charlou Park, Second Addition from the full five hearing subdivision process 24 11/30/99 Adopting a new 401(a) program 2000 1 1/18/00 Regarding legal advice to individual City Council members 2 2/15/00 Addressing Census 2000 as a community priority 3 3/7/00 Approving a subdivision exemption on Lot 111, Buell Mansion 4 3/21/00 Exempting Lots 1 and 2, Cat Meadows, and South X of Block 3 5 4/18/00 Changing the address of 1600 East Layton Drive 6 4/18/00 Increasing the uniform exemption from business personal property tax 7 4/18/00 Setting public hearing for assessment roll - Special Improvement District No. 7 8 4/18/00 Authorizing public sale of special assessment bonds 9 5/30/00 Changing residency requirements for members of the Parks and Trails Committee 10 6/20/00 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2001 budget 11 VOID VOID - Concurring the dissolution of Cherrymoor South - VOID 12 6/20/00 Changing 4500 Franklin to 1610 East Stanford Avenue 13 7/18/00 Changing 4896 South El Camino Drive to 6100 Plateau Drive 14 7/18/00 Changing 1 South Lane to 4825 South Lafayette Lane 15 8/15/00 Exempting Beck Subdivision from the full subdivision process 16 8/15/00 Calling an election on November 7, 2000, authorizing the issuance of general obligation bonds for undergrounding utilities 17 8/15/00 Stating opposition to proposed Constitutional Amendment #21, otherwise known as Initiative #205 or Tax Cut 2000 18 9/19/00 Recommending approval of the South Metro Fire Rescue ballot question 19 10/17/00 Exempting property at 4600 South University from the full exemption process 20 10/17/00 Accepting Parcel B, William Goodin Subdivision 21 11/21/00 Exempting property at 2400 Cherryridge Road from the full subdivision process 22 11/21/00 Exempting the five lots at the NW corner of Mansfield Avenue and Colorado Boulevard. from the full subdivision process 23 11/21/00 Exempting Lots 4 and 5, 19 and 20, 24 and 25, 12 and 13 and tracts D and E, Cherry Hills Park 1 Subdivision, from the full subdivision process 24 11/21/00 Allowing the Bethany Lutheran Church to proceed with the subdivision exemption process 25 11/21/00 Authorizing acceptance of a quitclaim deed and dedication for public street and utility use for a portion of Greenbriar Drive 26 12/12/00 Changing the address of the property at 4100 South University Boulevard to 9 Cherry Hills Park Drive 2001 1 1/2/01 Accepting a non-motorized recreational trail easement at 1 Sedgwick Drive 2 1/2/01 Accepting a non-motorized recreational trail easement at 52 Sedgwick Drive 3 2/6/01 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 4 3/20/01 Amending the fee schedule for water taps 5 5/15/01 Concurring with dissolution of Cherrymoor South Water and Sanitation District 6 4/17/01 Changing the address of 8 Covington Drive to 40 Covington Drive 7 4/17/01 Changing the address of 1200 East Tufts to 4600 South Downing 8 5/15/01 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2002 budget 9 6/19/01 Accepting a non-motorized recreational trail easement on Lot 2, The Glen at Cherry Hills 10 7/17/01 Calling for a special election to be held on November 6, 2001 11 8/7/01 Concurring with the dissolution with the Cherry Hills Metropolitan District 12 9/4/01 Increasing the uniform exemption from business personal property tax 13 Not Adopted Approving a ballot issue and a ballot question to be submitted to the voters at the special election to be held on November 6, 2001, related to the City's possible exclusion from the South Suburban Parks and Recreation District 14 10/2/01 Revising procedures concerning wireless communications facilities 15 11/20/01 Accepting a non-motorized recreational trail easement (accepts Ms. Chambers' new trail easement) 16 12/11/01 Amending the health care spending account plan for the employees of the City 2002 1 01/15/02 Providing for the use of the Uniform Election Code of 1992 for the April 2, 2002 regular municipal election 2 01/15/02 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 3 02/05/02 Opposing Senate Bill No. 02-60 concerning permits to carry concealed handguns 4 02/19/02 Appointing election judges for the April 2, 2002 regular municipal election 5 05/7/02 Repealing and adopting a new official zoning map 6 05/7/02 Changing the address of the property of 4351 South Downing Street to 1175 East Radcliffe Avenue 7 07/16/02 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2003 Budget 8 07/16/02 Accepting a nonmotorized recreational trail easement from Merle Chambers 9 07/16/02 Calling a special election pursuant to City Charter Section 2.10 to be held on November 5, 2002 10 09/3/02 Setting the title and content of a ballot question to be submitted to the City's registered electors at the general election to be held on November 5, 2002, related to the amendment of Section 2.8 of the City Charter, pertaining to nominating petitions and deadline for submission 11 09/4/02 Withdrawn 12 09/3/02 Approving a ballot issue and a ballot question to be submitted to the voters at the municipal election to be held on November 5, 2002, related to the City's transfer of existing taxes (not a tax increase) following exclusion of the City of Cherry Hills Village from the South Suburban Parks and Recreation District 13 09/17/02 Concurring with the dissolution of the Southwest Cherry Hills Water District and accepting transfer of said district's water assets, functions and responsibilities to the City 14 10/1/02 Supporting and encouraging a "yes" vote on Ballot Issue 2A related to the City's transfer of existing taxes following exclusion of the City of Cherry Hills Village from the South Suburban Parks and Recreation District 15 10/1/02 Changing the address of the property at 4 Cherry Lane Drive to 8 Cherry Lane 16 11/19/02 Adopting the Model Municipal Retention Schedule 2003 01 01/21/03 Agreeing to provide to the City residents the services provided by the South Suburban Parks and Recreation District 02 5/6/03 Approving a quitclaim deed for a vacated portion of Greenbriar Drive 03 Establishing a policy for the provision of extra-duty police services 04 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2004 budget 05 9/16/03 Approving City Communication Policy 06 9/16/03 Removing water administration fees from Utility Enterprise Fund 2004 1 1/20/04 Designating public place for posting notices of meetings 2 1/20/04 Establishing Blue Ribbon Panel for parks, trails, recreation, historic preservation and open space 3 1/13/04 Ratifying purchase of Lot 13, Meade Subdivision 4 1/20/04 Setting title and content for ballot question re Article X of Charter 5 1/20/04 Setting title and content for ballot question re Article XI of Charter 6 2/17/04 Approving conditional use for 3530 South Lafayette Street 7 3/2/04 Appointing election judges for 4/6/04 municipal election 8 4/20/04 Approving variances for Colorado Community Church 9 4/12/04 Appointing Blue Ribbon Panel members 10 7/20/04 Adopting 2005 budget 11 9/21/04 Supporting passage of 2004 ballot question for RTD's Fastracks Transportation Plan 12 9/21/04 Changing address of 3 East Belleview Place to 9 Sterling Avenue 13 11/16/04 Authorizing funds transfer from COLOTRUST to CSAFE 2005 01 1/18/05 Adopting the Denver Regional Council of Governments' Mile High Compact 02 1/18/05 Setting a base value of $5,000.00 per item for all City property carried on the fixed asset inventory for fiscal year 2004 and forward 3 2/1/05 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 04 3/1/05 Adopting the Recreation Reimbursement Program 05 3/15/05 Setting dollar thresholds per item for all City property carried on the fixed asset inventory for fiscal year 2004 and forward 6 4/5/05 Concerning the application of the United States Golf Association for a major event permit and, in connection therewith, making findings of fact and approving the issuance of a development agreement 7 5/17/05 Adopting the DRCOG Regional Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan 08 6/21/05 Amending the Recreation Reimbursement Program 9 6/21/05 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2006 budget 10 6/21/05 Amending the fee schedule for water taps 11 7/19/05 Supporting Referenda C and D (The Colorado Economic Recovery Plan) on the November 1, 2005 ballot 2006 1 1/3/06 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 (Disapproved) 3 2/7/06 Appointing election judges to the April 4, 2006 regular municipal election 4 3/12/06 Appointing and establishing a Citizens City Center Committee (CCCC) to make recommendations regarding a new City Center 5 4/10/06 Opposing the City and County of Denver proposed construction of a 200-foot emergency response communications tower at the Hillcrest Water Facility located on Happy Canyon Road 6 5/16/06 Appointing a new member to fill a vacancy to the District 5 City Council seat 7 5/16/06 Appointing new members to fill vacancies to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 8 5/16/06 Appointing new members to fill vacancies to the Planning and Zoning Commission 9 5/16/06 Establishing regulations concerning the appointment of members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission and appointing members to the commission 10 6/20/06 Amending Resolution No. 4 adopted 3/12/06 and repealing and reenacting with a new Section 2; establishing guidelines for the composition of the CCCC 11 8/1/06 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2007 budget 12 9/5/06 Amending Resolution No. 10 adopted 9/5/06 and repealing and reenacting Section 2; establishing guidelines for the composition of the CCCC 13 9/19/06 Supporting open space 16 9/19/06 Opposing the 2006 ballet issue "petitions" that would make changes to the initiative and referendum process and impact operations of the City to the detriment of its citizens 17 10/3/06 Amending the City communication policy as it relates to the City's hyperlink policy 18 10/3/06 Establishing authorization and rules of procedure of the City's Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission, in accordance with Chapter 2, Article VIII, Section 2-8-10 19 10/17/06 Appointing a new member to the City's Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 20 11/21/06 Appointing a new member to the City's Planning and Zoning Commission 21 11/21/06 Proposing the use of South Happy Canyon Road for RTD bus route 46 22 12/12/06 Adopting an emergency operations plan for the City 2007 1 1/16/07 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings of City Council 02 5/15/07 Appointing Ann Kerr to the Planning and Zoning Commission 03 6/5/07 Adopting a calendar for the preparation of the 2008 annual budget 04 7/17/07 Determining those lots contained in John Meade Park and those contained in the Village Center Subdivision 05 7/17/07 Adopting a fee schedule for stormwater discharges related to construction activities 06 8/21/07 Adopting policy guidelines for donation and dedication of benches within public spaces 08 10/2/07 Facilitating more efficient, expanded and reliable wireless communications from, to and within the City 09 11/13/07 Allowing for the reimbursement of programs, activities, classes or events conducted by any nonprofit youth recreation association within the seven-county Denver metropolitan area 10 12/11/07 Authorizing a mail ballot election for the April 8, 2008 regular municipal election 2008 1 1/15/08 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 1/15/08 Accepting the donation of certain real property known as the "Catherine Anderson Property" and expressing its gratitude to Ms. Catherine H. Anderson for the donation 3 2/19/08 Concerning the appointment of a member to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 04 2/19/08 Appointing election judges for the April 8, 2008 regular municipal election 05 2/19/08 Appointing a Canvass Board for the April 8, 2008 regular municipal election 6 3/18/08 Supporting the grant application to Great Outdoors Colorado for the installation of new lights in the High Line Canal trail at Belleview Avenue 7 3/18/08 Canceling the April 8, 2008 regular municipal election in accordance with Section 2-1-50 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code 8 4/15/08 Appointing a member to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 9 8/5/08 Appointing a member to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 10 5/20/08 Appointing members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 11 6/3/08 Establishing a Residential Development Standards Committee and assigning duties and responsibilities 12 6/17/08 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2009 budget 13 8/5/08 Endorsing the Metro Mayors Caucus' "Promoting Health and Wellness: A Memorandum of Understanding Among Metro Denver's Cities and Counties" 14 8/19/08 Appointing certain members to the Planning and Zoning Commission 15 8/19/08 Appointing a member to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 16 9/2/08 Adopting the City's Master Plan 17 9/16/08 Establishing the Residential Development Standards Committee 18 9/16/08 Appointing members to the Residential Development Standards Committee 19 9/16/08 Accepting the dedication of a non-motorized recreation trail easement 21 10/7/08 Adopting revised Investment Policy 22 10/21/08 Repealing and adopting Official Zoning Map 23 11/4/08 Appointing vacant District 3 City Council seat 24 12/9/08 Appointing member to Board of Adjustment and Appeals 25 12/9/08 Amending City's Tuition Reimbursement Policy 26 12/9/08 Adopting a Paid Time Off, Short Term Disability and Extended Sick Leave Program 2009 1 1/6/09 Designating public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 2/3/09 Adopting new fees for the sanitary sewer systems owned and operated by the City 4 5/5/09 Establishing the Catherine H. Anderson Open Space Program 5 4/21/09 Adopting a management plan for responses to conflicts with coyotes 6 5/5/06 Appointing members to Board of Adjustment and Appeals 7 5/5/09 Appointing a member to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 8 6/2/09 Appointing a member to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 9 7/21/09 Amending Resolution 8 related to term of Commissioner Katy Brown 10 6/16/09 Adopting Rules of Procedure for the Planning and Zoning Commission 11 6/16/09 Adopting Rules of Procedure for the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 12 7/7/09 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2010 budget 13 7/21/09 Appointing a representative to the Centennial Airport/Community Noise Roundtable 14 9/1/09 Appointing a member to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 15 9/15/09 Appointing certain members to the Planning and Zoning Commission 16 9/15/09 Adopting a red flag policy and establishing an identity theft prevention program for the City 17 12/8/09 Adopting a fund balance policy 18 12/8/09 Authorizing a mail ballot election for the regular municipal election to be held on Tuesday, April 6, 2010 2010 1 1/5/10 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 1/5/10 Appointing an interim City Manager 3 1/5/10 Approving the settlement agreement and release with Eric J. Ensey 4 1/5/10 Approving the application for a hotel & restaurant liquor license as requested by JTM Investments, LLC, D.B.A. Pulcinella Pizzeria at 1400 East Hampden Avenue Suite 140 5 2/16/10 To not appoint election judges for the April 6 2010, regular municipal election 6 3/1/10 Appointing a member to the Planning and Zoning Commission 7 3/1/10 Appointing a canvass board for the April 6, 2010 regular municipal election 8 3/15/10 Establishing permit fees related to landscaping activities within City-owned rights-of-way 9 3/15/10 Canceling the April 6, 2010 regular municipal election 10 5/18/10 Appointing members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 11 7/20/10 Opposing Proposition 101 and Amendments 60 and 61 12 7/20/10 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2011 budget 13 7/20/10 Appointing members to Board of Adjustment and Appeals 14 7/3/10 Supporting the Denver Regional Council of Governments' Comprehensive Joint Application to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's Sustainable Communities Regional Planning Grant Committee 15 8/17/10 Approving a change in control of Newpath Networks, LLC 16 9/21/10 Supporting a locally administered human services system by Arapahoe County 17 9/21/10 Concerning the reappointment of members to the Planning and Zoning Commission 18 11/16/10 Amending the contract of City Prosecutor 2011 1 1/4/11 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 1/4/11 Approving the application for a retail liquor store license as requested by Vino & Vino LLC at 1400 East Hampden Avenue, Suite 130 3 1/18/11 Accepting the donation of $39,100.00 for the installation of a fence at Volunteer Park 4 2/15/11 Adopting the Denver Regional Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan 2010 update 5 4/19/11 Reappointing members to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 6 5/3/11 Concerning the creation of the Public Art Commission 7 5/5/11 Amending the City's management plan for responses to conflicts with coyotes 8 5/17/11 Concerning the appointment of a Commissioner to the Public Arts Commission 9 5/17/11 Accepting the Second Amendment to the Water Service Agreement TSI 237 (DW #12104A) 10 6/7/11 Concerning the appointment of members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 11 6/7/11 Concerning the appointment of members to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 12 7/18/11 Concerning the appointment of members to the Public Art Commission 13 8/16/11 Concerning the re-appointment of members to the Planning and Zoning Commission 14 9/6/11 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2012 budget 15 9/20/11 Concerning the appointment of a member to the Planning and Zoning Commission 16 12/13/11 Authorizing a mail ballot election for the City's regular municipal election to be held on April 3, 2012 17 12/13/11 Concerning the easement agreement between the City and James and Judith McQuaid 2012 1 1/3/12 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 2/7/12 Submitting an amendment to Section 3.9 of the Charter to provide that all City parks shall be maintained in perpetuity for public use except in the event of a vote of the electorate 3 2/7/12 Submitting an amendment to Section 4.5 of the Charter to enhance the efficiency of the emergency ordinance procedure 4 1/17/12 Submitting an amendment to Section 2.3 and 2.7 of the Charter to change election day to the Tuesday following the first Monday in November 5 2/7/12 Appointing election judges for the April 3, 2012 regular municipal election 6 2/7/12 Concerning the appointment of members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 7 2/21/12 Appointing a Canvass Board for the April 3, 2012 regular municipal election 8 2/21/12 Providing for the cancellation of the April 3, 2012 regular municipal election in accordance with Section 2-1-50 of the Code 9 5/15/12 Appointing members to Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 10 5/15/12 Appointing members to Board of Adjustment and Appeals 11 5/15/12 Adopting a budget calendar for 2013 budget 12 5/15/12 Approving the application for transfer of ownership for a retail liquor store license as requested by Ocho Vino LLC, DBA Vino Vino, at 1400 E. Hampden Avenue, Suite 130 13 7/17/12 Updating construction and excavation standards and permit fees for work in public rights-of-way 14 7/17/12 Reappointing a member to the Public Art Commission 15 8/21/12 Appointing a member to the Planning and Zoning Commission 16 9/4/12 Reappointing members to the Planning and Zoning Commission 17 9/4/12 Amending the City of Cherry Hills Village Municipal Records Retention Schedule 18 9/18/12 Adopting the Municipal Court Fine Schedule 19 10/2/12 Establishing the PTRC Quincy Farm Visioning Committee and the assignment of duties and responsibilities 20 11/20/12 Making findings and declaring Council's intent as to the refinancing, at lower interest rates, of the bonds of Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 7, and as to the reduction of the interest rate on special assessments in such district 21 11/20/12 Appointing a new member to the vacant District 6 City Council seat 22 12/11/12 Appointing a member to the Planning and Zoning Commission 23 12/11/12 Approving the application for transfer of ownership for a hotel and restaurant liquor license as requested by Splendidos LLC DBA Pino's, at 1400 East Hampden Avenue, Suite 140 24 12/11/12 Approving the application for a hotel and restaurant liquor license as requested by Libertybell Holding LLC DBA South Philly Cherry Hills, at 1400 East Hampden Avenue, Suite 100 2013 1 1/2/13 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 1/15/13 Appointing new members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 3 3/19/13 Approving the acquisition of 120 Meade Lane, Consisting of approximately .720 acres more or less 4 3/19/13 Conveying a utility easement to Public Service Company of Colorado 5 5/21/13 Concerning the appointment of members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 6 6/4/13 Reappointing a member to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 7 6/4/13 Authorizing the Mayor to execute a professional services agreement with Norris Design on behalf of the City 8 Withdrawn 9 6/18/13 Authorizing termination of intergovernmental agreement between the City and the City Sanitation District dated March 16, 2004 concerning the provision of administrative services 10 6/18/13 Approving the acquisition of 115 Meade Lane consisting of approximately 2.12 acres more or less. 11 7/16/13 Reappointing a member to the Public Art Commission 12 7/16/13 Approving a dissolution agreement by and among the east Cherry Hills Water District, the City of Cherry Hill Village and the city and county of Denver acting by and through its Board of Water Commissioners 13 8/6/13 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2014 budget 14 8/20/13 Concerning the appointment of members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 15 Withdrawn 16 10/15/13 Appointment of Mayor to the Colorado Municipal League Board 17 11/5/13 Adopting the construction and excavation fee schedule for work in public rights-of-way 18 11/5/13 Updating the construction and excavation standards for work in public rights-of-way 19 11/19/13 Appointing new member to the Planning and Zoning Commission 2014 1 1/7/14 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 1/7/14 Concerning the establishment of the Utility Line Undergrounding Study Committee 3 1/21/14 Concerning the appointment of members to the Utility Line Undergrounding Study Committee 2015 1 1/6/15 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 1/6/15 Concerning the re-appointment of membersto the Utility Line Undergrounding Study Committee 3 1/20/15 Approving a second amendment to the intergovernmental agreement between the City of Cherry Hills Village and the South Metro Fire Rescue Authority for the administration and operation of a joint service facility 4 2/3/15 Adopting nonconforming short term rental license fees 5 2/3/15 Concerning the appointment of membersto the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 6 2/3/15 Concerning the appointment of membersto the Planning and Zoning Commission 7 2/3/15 Concerning the appointment of members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 8 2/3/15 Authorizing the Mayor to execute a quitclaim deed quitclaiming approximately 275 square feet of excess city property located in the NW 1/4 of Section 2, Township 5 South, Range 68 West to the Colorado Department of Transportation 9 Supporting legislation to protectpublic regional stormwater management activities 10 3/17/15 Concerning the creation of the Quincy Farm Committee 11 4/7/15 Concerning amendments to the Rules of Procedure for the Planning and Zoning Commission 12 4/21/15 Amending Resolution 10, Series 2015 and concerning the appointment of members to the Quincy Farm Committee 13 4/7/15 Concerning the appointment of members to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 14 4/21/15 Rescinding outdated or inapplicable policies: 
  
1. Annexation policy concerning areas of annexation, approved March 20, 1961; 
2. Subdivision Administration Policy, approved June 7, 1977; 
3. Resolution No. 4, Series of 1982, Setting Forth a Procedure to Implement an Open Space Preservation Program, dated February 2, 1982; 
4. Traffic Diversion Plan, approved August 17, 1982; 
5. Village Crier Reorganization, approved July 19, 1983; 
6. Resolution No. 4, Series of 1989, Disbursal Policy for Police Pension Old Hire Idle Funds, dated September 5, 1989; 
7. Resolution No. 1, Series of 1991, Establishing Smoking Policy for City Buildings and Vehicles, dated March 5, 1991 
8. Traffic management policy, adopted March 4, 1997; 
9. Check signing policy, adopted April 13, 1998; 
10. Trail naming policy approved by Council on September 17, 2002; 
11. Resolution No. 3, Series of 2003, Establishing a Policy for the City's Provision of Extra-Duty Police Services, adopted August 5, 2003; 
12. Adopt-A-Street and Trail Program Policy, adopted November 16, 2004; and 
13. Election Issues and Public Comment policy, approved June 3, 2008. 15 4/21/15 Amending and reaffirming Council policies concerning investments, Council Rules of Procedure,Council Liaison Program, and Communiciations 16 4/21/15 Adopting customer service standards for cable operators 17 4/21/15 Amending and restating the City's purchasing policy 18 4/21/15 Amending and restating the City's purchasing policy 19 4/21/15 Adopting the City's check controls policy 20 4/21/15 Adopting the City's council member attendance at commission meetings policy 21 4/21/15 Adopting the City's candidate forum policy 22 4/21/15 Adopting the City's fund balance/finance reserve policy 23 4/21/15 Approving the application for a transfer of ownership for a hotel and restaurant liquor license as requested by G4 Alliance Inc. dba South Philly Cheese Steak at 1400 East Hampden Avenue Suite 100 in the City of Cherry Hills Village 24 6/2/15 Designating the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission as the City's Tree Board and Specifying duties and responsibilities 25 Adopting new fees and procedures regarding the dissolution of water and sewer districts 26 7/21/15 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2016 budget 27 7/21/15 Approving an amendment to that certain tolling areement by and between the Denver First Church of the Nazarene and the City of Cherry Hills Village 28 7/21/15 Accepting a quitclaim deed from the Gilman Family Limited Partnership conveying the North thirty feet of East Quincy Avenue adjacent to property located at 4001 East Quincy Avenue 29 7/21/15 Reappointing Teresa Harbaugh to the Public Art Commission 30 7/21/15 Concerning the appointment of Michael Lamair to the Planning and Zoning Commission 31 7/21/15 Calling a special election pursuant to City Charter Section 2.10 to be held on November 3, 2015 in coordination with Arapahoe County 32 8/4/15 Approving an intergovernmental agreement with Arapahoe County for participation in the coordinated November 3, 2015 election 33 8/4/15 Appointing members to the Quincy Farm Committee 34 8/18/15 Appointing an Interim City Manager of the City of Cherry Hills Village 35 8/18/15 Appointing Lucinda Greene to the Quincy Farm Committee 37 9/1/15 Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement by and between the City of Cherry Hills Village and the City and County of Denver acting by and through its Board of Water Commissioners reaffirming, amending and extending that certain lease agreement for recreational use of the High Line Canal 38 9/15/15 Affirming the cancellation of the November 3, 2015 special municipal election 39 9/15/15 Appointing members to the Planning and Zoning Commission 40 10/6/15 Affirming the appointment of James E. Turre as the Municipal Judge, affirming the appointment of Penelope D. Coffman as Alternate Municipal Judge, appointing John F. Welborn as an Alternate Municipal Judge and setting the term for each Municipal Judge appointment 41 10/6/15 Supporting the grant application for a Local Parks and Outdoor Recreation Grant from the State Board of the Great Outdoors Colorado Trust Fund for the completion of John Meade Park Design and Phase I construction 42 10/6/15 Supporting the grant application for a Large Construction and Maintenance Grant from the Colorado Parks and Wildlife State Trails Program for construction of a new section of the High Line Canal Trail near Hampden Avenue to accommodate a new underpass 43 10/6/15 Adopting the 2015-2020 Arapahoe County, Colorado Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan 44 11/3/15 Approving an intergovernmental agreement with Arapahoe County for dispatch services in 2016 45 12/9/15 Appointing members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 2016 1 1/5/16 Designating the public place for positing notices of regular and special meetings 2 1/19/16 Amending the City Council rules of procedure 3 2/2/16 Approving the application for a hotel and restaurant liquor license as requested by Cherry Hills Sushi Co. 4 4/5/16 Appointing members to the Public Art Commission 5 5/3/16 Concerning the reappointment of a member to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 6 5/3/16 Concerning the reappointment of members and the appointment of a new member to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 7 6/21/16 Concerning the reappointment of a member to the Public Art Commission 8 6/21/16 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2017 budget 9 6/21/16 Accepting and approving an Easement Agreement with Denver First Church for a non-motorized public trail and authorizing the expenditure of funds 10 7/19/16 Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement regarding cost sharing and collaboration of the High Line Canal Underpass project at Hampden Avenue and Colorado Boulevard 11 8/2/16 Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement with Arapahoe County for participation in the coordinated November 8, 2016 election 12 8/16/16 Appointing a new member to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 13 9/6/16 Declaring the City's official intent to reimburse itself from the proceeds of a lease purchase financing for expenditures incurred with respect to a new City Hall, Public Works Facility, and park improvements 14 9/20/16 Reappointing a member to the Planning and Zoning Commission 15 10/18/16 Appointing a member to the Public Art Commission 16 11/15/16 Approving an intergovernmental agreement with Arapahoe County regarding shared use of Arapahoe County's Radio Communications Network System and Consolidated Communications Network of Colorado 17 11/15/16 Approving an intergovernmental agreement with Arapahoe County for dispatch services in 2017 18 12/14/16 Approving the acquisition of 2101 W. Quincy Avenue located in the City of Sheridan consisting of approximately 3.0 acres more or less 1 1/3/17 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 1/3/17 Reappointing James E. Turre as the Municipal Judge, Penelope D. Coffman as an alternate Municipal Judge, and John F. Welborn as an alternate Municipal Judge 3 1/3/17 Approving the first amendment to the intergovernmental agreement with Arapahoe County regarding contribution of the City of Cherry Hills Village funds to the High Line Canal Visioning Project 4 1/17/17 Accepting a donation from Daniel Tully and Dianne Tully on behalf of the Cherry Hills Village Police Department 5 1/17/17 Concerning the appointment of a new member to the Planning and Zoning Commission 6 2/7/17 Affirming the High Line Canal Working Group statement of purpose and to support the High Line Canal vision statement and guiding principles 7 2/7/17 Approving an intergovernmental agreement with Urban Drainage and Flood Control District for drainage and maintenance improvements on Little Dry Creek at Woodie Hollow Park 8 2/21/17 Authorizing the City Manager to execute certain consultant contracts, construction contracts, and other documents on behalf of the City related to the City Hall project and the Public Works Building project 9 2/21/17 Approving an addendum to the Wastewater Connector's Agreement with the City of Englewood 10 3/7/17 Amending Resolution 6, Series 2011 concerning the number of members on the Public Art Commission 11 5/2/17 Concerning the reappointment of members to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 12 5/2/17 Concerning the reappointment of members and the appointment of new members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 13 5/2/17 Concerning the reappointment of a member and appointment of new members to the Public Art Commission 14 6/20/17 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2018 budget 15 6/20/17 Concerning the reappointment of a member to the Public Art Commission 16 6/20/17 Supporting a stronger climate policy through an effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 17 8/15/17 Approving the Arapahoe County Consolidated Law Enforcement CAD Intergovernmental Agreement 18 8/15/17 Adopting Subdivision Plat Renaming Application Fees 19 8/15/17 Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement with Urban Drainage and Flood Control District for funding of Outfall Systems Planning and Operational Model for the Denver Water High Line Canal 20 9/5/17 Accepting and approving a permanent Utility Easement from Western Metals Recycling, LLC 21 9/5/17 Concerning the reappointment of a member to the Planning and Zoning Commission 22 9/19/17 Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement with Arapahoe County for Dispatch Services in 2018 23 10/3/17 Amending Resolution 22, Series 2017 Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement with Arapahoe County for Dispatch Services in 2018 24 10/3/17 Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement with the State of Colorado by and through History Colorado to set forth the terms of a grant for an Archaeological Assessment of Quincy Farm 25 10/17/17 Ratifying approval of a licensing agreement by and between the Denver Regional council of Governments and the City of Cherry Hills Village 26 11/7/17 Supporting reauthorization of the Colorado Lottery Division by the General Assembly in 2018 27 12/13/17 Accepting and approving a Utility Easement from Monte Vista Investments 28 12/13/17 Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement with Urban Drainage and Flood control District for funding of drainage design work on Greenwood Gulch related to the construction of the new Village Center and John Meade Park/Alan Hutto Memorial Commons Projects 2018 1 1/16/18 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 1/16/18 Ratifying a License Agreement between the Denver Board of Water Commissioners for the installation of a Sanitary Sewer Line 3 1/16/18 Initiating the process to vacate the Bridle Path Easement between Lots 3 and 4 of the Olson Subdivision 4 1/16/18 Accepting an anonymous donation from a resident on behalf of the Cherry Hills Village Police Department 5 3/6/18 Awarding the bid for the City Hall Demolition and Construction Project 6 3/20/18 Accepting a public Bridle Trail Easement (Lot 4, Olson Subdivision) 7 5/15/18 Amending Resolution 10, Series 2015 increasing the number of voting members from five to seven, establishing three year terms of office, reappointing members and appointing new members to the Quincy Farm Committee 8 5/15/18 Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement between the City, Arapahoe County and associated cities in Arapahoe County on a Collaborative Transportation Forum Agreement 9 6/5/18 Appointment of a new member to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 10 6/19/18 Appointment of new members to the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 11 6/19/18 Adopting a budget calendar for the 2019 budget 12 7/17/18 Reappointment of a member to the Cherry Hills Village Art Commission 13 Tabled 14 7/17/18 Amending the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission Rules of Procedure 15 7/17/18 Approving a Memorandum Of Agreement with the Colorado Department of Labor and Employment, Division of Oil and Public Safety, for local jurisdiction regulation of conveyances pursuant to the Elevator and Escalator Certification Act 16 7/17/18 Setting the date of a public hearing concerning the organization of the Cherry Hills Village Charlou Park 3rd Filing General Improvement District and ordering publication and mailing of the notice of hearing to electors of the proposed district 17 8/7/18 Accepting a Bargain and Sale Deed from Kent Denver School for right-of-way purposes 18 8/21/18 Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement with Arapahoe County for participation in the coordinated November 6, 2018 election 19 9/4/18 Appointment of a new member to the Parks and Recreation Committee 20 9/17/18 Reappointment of a member to the Planning and Zoning Commission 21 9/17/18 Accepting an anonymous donation from a resident on behalf of the Cherry Hills Village Police Department 22 10/2/18 Concerning the appointment of a new member to the Quincy Farm Committee 23 10/2/18 Appointment of a new member to the Planning and Zoning Commission 24 10/2/18 Approving a memorandum of understanding and funding structure between the City of Cherry Hills Village, Arapahoe County, Douglas County, associated cities in Arapahoe and Douglas Counties and the Arapahoe County Public Airport Authority for the formal creation of the Centennial Airport Community Noise Roundtable 25 10/16/18 Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement with the City of Englewood for vehicle maintenance 26 10/16/18 Amending the Board, Commission and Committee recruitment, appointment and removal policy 27 10/16/19 Opposing amendment 74, an attempt to amend the Colorado Constitution to drastically limit state and local government services at a high cost to taxpayers 28 11/20/18 Approving an intergovernmental agreement with Arapahoe County for dispatch services in 2019 29 11/20/19 Appointment of a new member to the Cherry Hills Village Art Commission 30 11/20/19 Approving an intergovernmental agreement with the City and County of Denver Board of Water Commissioners for Tree Maintenance on the High Line Canal 31 12-12-18 Approving an intergovernmental agreement with Arapahoe County for records management system and related agreements with Tritech Software Systems 32 12/12/18 Concerning the proposed exclusion of property from the boundaries of the City of Cherry Hills Village Sanitation District 33 12/12/18 Amending the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission Rules of Procedure 34 12/12/18 Approving an intergovernmental agreement with the city of Greenwood Village for traffic signal design, installation, and maintenance 2019 1 1/15/19 Designating the public place for posting notices of regular and special meetings 2 1/15/19 Reappointment of James E. Turre as the municipal judge and John F. Welborn as an alternate municipal judge and setting the term for each appointment 3 1/15/19 Accepting and approving an easement agreement with Denver First Church for a non-motorized public trail, authorizing the expenditure of funds in payment therefore, and repealing Resolution 9, Series 2016 4 1/15/19 Entering into an intergovernmental agreement regarding maintenance of the High Line Canal Underpasses at Hampden Avenue and Colorado Boulevard 5 2/5/19 Accepting anonymous donation from a resident on behalf of the Cherry Hills Village Police Department 6 2/5/19 Approval of a memorandum of understanding for the 18th Judicial District Assessment Center by and between the City of Cherry Hills Village and other Governmental Units 7 2/5/19 Approving a memorandum of understanding with Sungatekids for services related to allegations of child abuse and neglect 8 2/5/19 Accepting a bench donation in memory of Caroline Mieville Clute 9 2/19/19 Adopting the updated emergency operations plan 10 2/19/19 Appointment of a new member to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals 11 2/19/19 Appointment of a new member to the Quincy Farm Committee 12 3/5/19 Approving an agreement with Michow Cox & Mcaskin LLP for City Attorney legal services 13 3/5/19 Appointment of a new member to the Quincy Farm Committee 14 3/5/19 Waiving the requirement to obtain an additional Floodplain Permit for the planned improvements located in the floodplain at John Meade Park and Alan Hutto Memorial Commons 15 Renaming the subdivision of Swastika Acres to Old Cherry Hills  
APPENDIX H - ORDINANCE LOG 
Ord. No. Subject Matter 1945 1 Adopting rules and orders for the meetings of the Board of Trustees. 2 Designating the office of Cherry Hills Village, and requiring the minutes of the meetings of the Board of Trustees and all other books and records of the village be kept at such office and open to public inspection. 3 Adopting the corporate seal of Cherry Hills Village. 4 Providing for the bonds of the Treasurer, Attorney and Recorder of Cherry Hills Village, and prescribing the amounts thereof and the sureties therefor. 5 Adopting an oath of office to be taken by all appointive officials of Cherry Hills Village, to be administered by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore. 6 Providing for the fiscal year of Cherry Hills Village. 7 Providing for a Planning Commission for Cherry Hills Village and prescribing the duties thereof. 8 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1946. 9 Providing for the zoning of Cherry Hills Village. 10 Regulating the use of the streets, avenues and public highways of Cherry Hills Village, and providing penalties for the violation of the same. 11 Prohibiting the running at large of female dogs in Cherry Hills Village. 12 Relating to the discharge of firearms in Cherry Hills Village. 13 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1946. 14 Designating a place of deposit for all funds of Cherry Hills Village. 1946 1 Approving the annexation of the NE 1/4 of Section 1, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado, to Cherry Hills Village. 2 Providing for the bond of the Treasurer of Cherry Hills Village. 3 Amending the zoning map and ordinance of Cherry Hills Village. 4 Regulating excavations within or beneath the surface of the public roads, streets and highways of Cherry Hills Village. 5 Fixing regular meeting dates and providing for special meetings of the Board of Trustees of Cherry Hills Village. 6 Regulating the storage and collection of garbage in Cherry Hills Village. 7 Providing for the appointment of deputy town marshals for Cherry Hills Village. 8 Granting a franchise by Cherry Hills Village to Colorado Central Power Company, its successors and assigns, to construct, acquire, maintain and operate lines, poles and system for the transmission and distribution of electricity, and to furnish, sell and distribute said product to Cherry Hills Village and the inhabitants thereof for light, heat and power, or other purposes, by means of conduits, cables, poles and wires, strung thereon, or otherwise, over under, along, across and through all streets and public ways and public places in Cherry Hills Village, and fixing the terms and conditions thereof. 9 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1947. 10 Granting to the City and County of Denver and State of Colorado, a municipal corporation acting by, through and for the use of its Board of Water Commissioners, a permit for replacing and maintaining a water conduit. 11 Approving the annexation of the Northwest Quarter and the North Half of the Southwest Quarter and the Southeast Quarter of the Southwest Quarter and the East Half of the of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter and the North Half of the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado, to Cherry Hills Village. 12 Amending Ord. No. 9, Series of 1945, entitled "An ordinance providing for the zoning of Cherry Hills Village." 13 Vacating portions of certain streets and avenues of Cherry Hills Village. 1947 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1947. 2 Amending the zoning map and the zoning ordinance of Cherry Hills Village by classifying the Northeast Quarter of Section 1, Township 5 South, Range 68 West as an R-1, Residential District. 3 Concerning the accumulation, storage, dumping and disposing of trash, garbage and debris within the corporate limits of Cherry Hills Village. 4 Relating to the discharge of firecrackers, fireworks and other explosives in Cherry Hills Village. 5 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village, for the fiscal year 1948. 6 Amending Ord. No. 9, Series of 1945, entitled "an ordinance providing for the zoning of Cherry Hills Village." 1948 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1948. 2 Granting a franchise by the Town of Cherry Hills Village to Public Service Company of Colorado, its successors and assigns, to locate, build, construct, acquire, purchase, extend, maintain and operate into, within and through the Town of Cherry Hills Village, Arapahoe County, Colorado, a plant or plants, and works, the purchase, manufacture, transmission and distribution of gas, either natural, artificial or mixed, and to furnish, sell and distribute said gas to the Town of Cherry Hills Village, and the inhabitants thereof, for heating, cooking or other purposes, by means of pipes, mains or otherwise, over, under, along, across and through any and all streets, alleys, viaducts, bridges, roads, lanes, public ways and places in said Town of Cherry Hills Village, and fixing the terms and conditions thereof. 3 Providing for the vacation of certain streets and alleys. 4 Amending Ord. No. 9, Series of 1945. 5 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village, for the fiscal year 1949. 6 Changing the names of Orchard Avenue and Circle Road to Lynn Road. 7 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1949. 8 Amending Ord. No. 9, Series of 1945. 1949 1 Approving the annexation of the Northwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado, to Cherry Hills Village. 2 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1950. 3 Relating to the vacation of portions of certain streets and the re-naming of the remainder of said streets. 4 Transferring $2500.00 from the reserve fund to the Town Marshal to fund equipment supplies. 5 Regulating the platting and recording of subdivisions of land in Cherry Hills Village. 1950 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1950. 2 Providing for the vacation of certain streets and alleys. 3 Amending Ord. No. 10, Series of 1945. 4 Providing a building code for Cherry Hills Village. 5 Vacating certain streets and alleys. 6 Establishing the Cherry Hills Village Rehabilitation Authority for the Northwest Quarter of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, and the Northeast Quarter of Section 1, Township 5 South Range 68 West in Cherry Hills Village, and defining the powers and duties of such Authority pursuant to the Colorado Rehabilitation Act of 1945. 7 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1951. 8 Vacating certain streets and alleys. 9 Adopting a master plan for Cherry Hills Village. 10 Amending Ord. No. 9, Series of 1945. 11 Amending Ord. No. 4, Series of 1950. 1951 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1951. 2 Vacating certain streets. 3 Providing for the vacation of certain streets and alleys in a portion of the NW 1/4 Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West. 4 Amending Ord. No. 9, Series of 1945. 5 Authorizing Cherry Hills Village acting through its Mayor and Clerk and Recorder to reconvey certain plots of land and ratifying and confirming such reconveyances already made. 6 Amending Ord. No. 3, Series of 1951, vacating certain streets and alleys. 7 Prohibiting dogs and other pets and livestock from running at large between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 8 Establishing a budget for the fiscal year 1952. 9 Concerning water, wells, sanitation and sewerage. 10 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1952. 1952 1 Amending Ord. No. 9, Series of 1945. 2 Vacating certain streets. 3 For the vacation of an alley. 4 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1953. 5 Amending Ord. No. 9, Series of 1945. 6 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1953. 1953 1 Approving the annexation of Blocks Fourteen-C (14C), Fifteen-B (15B), Sixteen-A (16A), Seventeen-F (17F), Eighteen-E (18E) and Nineteen-D (19D) inclusive, Denver University Addition Annex, being a portion of Section 6, T. 5 South, R. 67 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado to Cherry Hills Village. 2 Vacating certain streets and alleys. 3 Amending Ord. No. 9, Series of 1945. 4 Vacating certain streets and alleys. 5 Amending Ordinance No. 5, Series of 1949. 6 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1954. 7 Changing the names of certain streets, avenues, and roads in Cherry Hills Village. 8 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1954. 1954 1 Providing for the vacation of certain streets, roads and avenues. 2 Providing for the vacation of certain streets, roads and avenues. 3 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1955. 4 Vacating a certain street. 5 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1955. 1955 1 Amending Ord. No. 9, Series of 1945. 2 Amending Ord. No. 9, Series of 1951. 3 Defining and prohibiting vagrancy and providing penalties for violation thereof. 4 Defining and prohibiting the creation or maintenance of nuisances and providing penalties for violation thereof. 5 Prohibiting drunkenness, intoxication and drug addiction and providing penalties for violation thereof. 6 Prohibiting certain offenses affecting law enforcement and providing penalties for violation thereof. 7 Prohibiting disturbance and noise and providing penalties for violation thereof. 8 Prohibiting offenses relating to contamination and filth and providing penalties for violation thereof. 9 Prohibiting cruelty to animals and providing penalties for violation thereof. 10 Prohibiting certain offenses relating to sex and providing penalties for violation thereof. 11 Prohibiting concealed firearms and other weapons and providing penalties for violation thereof. 12 Vacating a portion of East Quincy Avenue. 13 For the creation of a Metropolitan Water District; determining that public convenience and necessity require the organization of a Metropolitan Water District; determining that the Town of Cherry Hills Village should be a part thereof; naming originating municipalities and establishing the boundaries thereof. 14 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1956. 15 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1956. 16 Approving the annexation of the North One-half of the Northeast Quarter (N1/2 NE1/4) of Section 7, Township 5, South, Range 67 West, Arapahoe County, Colorado to Cherry Hills Village. 1956 1 Vacating roads, boulevards, places, avenues, streets or parts of the same, shown upon plats of Cherry Vale Acres and Cherry Vale Acres Second Filing, Cherry Hills Village, Arapahoe County, Colorado. 2 Vacating a portion of South Lane, Cherry Hills Village Acres, Cherry Hills Village, Colorado. 3 Vacating certain streets, roads, avenues, alleys or portions thereof, in Cherry Hills Village. 4 Vacating certain streets, roads, avenues, alleys, lanes or portions thereof, in Cherry Hills Village. 5 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1957. 6 Vacating streets, alleys, drives, boulevards, avenues, places, ditch easements and utility easements in Cherry Hills Village. 7 Providing for the zoning of Cherry Hills Village and repealing Ord. No. 9, Series of 1945, as amended. 1957 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1957. 2 Amending Ord. No 7, Series of 1956. 3 Regulating excavations within or beneath the surface of public roads, streets and highways of Cherry Hills Village. 4 Providing for the reconveyance by the Town of Cherry Hills Village to the present owners of certain land in Acres 11 and 12, Swastika Acres No. 1, Arapahoe County, Colorado. 5 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1958. 6 By the Town of Cherry Hills Village granting to Colorado Central Power Company, its successors and assigns, a franchise authorizing the construction, acquisition, maintenance and operation in and through the Town, and all additions thereto of a system for the transmission and distribution of electric energy and the sale thereof to the Town and to consumers therein, for light, heat, power and other purposes by means of conduits, cables, poles, wires and any other devices or means used for, or in the distribution, transmission and sale of electric energy constructed in, along, across, over, under and through all streets, alleys, public ways and places in the Town, and in all additions thereto, fixing the terms and conditions thereof. 7 Concerning revenue and imposing an occupation tax on Colorado Central Power Company, its successors and assigns, to secure a proper distribution of the burden of taxes, and to provide penalties. 1958 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1958. 2 Vacating certain streets and avenues in Denver University Addition Annex. 3 Relating to zoning amending Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, by the creation of a new zoning district, and changing the zoning classification of a certain described area. 4 Relating to rules and orders for the meetings of the Board of Trustees and to amend Sections 8 and 9 of Ord. No. 1, Series of 1945. 5 Vacating certain streets, avenues, roads and alleys. 6 Approving the annexation of a part of the N1/2 SW1/4 of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, 6th Principal Meridian, formerly described as Block 16, Denver University Addition, now vacated, and including the vacated alley in said block, together with the adjacent portions of S1/2 of East Nassau and a part of South Albion Street. 7 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1959. 1959 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1959. 2 Authorizing the Town of Cherry Hills Village to enter into an agreement with the State Highway Commission of Colorado for the purpose of improving State Highway No. 70 from South Colorado Boulevard easterly. 3 Vacating certain streets and alleys. 4 Authorizing the Town of Cherry Hills Village to enter into a agreement with the State Highway Commission of Colorado for the purpose of improving State Highway No. 70 from South Franklin Street to South Colorado Boulevard. 5 Approving the annexation of the North One-half (N1/2) of the North One-half (N1/2)of the Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of SECTION 11, TOWNSHIP 5 SOUTH, RANGE 68 WEST, 6th Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado, to Cherry Hills Village. 6 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1960. 1960 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1960. 2 Vacating certain streets, roads and alleys in Cherry Hills Village. 3 Relating to zoning, amending Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, by the creation of a new zoning district, and changing the zoning classification of a certain described area. 4 Vacating a fifteen-foot strip conveyed to Arapahoe County for road purposes by a quit deed recorded in Book 326 at Page 263, Arapahoe County records. 5 Amending Ord. No. 3, Series of 1950, by creating a prohibited parking zone and changing speed limits. 6 Granting to City and County of Denver, State of Colorado, a municipal corporation, acting by, through and for the use of its Board of Water Commissioners, a permit to construct and maintain a water conduit. 7 Approving the annexation of Mansfield heights filing No. One and parcels of land excepted from said subdivision, but lying contiguous to or within the external boundaries of said Mansfield Heights Filing No. One which said land is more particularly described in this ordinance, located in the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County Colorado to Cherry Hills Village. 8 Approving the annexation of Cherryridge, according to the plat thereof filed February 24, 1954 and bearing Reception No. 521108, Plat Book 11 at Page 34, in the records of the Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County, Colorado, said subdivision being a part of the South One-Half of the Northwest Quarter (S1/2 NW1/4) of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West, 6th P.M.. Arapahoe County, Colorado to Cherry Hills Village. 9 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1961. 10 Relating to zoning amending Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended, creating a new zoning district and changing the zoning classification of certain described areas. 11 Approving the annexation of the South One-half of the Northeast Quarter (S1/2 NE1/4) of Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, lying east of the highline ditch; Plot 33, Clark Colony, together with that portion of Union Street and Holly Street lying adjacent thereto; the Northwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter (NW1/4 SW1/4), Section 8, Township 5 South, Range 67 West; and Charlou Park Addition, a subdivision as shown on the map recorded April 18, 1955, under Reception Number 553719 in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County, to Cherry Hills Village. 12 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1961. 1961 1 Relating to zoning and amending Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended by Ord. No. 3, Series of 1958, relating to RA-1 Resort Area District. 2 Approving the annexation of Charlou Park Second Addition, Arapahoe County, Colorado to the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 3 Relating to zoning, amending Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended, creating a new zoning district and changing the zoning classification of certain described areas. 4 Relating to the rights of defendants in jury cases and selection of jurors. 5 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1962. 6 Authorizing the expenditure of funds for the purchase of land. 7 Vacating all easements as shown on the plat of Devonshire Heights recorded April 11, 1960, as Reception No. 715916 and vacating a parcel of land located in the Northeast Quarter of Section 1, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, lying west of the Highline Canal, in the Town of Cherry Hills Village, Arapahoe County, Colorado, as dedicated and delineated on the plat of Devonshire Heights, being all of that part of the dedicated public way or street lying between Lots Twenty-nine (29) and Thirty (30), east of the west property line of Devonshire Heights and west of a straight line which is the east property line of Lots Twenty-nine (29) and Thirty (30) extended, this straight line bearing North 0 degrees 29' 50" East. 1962 1 Making appropriations for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1962. 2 Vacating certain streets and alleys in the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 3 Vacating certain streets and avenues in Cherry Hills Village. 4 Establishing a budget for Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1963. 5 Approving the annexation of a portion of Mansfield Heights, Filing No. (2) to Cherry Hills Village. 1963 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1963. 2 Relating to zoning amending Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956 as amended, changing the zoning classification of certain described areas and amending the zoning map accordingly. 3 Vacating a public way, road or street in the Town of Cherry Hills Village, as dedicated and delineated on the plats of Cherry Hills Rancho 2nd Amended Filing and Cherry Hills Rancho Third Amended Filing, being all of dedicated public way, road or street lying between Lots Twenty-five (25) and Twenty-six (26), of such subdivisions, designated "Rancho Rd. for Water Mains" on the plat of Cherry Hills Rancho 2nd Amended Filings, and designated "Rancho Road B" on the plat of Cherry Hills Rancho Third Amended Filing, subject to certain reservations. 4 Vacating a public way, road, street or alley in the Town of Cherry Hills Village, as dedicated by Joseph A. Core and Mabel A. Core, in instrument recorded September 17, 1952, in Book 772 at Page 567, in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County, over and across parts of Acres 10 and 11, Swastika Acres No. 1, and being more particularly described in said instrument as follows: 5 Authorizing the leasing of real estate by the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 6 Authorizing the Town of Cherry Hills Village to lease land and buildings for governmental and proprietary purposes. 7 Granting a franchise by the Town of Cherry Hills Village to Public Service Company of Colorado, its successors and assigns, to locate, build, construct, acquire, purchase, extend, maintain and operate into, within and through the Town of Cherry Hills Village, transmission and distribution systems and facilities for the transmission and distribution of electrical energy and gas, either natural, artificial or mixed, and to furnish, sell and distribute said electrical energy and gas to the Town of Cherry Hills Village and the inhabitants thereof, for light, heat and power, or other purposes, by means of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, poles and wires strung thereon, or otherwise, on, over, under, along, across and through all streets, alleys, viaducts, bridges, roads, lanes, and other public ways and places in said Town of Cherry Hills Village and fixing the terms and conditions thereof. 8 Fixing regular meeting dates and providing for special meetings of the Board of Trustees of the Town on Cherry Hills Village. 9 Designating the office of the Town of Cherry Hills Village and the storage of official books and records therein. 10 Regulating solicitors, peddlers and itinerant merchants. 11 Establishing a budget for the Town of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1964. 1964 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1964. 2 Relating to zoning and changing the zoning classification of Plot 1, Cantitoe Subdivision, and amending the zoning map. 3 Relating to the discharge of firearms in the Town of Cherry Hills Village and providing penalties therefor and repealing Ord. No. 12, Series of 1945. 4 Amending Ord. No. 7, Series of 1951. 5 Amending Ord. No. 11, Series of 1945 relating to the running at large of female dogs in Cherry Hills Village. 6 Prohibiting dangerous dogs or other animals from running at large within the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 7 Approving an agreement between the State Highway Commission of Colorado and the Town of Cherry Hills Village relating to the widening and improving Of South University Boulevard, State Highway 177, between East Hampden Avenue and the southerly boundary or limits of the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 8 Approving an agreement between the State Highway Commission of Colorado and the Town of Cherry Hills Village, relating to the widening and improving of East Belleview Avenue between South Clarkson Street and South Race Street in the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 9 Approving the annexation of a tract or parcel of land in the NE1/4 of Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th P.M. in Arapahoe County, Colorado, to the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 10 Establishing a budget for the Town of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1965. 11 To bring the employees of the Town of Cherry Hills Village under Social Security. 1965 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1965. 2 Amending Ord. No. 3, Series of 1950, and establishing speed limits in the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 3 Vacating certain streets and alleys in the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 4 To contract an indebtedness on behalf of the Town of Cherry Hills Village, and upon the credit thereof by issuing bonds of said Town in the principal sum of $75,000, for the purpose of providing funds for erecting a public building to be used as a municipal building and for other municipal purposes; prescribing the form of said bonds; providing for the levy of taxes to pay the bonds and the interest thereon; and declaring an emergency. 5 Vacating certain streets and alleys in the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 6 Granting to City and County of Denver, State of Colorado, a municipal corporation, acting by and through its Board of Water Commissioners, a permit to construct, operate, maintain, repair and replace a water main. 7 Amending Ord. No. 3, Series of 1950, as amended, and establishing speed limits in the school zones in the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 8 Amending Ord. No. 3, Series of 1950 as amended and providing for the removal of parked cars. 9 Vacating certain streets and alleys in the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 10 Vacating a portion of East Quincy Avenue in the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 11 Establishing a budget for the Town of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1966. 12 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1966. 1966 1 Vacating a certain bridle path and public utility easement in the Town of Cherry Hills Village, as dedicated and delineated on the plat of Cantitoe, being all of that certain twenty-foot bridle path and public utility easement designated on the plat of Cantitoe as the north twenty feet (20') of Tract Eight (8), Cantitoe, County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado. 2 Adopting the municipal traffic ordinance for the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 3 Ratifying action by Mayor Pro-Tem Jay W. Tracey, Jr. in signing a lease purchase agreement. 4 Vacating a portion of East Quincy Avenue in the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 5 For a special election of charter convention members and a special election for accepting or rejecting a charter, as proposed, as provided for under Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado. 6 Establishing a budget for the Town of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1967. 7 Establishing the qualifications for police magistrate for the Town of Cherry Hills Village. 8 Establishing the number of members of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 9 Creating Special Improvement District No. 1 in the City of Cherry Hills Village; ordering the construction therein of street paving improvements, together with necessary incidentals; providing for the issuance of bonds in payment for said improvements; making provision for notice to contractors and for notice to bidders for special improvement district bonds of said City, and declaring an emergency. 1967 1 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1967. 2 Authorizing the issuance of City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, Special Improvement District No. 1 bonds; providing for the payment of said bonds and the interest thereon; and declaring an emergency. 3 Amending Section 4-1 (speed limits) and Section 12-3 (parking regulations) of the Municipal Traffic Code, Ord. No. 2, Series of 1966, and declaring an emergency. 4 Annexing unincorporated area entirely contained within the boundaries of the City of Cherry Hills Village pursuant to the provisions of Section 5 of the Municipal Annexation Act of 1965. 5 Amending Section 17 of Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended, and establishing the number of members of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 6 For the regulation of traffic in the City of Cherry Hills Village, providing for the enforcement and administration thereof; adopting by reference "Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities"; repealing all ordinances in conflict therewith; providing penalties for violation thereof; and declaring an emergency. 7 Establishing zoning classification on lands recently annexed to the City of Cherry Hills Village and amending the zoning map. 8 Providing for the annexation of certain contiguous unincorporated territory situate in the County of Arapahoe, State of Colorado, to and by the City of Cherry Hills Village. 9 Providing temporary zoning of lands in Sections 5, 6 and 8, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the 6th Principal Meridian annexed to the City of Cherry Hills Village. 10 Amending the municipal traffic ordinance. 11 Providing for the annexation of part of the SW1/4 NE1/4, all of N1/2, NW1/4, and part of the S1/2, SW1/4, all in Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, 6th P.M.; and also part of the SE1/4 NE1/4 of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West, 6th P.M.; all located in Arapahoe County, Colorado, to Cherry Hills Village. 12 Approving the terms and conditions as arranged and reported by the Commissioners appointed for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the annexation of the Town of Greenwood Village to the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, and submitting the question of such annexation to the electors of the City of Cherry Hills Village, including amendments to Sections 2.3, 2.6 and 2.7 of the Charter of the City of Cherry Hills Village. 13 Providing temporary zoning classification for that part of the SW1/4 NE1/4, all of N1/2, NW1/4, and part of the S1/2 SW1/4, all in Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West, 6th P.M.; and also part of the SE1/4 NE1/4 of Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West, 6th P.M.; all located in Arapahoe County, Colorado, recently annexed to the City of Cherry Hills Village. 14 Approving the whole cost of the improvements made in and for Special Improvement District No. 1, in the City of Cherry Hills Village; approving and confirming the apportionment of said cost to each lot or tract of land in said district; assessing a share of said cost against each lot or tract of land in the district; prescribing the manner for the collection and payment of said assessments; an declaring an emergency. 15 To bring under Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, certain lands located in Sections 5, 6 and 8, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 16 To bring under Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, certain lands located in Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the 6th Principal Meridian and Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 17 Establishing a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1968. 18 Appropriations for the fiscal year 1968. 19 To levy 2% sales tax on retail sales within the City of Cherry Hills Village. 20 Changing and designating the districts for election of Councilmen for the City of Cherry Hills Village pursuant to Section 2.6 of the Charter. 21 For the annexation by Cherry Hills Village of contiguous territory situated in Arapahoe County, Colorado. 22 Approving the annexation of portions of Sections 11 And 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the 6th Principal Meridian, Arapahoe County, Colorado, on terms and conditions as set forth in the petition, to the City of Cherry Hills Village. 1968 1 Repealing Ord. No. 7, Series 1946, which provided for the appointment of deputy town marshals. 2 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year of 1967. 3 To amend Ord. No. 6, Series of 1967, relating to the Model Traffic Code, by the addition of certain speed limits. 4 To bring under Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, certain newly annexed lands located in Sections 11 and 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 5 To bring under Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, lands located in Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, and platted as East Belleview Subdivision, in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 6 To bring under Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, certain newly annexed lands located in Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 7 To bring under Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, certain lands located in Section 7, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, platted as Pheasant Ridge Subdivision, in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 8 Amending Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended, and amending the Cherry Hills Village zoning map. 9 Providing for control of weeds, brush and rubbish within the City of Cherry Hills Village. 10 Vacating all of Sedgwick Place, Devonshire Heights Amended Plat. 11 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1968. 12 Ratifying Ord. No. 10, Series of 1968, vacating all of Sedgwick Place, Devonshire Heights Amended Plat. 13 Prohibiting livestock and other specified animals from running at large. 14 Relating to street excavations in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 15 Providing for the keeping and depositing of all monies or funds and repealing Ord. No. 14, Series of 1945. 16 Vacating a portion of Chenango Street or Avenue. 17 Establishing a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village, for the fiscal year 1969. 18 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1969. 19 For the regulation of traffic in the City of Cherry Hills Village, providing for the enforcement and administration thereof; adopting by reference the 1966 edition of" the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities"; adopting by reference the 1968 Colorado Interim Traffic Control Manual"; adopting by reference the 1961 edition of the national "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways"; repealing all ordinances in conflict therewith; providing penalties for violation thereof; and declaring an emergency. 20 Relating to the general administration and operation of the City of Cherry Hills Village. 21 Relating to the establishment and operation of the Municipal Court of the City of Cherry Hills Village. 22 Relating to the control and prohibition of public nuisances. 1969 1 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1968 2 Relating to the storage, sale and disposition of lost, abandoned, stolen or confiscated property. 3 Providing for the regulation of right turn on steady red traffic signal. 4 To amend Ord. No. 19, Series of 1968, relating to the Model Traffic Code, by changing the prima facie speed limit on South Dahlia Street between the intersections of East Mansfield Avenue and East Quincy Avenue. 5 Establishing a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1970. 6 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1970. 7 Vacating certain public streets, roads, ways and alleys as previously dedicated on a portion of the plat of Denver University Addition, Third Filing. 8 To amend Ord. No. 22, Series of 1968, concerning public nuisances by the addition of provisions relating to the accumulation of trash and rubbish and the removal of diseased, dead or dangerous trees. 1970 1 Adopting a Master Plan for Cherry Hills Village. 2 Establishing comprehensive zoning regulations for the City of Cherry Hills Village, and providing for the administration, enforcement, and amendment thereof, and for the repeal of Ord. No. 7, Series of 1956, as amended. 3 Amending Ord. No. 19, Series of 1968, relating to the Model Traffic Code, by the addition of parking regulations on South Lafayette Street between East Hampden Avenue and East Jefferson Avenue and by including all of East Belleview Avenue and that portion of East Jefferson Avenue, constituting State Highway 70. 4 Concerning trespass and interference with property rights and the destruction or removal of public and private property. 5 Relating to the regulation and licensing of security patrols and their agents and employees. 6 Vacating a portion of easement for bridle path for daylight non-vehicular and pedestrian traffic in Devonshire Heights Amended Plat. 7 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1970. 8 Establishing a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1971. 9 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1971. 10 Amending Section 3, Ord. No. 14, Series of 1968, relating to street excavations in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 1971 1 Regulating the use of bridle paths, parks and Highline Canal right-of-way, providing for the enforcement and administration thereof, and providing penalties for violation thereof. 2 Amending Section 3, Ord. No. 14, Series of 1968, relating to street excavation in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 3 For the annexation by the City of Cherry Hills Village of unincorporated area entirely contained within the boundaries of the City. 4 Establishing a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1972. 5 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1972. 6 Amending Ord. No. 3, Series of 1971, concerning the annexation by the City of Cherry Hills Village of unincorporated area entirely contained within the boundaries of the City. 7 Changing and designating the districts for election of Councilmen for the City of Cherry Hills Village pursuant to Section 2.6 of the Charter. 8 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1971. 1972 1 For the regulation of traffic by the City of Cherry Hills Village, for the purpose of providing a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the State and the Nation; adopting by reference the 1971 Edition of the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities"; repealing all ordinances in conflict therewith; and providing penalties for violation thereof. 2 To bring under Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, lands located in Section 11, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 3 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of Plots 14, 15 and 16, Meade Subdivision. 4 Vacating a portion of South Forest Circle in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 5 Amending Ord. No. 1, Series of 1972, relating to the Model Traffic Code, by changing the speed limit on portions of State Highway 285. 6 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1972. 7 Amending Ord. No. 21, Series of 1968, to change the amount of the witness fee. 8 Concerning burglar alarm systems and the regulation thereof. 9 Amending Ord. No. 1, Series of 1972, relating to the Model Traffic Code, by adding certain provisions pertaining to operation of bicycles. 10 Establishing a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1973. 11 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1973. 1973 1 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1972. 2 Vacating a portion of a bridle easement on Plot 4, White's Subdivision. 3 Providing for bond on appeal from any judgment of the Municipal Court. 4 Amending Ord. No. 8, Series of 1966, to change the number of members of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 5 Concerning the regulation and control of dogs. 6 For the annexation by the City of Cherry Hills Village of unincorporated area entirely contained within the boundaries of the City. 7 For the annexation by the City of Cherry Hills Village of unincorporated area entirely contained within the boundaries of the City. 8 Establishing a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1974. 9 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1974. 10 Regulating the subdivision of land in the City of Cherry Hills Village, providing a procedure for the preparation, processing and presentation of sketch plats, preliminary and final plats, establishing design standards, requiring improvements, defining certain terms, prescribing methods for variances, enforcement, interpretation, amendment, separability and repeals. 11 For the annexation by the City of Cherry Hills Village of unincorporated area entirely contained within the boundaries of the City. 12 To bring under Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, lands located in Section 12, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 1974 1 Regulating the construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, equipment use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Cherry Hills Village; adopting by reference the 1973 Edition of the Uniform Building Code, Volume I (Uniform Building Code) and Volume II (Uniform Mechanical Code) as published by the International Conference of Building Officials which primary code adopts by reference the 1973 Edition of the Uniform Building Code Standards as published by the International Conference of Building Officials; adopting by reference the 1972 Edition of the Technical Plumbing Code of the State of Colorado Department of Health; adopting by reference the 1971 Edition of the National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association; providing penalties for violation thereof, and declaring an emergency. 2 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and amending the Cherry Hills Village zoning map. 3 To bring under Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, lands located in Section 6, Township 5 South, Range 67 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian in the City of Cherry Hills Village. 4 Amending Paragraph 17 of Article VI of Ord. No. 10, Series of 1973 (the Subdivision Ordinance). 5 Authorizing and approving the City of Cherry Hills Village designing, constructing and maintaining a bridge across Little Dry Creek at Quincy Avenue. 6 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and amending the City zoning map. 7 Establishing a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1975. 8 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1975. 1975 1 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of Lots 1, 2 and 3, Block B, Cherry Hills Park, City of Cherry Hills Village. 2 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of a portion of Lot 16, Meade Subdivision, City of Cherry Hills Village. 3 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of that portion of the private roadway abutting Lots 1 and 3, Cherry Hills Park on the south, from the roadway's intersection with South University Boulevard on the east to a point approximately 700 feet west of said intersection, said point being the westerly most boundary of Lot 3, Block B, Cherry Hills Park, City of Cherry Hills Village. 4 Amending the Subdivision Ord. of the City of Cherry Hills Village, Ord. No. 10, Series of 1973, as amended, to provide for the payment of a fee by all applicants requesting exemption of any division of land from the definition of the term "subdivision." 5 Authorizing negotiations for the purchase of or condemnation of property or interest therein in relation to the Dahlia and Oxford Street and Drainage Project within the City of Cherry Hills Village. 6 Establishing a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1976. 7 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1976. 1976 1 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1975. 2 Vacating a portion of Grand Avenue. 3 Establishing a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1977. 4 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1977. 1977 1 Vacating the platted alleys located in Blocks 17, 18 and 19, South University Park, and portions of platted South Harrison Street and South Jackson Street as the same are shown on the recorded plat of South University Park; and requiring the sale or conveyance of certain lots in Blocks 17, 18 and 19, of platted South University Park to be conducted only in conjunction with the sale or conveyance of other specified lots in said blocks. 2 Making supplemental appropriations from General Revenue Sharing Funds for the fiscal year 1977. 3 Establishing a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1978. 4 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1978. 1978 1 For the regulation of traffic by the City of Cherry Hills Village; adopting by reference the 1977 Edition of the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities"; repealing all ordinances in conflict therewith; and providing penalties for violation thereof. 2 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and amending the City zoning map. 3 For the regulation, control, impoundment, destruction and licensing of dogs within the City of Cherry Hills Village, and for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. 4 Vacating portions of Cherrymoor Drive and South Vine Way located within Cherrymoor South Subdivision, City of Cherry Hills Village. 5 Amending Ord. No. 1, Series of 1974, to adopt by reference the Uniform Building Code and Standards 1976 Edition, the Uniform Mechanical Code 1976 Edition, the Colorado Model Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards for Nonresidential Building and the Colorado Recommended Energy Conservation "Performance" Code for New Construction and Renovation of Residential Buildings. 6 Vacating South Jackson Street between the north line of East Mansfield Avenue on the south, and the north line of now vacated East Lehigh Avenue on the north, all located within the City of Cherry Hills Village. 7 Vacating a portion of Catherine Street and alley located within University Park Heights, a subdivision within the City of Cherry Hills Village. 8 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and relating to flood plain boundaries and flood prevention and control. 9 Vacating that portion of Rancho Road contiguous to, located between, and separating Lots 24 and 25, Cherry Hills Rancho, Second Amended Filing, a subdivision located within the City of Cherry Hills Village. 10 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of certain property located within the North Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 1, Township 5 South, Range 68 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, City of Cherry Hills Village. 11 Providing for the appointment of a City Manager and establishing responsibilities and authorities for this position. 12 Vacating a portion of Victoria Street and alleys located within University Park Heights, a subdivision within the City of Cherry Hills Village. 13 Adopting a budget for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1979. 14 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1979. 15 Defining the rules and regulations pertaining to the Public Improvements Fund. 16 Amending Ord. No. 19, Series of 1967, to provide thereby for the levy of a 3% sales tax on retail sales within the City of Cherry Hills Village. 17 Amending Ord. No. 1, Series of 1978 to bring the same (which adopted by reference the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities") into compliance with the approval thereof granted by the Colorado State Department of Highways. 18 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1978. 1979 1 Amending Ord. No. 19, Series of 1967, to clarify and expand the definition of sale or sale and purchase. 2 Repealing Ord. No. 10, Series of 1973, known as the subdivision regulations and also repealing amending Ordinances No. 4, Series of 1974 and No. 4, Series of 1975 and enacting new subdivision regulations for the City of Cherry Hills Village. 3 Vacating certain bridle path easements within Meade Subdivision and White's Subdivision and terminating a certain lease agreement dated January 1, 1971 Relating to a bridle path, all within the City of Cherry Hills Village. 4 Regulating merchant guards, merchant patrols, and private security guards operating within the City of Cherry Hills Village, and providing a penalty for violation. 5 Making an additional appropriation for the 1979 fiscal year to cover unexpected legal expenses. 6 Concerning revenue and imposing a business and occupation tax on telephone utility companies operating within the City of Cherry Hills Village; providing for the collection of said taxes and for penalties with respect thereto. 7 Providing for the creation and collection of a service expansion fee as a condition of issuing building permits. 8 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1980. 9 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1980. 10 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1979. 11 Amending Ord. No. 7, Series of 1979, by establishing a separate rate for tennis courts within the service expansion fee structure.  
Ord. No. Subject Matter 2003 Code Section 1980 1 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and the Cherry Hills Village zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of Parcel A and Parcel B, Oxford Heights at Cherry Hills Subdivision, City of Cherry Hills Village. 2 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1970, as amended, and the Cherry Hills village zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of Lots 6 and 7, Cherry Hills Rancho, Third Filing, City of Cherry Hills Village. 3 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1979, known as the subdivision regulations as it pertains to Article II, Section 9, Exemptions. 4 Making a supplemental appropriations to the public improvement fund for the fiscal year 1980. 5 Adopting the City Code of the City of Cherry Hills Village. 6 Amending the 100-year flood plain boundaries, as amended, and amending the City zoning map with respect to the flood plain boundaries in the Oxford Heights Subdivision. 7 Amending Title 9 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code pertaining to the regulation, control, impoundment and licensing of dogs. 8 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code and the zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of Lot 11, Cherry Hills Rancho, Third Filing, City of Cherry Hills Village. 9 Enacting a requirement for a concealed weapons permit. Ch. 6, Ch. 10 10 Amending the subdivision regulations of the City of Cherry Hills Village to set a time limit for the execution of a final plat. Ch. 17 11 Amending the 100-year flood plain boundaries, as amended, and amending the City zoning map with respect to the flood plain boundaries in the Petry-Garnsey Subdivision. 12 Vacating the bridle trail between Lots 1 and 2 of the Allen Subdivision and Lots 2 and 3 of the Olson Subdivision, all located within the City of Cherry Hills Village. 13 Making a supplemental appropriation for legal expenses in the General Fund during fiscal year of 1980. 14 Adopting a budget for levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1981. 15 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1981. 16 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code relating to zoning. Ch. 16 17 Amending Title 3, Chapter 6 relating to false burglar alarms. 1981 1 Amending Title 9-1-1-10 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code pertaining to penalties for violation of the animal control regulations. 2 Amending Title 2-1 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code increasing the membership of the Planning Commission from seven to nine. Ch. 2 3 Adopting by reference the Uniform Fire Code 1979 Edition and amending Title 5-1-1 of the City Code relating to Building Codes. 4 Enacting Title 3, Chapter 7, of the Cherry Hills Village City Code pertaining to the issuance of a permit or permits for a cable television system in the City; setting forth conditions accompanying the granting of such permit of permits; providing for regulations and use of the cable television system; providing penalties for violations thereof; and repealing all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. 5 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code and the zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of a portion of Cherry Hills Park Block B and Foxley Subdivision from R-3; One Acre Residential to R-2, One and One-Fourth Acre Residential. 6 Amending the 1981 budget and making a supplemental appropriation to the Public Improvement Fund and the Revenue Sharing Trust Fund for the Holly Street Project during fiscal year 1981. 7 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code and the zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of a portion of Cherry Hills Park Block C from R-3, One Acre Residential to R-2, One and One-Fourth Acre Residential. Ch. 2 8 Amending Title 10 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code as it relates to the weight limit on city streets. 9 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code by changing the definition of a family in the zoning regulations. Ch. 16 10 Adopting a budget for levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1982. 11 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1982. 12 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code and the zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of Lot 5, Cherry Hills Rancho, Third Amended Filing, City of Cherry Hills Village. 13 Prescribing the procedure for notice, the method and time for filing protest and disposition thereof, and the method and manner of making such improvements, letting contracts therefor, assessing the cost thereof, and issuing and paying bonds for cost and expenses relating to the organization of special or local improvement districts and the construction or installation of such improvements within the City of Cherry Hills Village. Ch. 11 14 Changing and designating the districts for election of Councilmen for the City of Cherry Hills Village pursuant to Section 2.6 of the Charter. 15 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code by amending Section 15-11, constructing earthen berms and Section 2-3, building permit fees. 16 Creating Special Improvement District No. 2, in the City of Cherry Hills Village, ordering the construction and installation therein of certain street improvements in the district to include grading and street paving together with any other necessary incidentals on certain streets therein; providing for the issuance of bonds in payment for said improvements; and providing for other details in connection with the district. 17 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1981. 1982 1 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code and the zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of a portion of Meade Subdivision, Tract A from F-1, Flood Plain and Recreation to R-1, Two and One-Half Acre Residential. 2 Authorizing the issuance of special assessment bonds in the principal amount of $100,000 for the City of Cherry Hills Village, for Special Improvement District No. 2; prescribing the form of the bonds, and providing for the payment of the bonds and the interest thereon. 3 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series 1982, of the City of Cherry Hills Village, finally passed and adopted on March 2, 1982, relating to the interest rates and net effective interest rate on the $100,000 special assessment bonds of the City authorized therein. 4 Amending Title 5 of the City Code to adopt by reference the 1982 Uniform Building Code and Standards, the 1981 National Electric Code and the 1972 Edition Technical Plumbing Code. 5 Ordinance never adopted. 6 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code and the zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of Lot 5, Cherry Hills Rancho, Third Amended Filing, City of Cherry Hills Village. 7 Amending the 100-year flood plain boundaries, as amended, and amending the City zoning map with respect to the flood plain boundaries in the Wilson Meadow Subdivision. 8 Amending Title 10 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code by reviewing Sections 22-9 and 22-10 of the Model Traffic Code adopted by reference. 9 Contracting an indebtedness on behalf of the City of Cherry Hills Village, and upon the credit thereof by issuing general obligation bonds of the City in the principal amount of $450,000, for the purpose of construction and providing for the levy of taxes to pay the bonds and the interest thereon; and declaring an emergency. 10 Amending the 100-year flood plain boundaries, as amended, and amending the City zoning map with respect to the flood plain boundaries in the Fairlea Farms Subdivision. 11 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for the fiscal year 1983. 12 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1983. 13 Approving the whole cost of the improvements made in Special Improvement District No. 2, in the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado; approving and confirming the apportionment of said cost to each lot or tract of land in the district; assessing a share of said cost against each lot or tract of land in the district; and prescribing the manner for the collection and payment of said assessments. 14 Adding new Sections 1-9-15 and 1-9-16 to Chapter 9 of Title 1, of the Cherry Hills Village City Code, relating to costs and fees assessable by the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Court. 15 Vacating a portion of Manor Drive the Charlou Park Section Addition. 16 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1982. 17 Vacating a portion of Vista Road. 18 Vacating a portion of Village Road. 1983 1 Adopting a budget and making supplemental appropriations for the Village Center Bond and Interest Fund. 2 Vacating a portion of South Jackson Street, South Harrison Street and adjacent alleys. 3 Vacating a portion of El Camino Drive. 4 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code and the zoning map attached, to change the zoning classification of a portion of the Glenmoor of Cherry Hills Subdivision from R-3, One Acre Residential to F-1, Flood Plain and Recreation District. 5 Amending Title 7 of the City Code for the adoption and implementation of an open space plan. 6 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code and the zoning map attached thereto, to change the zoning classification of a portion of the Glenmoor of Cherry Hills Subdivision from R-3, One Acre Residential to F-1, Flood Plain and Recreation District. 7 Amending Title 5 of the City Code relating to building codes adopted by reference. 8 Vacating a portion of Charrington Drive. 9 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for fiscal year 1984. 10 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1984. 1984 1 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1983. 2 Making a supplemental appropriation and amending the Public Improvement Fund budget for fiscal 1984. 3 Amending the Cherry Hills Village Code to require compliance with emissions control inspection requirements and providing penalties for violations hereunder. 4 Amending Title 4 of the City Code to prohibit the deposit of various materials on public property and assessing a penalty. Ch. 7 5 Amending Section 3, Ord. No. 2, Series of 1983. 6 Making a supplemental appropriation to and amending the budget of the public improvement fund for the purchase of park land. 7 Vacating a portion of South Harrison Street and the adjacent alley. 8 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for fiscal 1985. 9 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1985. 10 Making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year 1984. 1985 1 Amending Chapter 3-5A of the City Code to increase the rate of the service expansion fee. 2 Amending Section 6-2-3 of the City Code pertaining to fees for building permits, for appeals to the Board of Adjustment and for rezonings and adding a fee for applications to modify the flood plain. 3 Amending Chapter 7-3 of the City Code to increase the fees for filing subdivision, subdivision exemption and street vacation applications. Ch. 17 4 Setting the expiration date for terms of members of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Board of Adjustment to the third Tuesday in May. 5 Amending Title 9 of the City Code relating to animal control. Ch. 7 6 Vacating a portion of South Gilpin Street. 7 Amending Title 10 of the City Code relating to weight limits on City streets. 8 Creating Special District Improvement District No. 3, in the City of Cherry Hills Village, ordering the construction and installation therein of street paving and improvements, necessary grading and any necessary incidentals; providing for the issuance of bonds in payment for said improvements; and providing for notice to contractors and other details in connection with the district. 9 Amending Title 7 of the City Code to require public notice during the use of the subdivision exemption process. 10 Adding Chapter 8 to Title 3 of the City Code concerning alcoholic beverages. Ch. 6 11 Authorizing the issuance of special assessment bonds in the principal amount of $224,500 of the City of Cherry Hills Village, for Special Improvement District No. 3; prescribing the form of the bonds, and providing for the payment of the bonds and the interest thereon. 12 Amending Title 6 of the City Code known as the zoning regulations. Ch. 16 13 Vacating a portion of a sanitary sewer easement in the Cherry Hills Meadow Subdivision. 14 Vacating a utility easement on Lot 3 Block 5 of the Chaumont Subdivision. 15 None. 16 Amending Ord. No. 11, Series of 1985, of the City of Cherry Hills Village, finally passed and adopted on May 21, 1985, relating to the principal amount, interest rates, and net effective interest rate on the $180,000 special assessment bonds of the City authorized therein for Special Improvement District No. 3. 17 Creating Title 1, Chapter 13, of the City Code relating to delinquent taxes, fees, assessments, fines and penalties and procedures for collection thereof and interest and attorneys' fees. Ch. 4 18 Approving the whole cost of the improvements made in Special Improvement District No. 3, in the City of Cherry Hills Village; approving and confirming the apportionment of said cost to each lot or tract of land in the district; assessing a share of said cost against each lot or tract of land in the district; and prescribing the manner for the collection and payment of said assessments. 19 Vacating a portion of an alley in the South University Place Annex Subdivision. 20 Amending Ord. No. 10, Series of 1985, and to provide for "optional premises" in connection with establishments for which liquor licenses are issued. Ch. 6 21 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for fiscal 1986. 22 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1986. 23 Amending Title 3 of the City Code relating to franchise, business, license, and fee regulations to add a new Chapter 8 consisting of a use tax on motor vehicles purchased outside the City by City residents for use or storage within the City of Cherry Hills Village. 24 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1985. 25 Amending Title 3, Chapter 1, of the City Code relating to retail sales tax. 1986 1 Adopting by reference the 1985 Edition of the Uniform Fire Code and the Uniform Fire Code Standards. 2 Concerning the creation of Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 4, authorizing and ordering the construction and installation of improvements therein, for the payment of which special assessments shall hereafter be levied; and determining the method of apportioning said assessments as among the owners of the real property benefited thereby. 3 Creating Special Improvement District No. 5 in the City of Cherry Hills Village, ordering the construction and installation therein of street improvements, to include necessary grading and street paving, together with any necessary incidentals; providing for the issuance of bonds in payment for said improvements; and providing for notice to contractors and other details in connection with the district. 4 None. 5 None. 6 Authorizing the issuance of special assessment bonds in the principal amount of $263,200 of the City of Cherry Hills Village, for Special Improvement District No. 5; prescribing the form of the bonds, and providing for the payment of the bonds and the interest thereon. 7 Authorizing the issuance of special assessment bonds of the City of Cherry Hills Village, dated April 1, 1986, in the principal amount of $215,000, for Cherry Hills Village, Special Improvement District No. 4; prescribing the form of said bonds; providing for payment of the principal thereof and the interest thereon; and making provision for other matters relating thereto. 8 For Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 4, approving the statement of cost and confirming the apportionment thereof; assessing said cost as apportioned against each lot or tract of land within said district specially benefited by said improvements; prescribing the method of paying and collecting said assessments; describing the lien securing payment thereof; and making necessary finding with respect to the satisfaction of conditions and requirements relating to the foregoing. 9 Making supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 1985. 10 Making a supplemental appropriation and amending the Public Improvement Fund Budget for fiscal year 1986. 11 Vacating a portion of South Harrison Street. 12 Approving the whole cost of the improvements made in Special Improvement District No. 5, in the City of Cherry Hills Village; approving and confirming the apportionment of said cost to each lot or share of said cost against each lot or tract of land in the district; and prescribing the manner for the collection and payment of said assessments. 13 Amending Ord. No. 6, Series of 1986, of the City of Cherry Hills Village, finally passed and adopted on April 14, 1986, relating to the principal amount, interest rates, and net effective interest rate on the $215,000 special assessment bonds of the City authorized therein for Special Improvement District No. 5. 14 Levying an excise tax on professional sports events. Ch. 4 15 Making supplemental appropriations for the 1986 fiscal year. 16 Amending Title 6 of the City Code relating to screening and design of parking lots and permitted structures, uses and activities in zoning districts. Ch. 16 17 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for fiscal year 1987. 18 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1987. 19 Amending the legal description set forth in Ord. No. 19, Series of 1985. 20 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1986. 1987 1 Amending Ord. No. 2, Series of 1986, of the City, creating Cherry Hills Village, Special Improvement District No. 4 and Ord. No. 8, Series of 1986, assessing costs of improvements within the district. 2 Vacating a portion of Charlou Drive. 3 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills City Code to require the preparation of a traffic impact study for, and City approval of, any proposed use or increased or expanded use of property as or by a school, church, private club or residential and resort hotel. 4 Amending Title 2-1 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code decreasing the size of the Planning Commission from nine to seven members. Ch. 2 5 Amending Section 14 of Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code relating to non-conforming lots. 6 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills City Code revising flood plain management regulations to maintain compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 7 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for fiscal year 1988. 8 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1988. 9 Granting a franchise by the City of Cherry Hills Village to Public Service Company of Colorado, its successors and assigns, the right to furnish, sell and distribute gas and electricity to the City and to all persons, businesses, maintain, operate and extend into, within and through said City all facilities reasonably necessary to furnish, sell and distribute gas and electricity within the City and the right to make reasonable use of all streets and other public places as herein defined as may be necessary; and fixing the terms and conditions thereof. Ch. 5 10 Amending Section 15 of Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code relating to signs and outdoor advertising devices. Ch. 16 11 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1987. 12 Amending Title 6 of the City Code to permit a columbarium under certain conditions. Ch. 16 1988 1 Amending Title 3, Chapter 6, relating to security alarm systems and providing for a permit fee and response changes. 2 Making a 1988 appropriation for the Revenue Sharing Trust Fund. 3 Amending Title 5 of the City Code to adopt by reference the 1988 Uniform Building Code and Standards, the 1987 National Electric Code, 1988 Uniform Mechanical Code and the 1988 Uniform Plumbing Code. 4 Making supplemental appropriations to the Public Improvement Fund for fiscal year 1988. 5 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for fiscal year 1989. 6 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1989. 7 Adopting a budget and making appropriations for special improvement district funds in Cherry Hills Village for fiscal year 1988. 8 Vacating certain alleys in Cherry Hills Village. 9 Amending Title 1 of the City Code to establish a Municipal Court of record. 1989 1 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills City Code to expand the definitions of accessory and recreational uses or structures. Ch. 16 2 Amending Title 10, Chapter 1 of the Cherry Hills City Code with respect to parking regulations on private property. 3 Authorizing the imposition of an emergency telephone service charge for the funding of the E-911 Telephone Service System within Arapahoe County. 4 Amending Title 6, Chapter 1 of the City Code to modify the definition of medical and dental clinics. Ch. 16 5 Amending Title 3, Chapter 5 of the City Code relating to the service expansion fee. Ch. 18 6 Amending Title 5, Chapter 1 of the City Code relating to building codes. 7 Amending Title 6, Chapters 2 and 3 of the City Code relating to the administration and enforcement of zoning, building and other regulations. Ch. 16 8 Amending Title 6, Chapter 15, Section 4 of the Cherry Hills City Code relating to fences and walls. Ch. 7, Ch. 16 9 Amending Title 6 of the Cherry Hills City Code to revise the floodplain management regulations. Ch. 16 10 Making supplemental appropriations to the Public Improvement Fund for fiscal year 1989. 11 Adopting a fee schedule for residential electrical permits. 12 Adopting a budget and making appropriations for special improvement district funds in Cherry Hills Village for fiscal year 1989. 13 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for fiscal year 1990. 14 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1990. 15 Amending Section 6-15-4 of the City Code concerning fences and walls. Ch. 16 16 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1989. 17 Amending Title 3, Chapter 9 of the City Code Relating to use taxes by including motor vehicles leased by City residents for use of storage within the City of Cherry Hills Village. Ch. 4 1990 1 Amending Title 1, Chapter 9 of the Cherry Hills City Code with respect to the Municipal Court. Ch. 2 2 Amending Title 5, Chapter 1, Section 7 of the City Code to adopt the 1988 Edition of the Uniform Fire Code and Uniform Fire Code Standards with deletions, additions and modifications. 3 Amending Title 8, Chapter 2 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code relating to city parks and rights-of-way. Ch. 11 4 Amending Title 6, Chapter 15 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code relating to off-street parking requirements. 5 Amending Title 9 of the City Code concerning definitions for vicious dogs and the control of dogs. Ch. 7 6 Amending Title 3, Chapter 1 of the City Code relating to sales taxes. 7 Establishing a City-wide curfew for minors; curfew violations, penalty provisions, of curfew violations for the City of Cherry Hills Village. Ch. 1, Ch. 10 8 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for fiscal year 1991. 9 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1991. 10 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1990. 1991 1 Amending Title 5, Chapter 1 of the City Code to adopt the 1990 Edition of the National Electric Code and correct the electrical permit fee schedule. Ch. 16 2 Amending Title 9 of the Cherry Hills City Code to revise the peddlers and solicitors regulations. Ch. 10 3 Amending Title 6 of the City Code relating to the zoning regulations involving accessory structures. Ch. 16 4 Creating Special Improvement District No. 6, in the City of Cherry Hills Village; ordering the construction and installation therein of a sound attenuation and beautification wall, together with any improvements; and providing for notice to contractors and other details in connection with the district. 5 Authorizing the issuance of special assessment bond in the principal amount of $128,000 of the City of Cherry Hills Village, for Special Improvement District No. 6; prescribing the form of the bonds, and providing for the payment of the bonds and the interest therein. 6 Creating a new Title 1, Chapter 14 relating to the legal enforcement rights of the City Code Enforcement Officer. Ch. 2 7 Amending Title 10, Chapter 1 regarding regulatory offenses included in the Model Traffic Code. 8 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for fiscal year 1992. 9 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1992. 10 Repealing and re-enacting in its entirety Title 3, Chapter 1, of the City Code relating to retail sales tax. Ch. 4 11 Changing and designating the districts for election of Council Member for the City of Cherry Hills Village, pursuant to Section 2.6 of the Charter. 12 Approving the whole cost of the improvements made in Special Improvement District No. 6, in the City of Cherry Hills Village; approving and confirming the apportionment of said cost to each lot or tract of land in the district; assessing a share of said cost against each lot and payment of said assessments. 13 Amending Ord. No. 5, Series of 1991, of the City of Cherry Hills Village, finally passed and adopted on June 4, 1991, relating to the principal amount, interest rates, and net effective interest rate and other details on the $134,000 special assessment bonds of the City authorized therein for Special Improvement District No. 6. 14 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1991. 1992 1 Amending Section 7-3-3 of the City Code relating to the payment of cash fees in lieu of land dedication. 2 Adopting a budget for Special Improvement District No. 6 and making supplemental appropriations for Special Improvement District No. 6 and the Water and Sewer Enterprise Fund. 3 Amending Title 4, Chapter 2 of the City Code relating to weeds. Ch. 7 4 Amending Ord. No. 12, Series of 1991, of the City of Cherry Hills Village, finally passed and adopted on December 17, 1991, relating to the interest rate to be paid on the installment payments of assessments for Special Improvement District No. 6. 5 Authorizing the issuance by the City of Cherry Hills Village of general obligation refunding bonds, Series of 1992, in the principal amount of $285,000, for the purpose of refunding valid and outstanding general obligation bonds of the City; prescribing the form of said bonds; providing for the levy of ad valorem taxes to pay the same; providing for the proceeds of said bonds to be deposited in a separate escrow account for the payment of the bonds being refunded; and providing other details in connection therewith. 6 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1992. 7 Amending Title 6, Chapter 5 of the City Code pertaining to the boarding of horses. Ch. 16 8 Amending Title 6 of the City Code pertaining to temporary construction and sales structures. Ch. 16 9 Vacating a portion of East Stanford Avenue east of Holly Street. 10 Concerning municipal disposition of unclaimed property. Ch. 1 11 Making supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 1992. 12 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, for fiscal year 1993. 13 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1993. 1993 1 Amending Title 5, Chapter 1, Section 1-5, relating to building codes. 2 Amending Title 9, Chapter 1, Section 5 of the City Code with regard to the trapping of animals. 3 Repealing the 1970 Master Plan and amending Title 7, Chapters 1 and 2 of the City Code. Ch. 17 4 Amending Title 6 of the City Code with regard to public hearing and announcement signs. Ch. 17 5 Amending Title 10 of the City Code to add regulations concerning compulsory automobile insurance. 6 Amending Title 9, Chapter 2 of the City Code by addition of a new Section 10, captioned "hawkers and peddlers", and declaring it unlawful to sell or attempt to sell merchandise on or from any public way, and conditioning such sale or attempted sale from private property on compliance with other applicable code requirements. Ch. 10 7 Amending Title 6 of the City Code to provide for the appointment of an alternate member of the Board of Adjustment. 8 Amending Title 5, Chapter 1 of the City Code to provide for a minimum investigation fee for work without a permit. 9 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village, for fiscal year 1994. 10 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1994. 11 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1993. 1994 1 None. Ch. 16, Ch. 17 2 Submitting to the registered electors of the City certain proposed Charter amendments. 3 Amending Title 6 of the City Code with regard to wireless communication facilities. Ch. 16 4 Amending Title 6 of the City Code with regard to planning and engineering escrow accounts for construction in the RA-1 Zone District. 5 Amending Section 6-15-14 of the City Code regarding wireless communication facilities. Ch. 16 6 Amending Chapter 5-1 of the City Code to adopt the ANSI Safety Code for Elevators. 7 Amending Title 9 of the City Code regarding the release and possible destruction of vicious dogs. Ch. 7 8 Amending Title 6 of the City Code with regard to the criteria against which variance applications will be reviewed. 9 Adopting a budget and levying general property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village, for fiscal year 1995. 10 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1995. 11 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1994. 1995 0 Vacating Charlou Lane. 1 Amending the City Code pertaining to wireless communication facilities. Ch. 16 2 Amending the City Code regarding licensing of security guards. Ch. 6 3 Amending the City Code regarding base maps for floodplain regulations. Ch. 16 4 Amending the City Code regarding effective term of variance. 5 Amending the telephone service charge for the funding of the E-911 System. 6 Rezoning a parcel of land owned by the Cherry Hills Country Club from F-1, Flood Plain & Recreation District to R-1, 2 1/2 Acre Residential. 7 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village, for fiscal year 1996. 8 Making appropriations for the fiscal year 1996. 9 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1995. 1996 1 Amending Title 6 of the City Code to create a new zone district in the Cherry Hills zoning regulations titled R-3A, Variable Lot Residential District. Ch. 16 2 Rezoning a parcel of land owned by the Cherry Hills Arts and Culture Center from RA-1, Resort Area District to R-3A, Variable Lot Residential District. 3 Amending Title 6 of the City Code to eliminate Chapter 11, RA-1 Resort Area District. Ch. 16 4 Rezoning a parcel of land owned by the Cherry Hills Country Club from R-2, 11/4 Acre Residential District to F-1, Flood Plain and Recreation District. 5 Amending Section 1-4-1 of the City Code concerning general penalty provisions. Ch. 16 6 Concerning a affidavit of intent for write-in candidates and when municipal elections may be canceled. Ch. 2 7 Amending Section 7-3-3 of the City Code concerning the City's land dedication regulations. Ch. 7 8 Amending Title 3-2 of the City Code relating to an occupation tax on local exchange telephone suppliers. 9 Vacating a portion of the bridle trail easement on Plot 3 and Plot 7, Polichio Subdivision and Plot 3, White's Subdivision. 10 Vacating a portion of Random Road. 11 Amending Title 6, Chapter 15, Section 8 pertaining to political signs. 12 Amending Title 5, Chapter 1, Section 1-9 relating to the adoptions of building codes. 14 Making supplemental appropriation for the 1996 fiscal year. 15 Adopting a budget and establishing a mill levy for the 1997 fiscal year. 16 Appropriating funds for the 1997 fiscal year. 1997 1 Amending Title 9 of the City Code pertaining to animal trapping. Ch. 7 2 Amending Title 9 of the City Code pertaining to uninvited door-to-door solicitation. Ch. 10 3 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1997. 4 Amending Title 6 of the City Code to modify a zone district in the Cherry Hills Zoning Regulations Titled R-3A, Variable Lot Residential District. Ch. 4 5 Rezoning a parcel of land from R-1, 2.5 Acre Residential District to R-3A, Variable Lot Residential District. 6 Vacating streets and alleys within South University Park Subdivision. 7 Adopting the 1994 Edition of the Uniform Mechanical Code and the Uniform Plumbing Code. 8 Vacating the north leg of Cherry Lane Drive. 9 Rezoning a parcel of land owned by Perlmutter/Witkin from R-1, 2.5 Acre Residential District to F-1, Flood Plain and Recreation Area District. 10 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village, for the fiscal year 1998. 11 Making appropriations for fiscal year 1998. 12 Making supplemental appropriations for fiscal year 1997. 1998 1 Vacating a recreational trail easement across Lots 5 and 6, Block 1, Highline Meadows in Cherry Hills. 2 Vacating a utility easement across the northern six feet of Lot 17, the northern eight feet of Lots 5, 6 and 7, and the eastern eight feet of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5; all within Block 2, Highline Meadows in Cherry Hills. 3 Creating a fund to account for Special Improvement District No. 7. 4 Vacating a recreational trail and drainage easement across Lot 5, Buell Mansion Subdivision, Cherry Hills Village. 5 Submitting to the registered electors of the City of Cherry Hills Village at a special election to be held on Tuesday, the 3 rd Day of November, 1998, the question of whether to amend Article XI, Section 11.2 of the Charter for the City of Cherry Hills Village by providing that the City of Cherry Hills Village no longer be obligated by its City Charter for the payment of special assessment bonds issued for special or local improvement districts by amendment of Section 11.2 of the Charter of the City of Cherry Hills Village and setting the ballot title. 6 Creating the Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 7 in the City of Cherry Hills Village; ordering the construction, installation and acquisition of water system improvements necessary to provide a permanent water supply to the Charlou Park Addition and the Charlou Park Second Addition; and setting forth other details in connection with the district. 7 Amending Section 7-4-3(A)(2) of the City of Cherry Hills Village City Code. 8 Adding new Sections 6-3-5, 6-14-10, 6-16.4-1, and amending Sections 6-2-3F and 7-3-2B of the City Code of the City of Cherry Hills Village to allow the City to recover costs incurred in connections with various land development requests. Ch. 16, Ch. 17 9 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for fiscal year 1999. 10 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 1999. 11 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 1998. 1999 1 Authorizing an amendment to the 1999 budget. 2 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 1998. 3 Amending Chapter 14, Section 2, Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code by increasing the number of lot size classifications for the purpose of regulating the size of residences on non-conforming lots, and providing for administrative issuance of building permits for certain non-conforming lots. Ch. 16 4 Prescribing the procedure for notice, the method and time for filing protest and disposition thereof, the method and manner of making Special Improvement District No. 7 improvements, letting contracts therefor, assessing the cost thereof, and issuing and paying bonds for cost and expenses on the organization of Special Improvement District No. 7, and of construction or installation of said improvements. 5 Repealing and reenacting Chapter 3 of Title 6 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code thereby changing the criteria governing the granting of variances and special exceptions; authorizing City Council to increase the application fee for matters before the Board of Adjustment and Appeals; and providing a pre-hearing procedure for said matters. Ch. 16 6 Affirming the City Council's authority to sell and dispose of real property. 7 Amending Titles 6 and 7 to define guardhouses, to allow guardhouses as a conditional use and to set forth a conditional use review procedure. Ch. 16 8 Rezoning two parcels owned by Cherry Hills Country Club. 9 Authorizing supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 1999. 10 Approving with conditions St. Mary's Academy expanded and increased use. 11 Conditionally vacating portion of South Harrison Street. 12 Conditionally vacating portion of East Kenyon Ave. (Covington Dr.). 14 Concerning vested property rights Ch. 16 2000 1 Amending required platting language contained in Title 7, Chapter 4, Section 5 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code. Ch. 17 2 Amending Title 6, Section 15-6, to include swimming pool covers as an alternative to fencing around a swimming pool and amending Title 6, Section 1-1 to add new definitions relating to swimming pools. Ch. 16 3 Declaring a temporary moratorium on the acceptance by the City of Cherry Hills Village of expanded use applications pending adoption of new regulations. 4 Certifying a ballot issue for the City of Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 7; ordering that the ballot issue be submitted to electors of the district at the regular City election; and setting forth other details in connection therewith. 5 Repealing and reenacting Sections 6-15-14 (C) and (D) of the Cherry Hills Village Zoning Code concerning wireless communication facilities. Ch. 16 6 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2000. 7 Adding a new section to Title 1, Chapter 8, of the City of Cherry Hills Village City Code allowing the City Council to appoint qualified persons to fill vacancies which are the result of the failure of a properly qualified person to run for office. 8 Amending Section 6-14-2B of the City Code concerning construction on nonconforming lots. 9 Amending Ord. 3, Series 2000 extending the temporary moratorium on the acceptance of expanded use applications to September 14, 2000. 10 Approving the costs of the Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 7 and approving and confirming the apportionment of such costs; assessing a share of the cost against the real property described in this ordinance; and prescribing the manner for the collection and payment of the assessments. 11 Authorizing the issuance of special assessment bonds, Taxable Series 2000A in the aggregate principal amount of $595,000 and Tax-Exempt Series 2000B in the aggregate principal amount of $930,000; prescribing the form of the bonds; providing for the payment of the bonds from special assessments imposed upon property within the City of Cherry Hills Village Special Improvement District No. 7 and making certain covenants in connection therewith; providing other details and approving various documents in connection with the bonds; and declaring an emergency. 12 Amending various sections of Title 6 concerning zoning and variance matters. Ch. 16 13 Amending the City Code concerning nonprofit institutions, private clubs, nonprofit recreational facilities and expanded or increased uses of nonprofit institutions, private clubs and nonprofit recreational facilities. Ch. 16 14 Adopting by reference the Arapahoe County Guidelines for Traffic Impact Studies & Storm Drainage Design & Technical Criteria Manuals. 15 Rezoning parcels of land to F-1, Flood Plain and Recreation Area District. 16 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2000. 17 Amending the F-1, Flood Plain and Recreation Area District and to amend other related provisions of Title 6. Ch. 16 18 Proposed budget and tax levy for 2001. 19 Appropriations for 2001 budget. 20 Rezoning Parcel B, William Goodin Subdivision from R-2, 11/4 Residential to O-1, Flood Plain & Recreational Area District. 21 Amending Section 5-1-1-1(1) of the Cherry Hills Village City Code pertaining to elevator inspection fees. 2001 1 Amending Section 4-1-2-4(c) pertaining to nuisances involving artificial lighting. Ch. 7 2 Requiring merger of non-conforming or substandard lots. Ch. 16 3 Adopting a new Chapter 6 of Title 7 of subdivision regulations concerning an administrative process for the approval of lot consolidations and minor lot adjustments. Ch. 17 4 Vacating a trail easement on the Cherry Hills Park I Subdivision Plat. 5 Establishing a process for vacation of certain public properties and repealing Section 7-3-10. Ch. 11 6 Amending Subsection 6-15-8(b)(7) concerning the size of signs related to use of property. 7 Vacating alley within the South University Park Subdivision. 8 Amending Section 3-5-2 of the Code concerning references to the F-1, Flood Plain and Recreation Area and the RA-1 Resort and Hotel Districts and clarifying service expansion fee to construction in R-3A. Ch. 18 9 Re-establishing the boundaries of council districts. Ch. 2 10 Authorizing procedures for contracting for construction of public works projects. Ch. 4 11 Approving a special warranty deed for conveyance of City-owned real property. 12 Amending Title 6, Chapter 16, concerning wire mesh fence in the floodplain. Ch. 16 13 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2001. 14 Amending Section 6-19-2(b)(2) concerning nonprofit institutions, private clubs, public recreational facilities and nonprofit recreational facilities. Ch. 16 15 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for fiscal year 2002. 16 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2002. 17 Authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds (County Sheriffs of Colorado Project) for $1,700,000. 2002 1 Amending Title 6, Chapters 13, 15 and 17 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code to allow retail uses as conditional uses in the C-2 zone district. Ch. 16 2 Repealing Section 7-3-9 (exemptions) of the City Code and enacting a minor subdivision process. Ch. 17 3 Vacating the City's interest in a non-motorized recreational trail easement. 4 Vacating the City's interest, if any, to a bridle trail previously granted by easement agreement between the City and Marcia P. Lyons. 5 Vacating the City's interest, if any, to a roadway easement adjacent to Fairfax Street and within Lot 1, Tamblyn Subdivision. 6 Repealing and readopting Chapter 7 of Title 3 of the City Code, to approve a cable franchise agreement by and between Mountain States Video Communications Co., Inc. and the City of Cherry Hills Village. Ch. 5 7 Vacating the City's interest, if any, to a portion of platted Fairfax Street easement and prohibiting parking along other portions of Fairfax Street. 8 Vacating the City's interest, if any, to certain property within Chenango Avenue and reserving a public pedestrian and bridle trail easement and prohibiting parking along other portions of Chenango Avenue. 9 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2002. 10 Amending Title 1, Chapter 11 of the Cherry Hills Village City Code relating to disposition of unclaimed property. Ch. 1 11 Consenting to the transfer of control of the City's Cable Television System franchise to AT&T Comcast Corporation. 12 Repealing and readopting Section 9-2-7 of the City Code, concerning door-to-door solicitation. Ch. 10 13 Repealing and readopting Title 10, Chapter 1 of the City Code, relating to the Model Traffic Code; adopting by reference the 1995 edition of the Model Traffic Code; designating certain violations as traffic infractions and eliminating the availability of jury trials and jail sentences therefor; repealing all ordinances in conflict therewith; and providing penalties for violations of the City-adopted traffic code. Ch. 8 14 Vacating the City's interest, if any, to certain ditch and utility easements located within 6 Cherry Vale Drive. 15 Vacating the City's interest, if any , to South Harrison Street north of East Mansfield Avenue. 16 Making an appropriation in connection with groundwater. 17 Repealing and readopting Title 5, Chapter 1, Section 1-9 of the City Code, regarding building codes. Ch. 18 18 Repealing Section 6-15-8 of the City Code and enacting a new Title 6, Chapter 20, and amending Section 6-19-3(C)(15), all pertaining to signs. Ch. 16 19 Amending Sections 3-6-10 and 3-6-12 of the City Code pertaining to false alarms. Ch. 6 20 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village for fiscal year 2003. 21 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2003. 2003 1 Amending Section 5-11-2 of the City Code regarding work in the right-of-way. Ch. 18 2 Creating a Parks and Recreation Fund. Ch. 4 3 Vacating the City's interest to a portion of Greenbriar Drive. 4 Authorizing transfer of funds from the General Fund to the Parks and Recreation Fund. 5 Amending Chapter 9-1, animal control regulations. Ch. 7 Art. 6 6 Amending Section 6-15-4, fences and walls. 16-16-40 7 Amending Chapter 3-8, alcoholic beverages. Ch. 6 Art. 2 8 Repealing and reenacting Chapter 4-1, nuisances. Ch. 7 Art. 1 9 Adopting Municipal Code. Entire Code 10 Authorizing issuance of Revenue Bond and approving loan agreement for Denver Christian Schools Project. 11 Amending Sections 16-3-20, 16-18-10, 16-18-50, 16-18-60 and 16-18-70 concerning approval of conditional use permits and grants of variances. Ch. 16 12 Amending Sections 16-1-10 and 16-16-100 concerning construction of berms. Ch. 16 13 Authorizing supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2003. 14 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for fiscal year 2004. 15 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2004. 2004 1 Amending Sections 16-3-50 and 16-3-70 regarding approval of variances. Ch. 16 2 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2004. 3 Adding Article XXI, Major Event Permit, to Chapter 16. Ch. 16 4 Vacating portion of Hampden Avenue. 5 Amending Section 16-16-70, temporary uses and structures. Ch. 16 6 Amending Section 2-1-10, conduct of elections. Ch. 2 7 Adding Section 1-1-80, amending Chapters 2, 6, 7, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18 and Appendix A to include fees, costs, deposits, occupation taxes and other charges in Code text Ch. 1, 2, 6, 7, 11, 15-18, Appx A 8 Amending Section 17-3-30, dedication of land Ch. 17 9 Amending Chapter 6, Article III, regarding Security Guard Businesses Ch. 6 Art. III 10 Amending Section 16-16-100, construction of berms Ch. 16 11 Vacating the City's interest, if any, to a portion of a platted recreational trail easement and utility easement at 21 Sandy Lake Road 12 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for fiscal year 2005 13 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2005 14 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2004 2005 01 Vacating the City's interest, if any, to an eight-foot-wide platted utility easement in the Buell Mansion Subdivision Filing 3 02 Establishing an Arapahoe County Open Space Fund 03 Amending Chapter 16, Article XXI, concerning major event permits Ch. 16 04 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2005 05 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2005 06 Vacating the City's interest, if any, to a portion of Meade Lane from Quincy Avenue east approximately 576 feet and to a portion of East Quincy Avenue from South University Boulevard northeast approximately 824 feet 07 Amending Sections 16-17-40(b) and 18-1-20(17), concerning methods for establishing floodplain areas within the City Ch. 16, Ch. 18 08 Amending Chapter 18, Articles I, II, III, IV, V, VII, VIII and IX, concerning Building Regulations Ch. 18 09 Rezoning certain parcels of land located on the southeast corner of Quincy Avenue and University Boulevard from R-1, 21/2-acre Residential District to C-1, Community District 10 Repealing and reenacting Chapter 11, Article II, concerning public right-of-way permits Ch. 11 11 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2005 12 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for fiscal year 2006 13 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2006 2006 1 Amending Section 11-2-20, concerning public right-of-way permit definitions Ch. 11 2 Establishing the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission at Chapter 2, Article VIII; amending Section 17-3-120, concerning preliminary plats Ch. 2, Ch. 17 3 Amending Section 16-16-40, concerning fences and walls Ch. 16 4 Amending Section 7-1-30 and 7-1-40, concerning noise nuisances Ch. 7 5 Amending Section 18-10-10, concerning construction times of building regulations Ch. 18 6 Repealing and reenacting Chapter 18, Article X, Building Regulations Ch. 18 2007 01 Amending Chapter 16, concerning zoning, by amending Sections 16-1-10, concerning definitions, and 16-16-40, concerning fences and walls Ch. 16 02 Adding Article IX, Code of Ethics to Chapter 2 Ch. 2 04 Amending Sections 7-1-30 and 7-1-40 concerning noise nuisance, specifically construction noise Ch. 7 06 Adding Chapter 19 concerning stormwater quality and control Ch. 19 07 Amending Section 16-16-10 concerning off-street parking regulations Ch. 16 08 Amending Chapter 16 to adopt comprehensive regulations concerning wireless communications facilities Ch. 16 09 Amending Chapter 11 concerning streets, sidewalks and public property Ch. 11 10 Amending Chapter 11 concerning streets, sidewalks and public property Ch. 11 11 Repealing and reenacting Chapter 8 concerning vehicles and traffic Ch. 8 12 Amending Chapter 18 concerning building regulations. Ch. 18 13 Amending Chapter 10 concerning general offenses. Ch. 10 14 Approving a gas and electric franchise agreement between Xcel Energy and the City Ch. 5, Art. II 15 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes 16 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2008 2008 01 Repealing and reenacting Articles I through VIII of Chapter 18 Ch. 18 03 Amending Section 17-3-420 concerning variance procedures 17-3-420 04 Amending Section 2-4-130 concerning fees for jury service 2-4-130 05 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2008 06 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2008 07 Amending Section 2-6-30 concerning terms of office for the Planning and Zoning Commission Ch. 2 08 Amending Section 10-4-30 concerning trespassing Ch. 10 09 Building regulations. Amending Subsection 18-10-70(a) concerning enforcement of the provisions of Chapter 18 that regulate construction times Ch. 18 10 Administration and personnel. Amending Section 2-8-20 concerning members and appointment and Section 2-8-30 concerning terms of office and organization of the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission Ch. 2 11 Amending Paragraph 7-1-30(5) concerning lighting Ch. 7 12 Amending Section 18-10-20 concerning construction practices definitions and amending Section 18-10-30 concerning administration of construction practices Ch. 18 14 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the settlement agreement and release with Davis Partnership Architects for fiscal year 2008 15 Amending Paragraph 18-2-10(22) concerning amendments to the fire sprinkler system requirements of 2006 The International Residential Code Ch. 18 16 Adding Sections 2-4-80 and 8-1-30 concerning a mandatory gasoline surcharge for violations Ch. 2 Ch. 8 17 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the 2007 payment to South Suburban Park and Recreation District in fiscal year 2008 18 Vacating a trail easement in the Buell Subdivision Appx. E-5 19 Authorizing supplemental appropriation for repair and replacement of sanitary sewer lines for fiscal year 2008 20 Amending Paragraph 18-1-20(10) and Appendix A concerning elevator inspection fees in the International Building Code Ch. 18 Appx. A 21 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for fiscal year 2009 22 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2009 2009 1 Amending Section 11-2-90 concerning permit fees Ch. 11 2 Authorizing supplemental appropriation for repair and replacement of sanitary sewer lines, water lines, and construction of picnic shelter for fiscal year 2009 3 Amending Section 2-9-20 concerning the Code of Ethics Ch. 2 4 Amending Section 2-6-10 concerning the Planning and Zoning Commission Ch. 2 5 Amending Section 16-17-60 concerning procedure for development within the floodplain Ch. 16 6 Amending Subsection 16-16-130(e) concerning wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way Ch. 16 7 Amending Section 7-5-50 concerning prohibited and restricted animals Ch. 7 8 Amending Section 10-5-100 concerning throwing prohibited objects Ch. 10 9 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation to transfer money from the general fund to the Catherine H. Anderson Land Donation Fund 10 Amending Section 19-1-120(a) concerning post-construction permanent Best Management Practices Ch. 19 11 Amending Section 16-8-90 concerning accessory structures and amending Subsection 16-9-30(d) concerning area, height and yard requirements for accessory structures Ch. 16 12 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for fiscal year 2010 13 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2010 2010 1 Amending Section 16-8-80 concerning residential district buffer requirements Ch. 16 2 Amending Chapter 17, Article III, Division 4 concerning minor subdivisions and amended plats Ch. 17 3 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the 2008 and 2009 payments to South Suburban Park and Recreation District in fiscal year 2009 4 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the settlement agreement and release with Eric Ensey in fiscal year 2010 5 Adding Section 11-1-30 concerning landscape maintenance, adding Section 11-1-40 concerning public right-of-way and public easement encroachments, amending Subsection 11-2-40(e) concerning permitted encroachments, renumbering Sections 11-2-180 through 11-2-280 as Sections 11-2-190 through 11-2-290 and adding Section 11-2-180 concerning damage to public rights-of-way Ch. 11 6 Amending Section 18-1-20 concerning amendments to the 2006 International Building Code, amending Section 18-2-20 concerning amendments to the 2006 International Residential Code, amending Section 18-3-20 concerning amendments to the 2006 International Mechanical Code, amending Section 18-4-20 concerning amendments to the 2006 International Plumbing Code and amending Section 18-5-20 concerning amendments to the 2006 International Fuel Gas Code Ch. 18 7 Amending Sections 6-1-10 through 6-1-30 concerning business licenses Ch. 6 8 Amending Section 4-4-10 concerning sales tax definitions, amending Section 4-4-30 concerning the requirement for a sales tax license, amending Section 4-4-120 concerning property taxed, amending Section 4-4-130 concerning schedule of sales tax, amending Section 4-4-210 concerning exemptions from taxation and amending Section 4-4-310 concerning vendor liability for tax Ch. 4 9 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the expenditure of funds for the Dry Creek Trail improvements for fiscal year 2010 10 Vacating a portion of Union Avenue 11 Amending Section 16-16-50 concerning exterior lighting standards Ch. 16 12 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the repair and replacement of the public works roof and fuel management system for fiscal year 2010 13 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the repair and replacement of asphalt road surface on South Franklin Street 14 Amending Section 18-10-70 concerning enforcement of construction practices Ch. 18 15 Amending Section 16-3-90 concerning land development account, amending Section 16-14-100 concerning fees, amending Section 16-17-90 concerning fees, amending Section 16-18-50 concerning application procedures, amending Section 16-19-60 concerning preapplication meeting and submission requirements, amending Section 17-3-20 concerning fees, amending Section 17-6-30 concerning administrative review application and plat Ch. 16, Ch. 17 16 Amending Section 2-1-10 concerning conduct of elections, amending Section 2-1-40 concerning write-in candidate affidavits, amending Section 2-1-50 concerning cancellation of election Ch. 2 17 Amending Section 1-6-10 concerning location of City offices, records Ch. 1 18 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for a contract with Winter and Company to conduct a bulk plane study 19 Amending Sections 16-5-10, 16-12-10 and 16-13-10 concerning permitted uses in the various zone districts; 16-5-20, 16-6-20, 16-7-20, 16-8-20, 16-9-20, 16-10-20 and 16-12-20 concerning conditional uses in the various zone districts; and 16-8-20 concerning requirements and conditions for specific conditional uses; and the addition of Section 16-16-150 concerning satellite dish antennas Ch. 16 20 Amending 16-17-60, concerning procedure for development relating to dredging ponds within the floodplain Ch. 16 21 Repealing and reenacting Articles I through VIII of Chapter 18, concerning building regulations; adopting by reference, with certain amendments, the 2009 International Building Code , the 2009 International Residential Code , the 2009 International Mechanical Code , the 2009 International Plumbing Code , the 2009 International Fuel Gas Code , the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code , the 2008 International Electrical Code and the 2009 International Fire Code Ch. 18 22 Repealing and reenacting Chapter 8, concerning vehicles and traffic, to adopt by reference The 2010 Model Traffic Code for Colorado , with certain amendments Ch. 8 23 Amending Section 6-2-190, concerning annual occupation tax Ch. 6 24 Adding Chapter 10, Article XI concerning medical marijuana Ch. 10 25 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for an appraisal of real property 26 Amending Sections 16-17-30 - 16-17-70, concerning floodplain management regulations Ch. 16 27 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado for Fiscal Year 2011 28 Authorizing appropriations for Fiscal Year 2011 and creating a Capital Fund Ch. 4 29 Granting a water service line easement within the Billynne Subdivision to the Denver Board of Water Commissioners 30 Conveying by quitclaim deed the City's interest in a drainage and water line easement within the Cherry Hills Annex Subdivision to the East Cherry Hills Water District 2011 1 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the replacement of carpet in the Village Center 2 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for architectural and design services related to the planning and design of the proposed new joint public safety facility 3 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the repair and replacement of portions of the Village Center building roof 4 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the installation of new audio visual equipment 5 Amending Chapter 6 concerning business licenses and regulations, to adopt standards, procedures and fees for applications for Liquor Tastings Ch. 6 6 Amending Chapter 16 concerning zoning by the addition of Section 16-16-170 concerning the preservation of established trees Ch. 16 7 Amending Chapter 16 concerning zoning, by the addition of Section 16-16-160 concerning retaining walls Ch. 16 8 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the preconstruction services related to the planning and design of the proposed new joint public safety facility 9 Amending Chapter 16 by the addition of provisions concerning bulk plane and maximum floor area ratio standards Ch. 16 10 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the placement of asphalt road surface on South Monroe Street 11 Amending Sections 4-4-130 and 4-4-310 to adjust the City sales tax vendor fee Ch. 4 12 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for the City for fiscal year 2012 13 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2012 2012 1 Vacating the City's interest, if any, in a portion of the right-of-way for Meade Lane 2 Amending Section 16-11-40 concerning dimensional requirements applicable to the Open Space, Park and Recreation District Ch. 16 3 Amending Section 16-17-60 concerning requirements applicable to the dredging of ponds and lakes. Ch. 16 4 Amending Section 16-16-180 concerning administrative bulk plane variances. Ch. 16 5 Amending Section 16-14-20 concerning nonconforming lots Ch. 16 6 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for additional litigation expenses in fiscal year 2012 7 Amending Sections 16-1-10 and 16-8-80 concerning R-3A buffer requirements Ch. 16 8 Adding Section 18-10-80 concerning preapplication neighborhood input meetings Ch. 18 9 Amending Sections 16-1-10 and 16-5-10 concerning short-term rental of single-family dwellings and prohibiting rental of single-family dwellings for commercial uses Ch. 16 10 Amending Sections 19-1-20, 19-1-40, 19-1-60, 19-1-80, 19-1-110, 19-1-120 and 19-1-130 concerning stormwater quality and control Ch. 19 11 Repealing and reenacting Section 2-1-20 designating Council district boundaries Ch. 2 12 Authorizing the issuance of a special assessment revenue refunding note 13 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for the City for fiscal year 2013 14 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2013 2013 1 Repealing Article VII, Chapter 2 concerning the establishment of a rehabilitation authority Ch. 2 2 Adding Chapter 10, Article XII to prohibit the operation of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities and retail marijuana stores Ch. 10 3 Amending Section 7-5-340 concerning nuisance dogs Ch. 7 4 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation to pay additional principal on the special improvement district number seven bonds 5 Rezoning lots 1 through 5, block 1, Highline Meadows in Cherry Hills from R-3A, Variable Lot Residential District to R-1, 21/2-acre Residential District and amending the Zoning Map 6 Amending Section 6-3-110 concerning security guard license renewals Ch. 6 7 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for the installation, repair and replacement of the asphalt road surface and Dahlia Street, Birch Street and Winwood Drive 8 Amending Article VII of Chapter 10 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code to recognize the adoption and effect of new Article XVIII, Section 16, of the Colorado Constitution concerning personal use and regulation of marijuana and marijuana accessories by persons twenty-one years and older and to make use by persons under twenty-one and use or display in public places unlawful Ch. 10 9 Amending Section 16-1-20 concerning interpretation of minimum zoning requirements Ch. 16 10 Amending Sections 1-4-20, 1-4-30, 7-1-90, 7-5-610, 10-11-30, 18-9-20 and 19-1-140 to increase the maximum fine for municipal ordinance violations to the amount authorized by Section 13-10-113, C.R.S. Ch. 1, 7, 10, 18, 19 11 Adding Chapter 18, Article XII, concerning marijuana cultivation in residential structures Ch. 18 12 Amending the certified schedule of assessments in City Special Improvement District No. 7 to reflect savings from the refunding of bonds of such district 13 Amending Sections 16-20-10, 16-20-30, 16-20-40 and 16-20-50 concerning approval of public recreation facilities Ch. 16 14 Repealing and reenacting Articles I through VIII, concerning building regulations; adopting by reference, with certain amendments, the 2012 International Building Code , the 2012 International Residential Code , the 2012 International Mechanical Code , the 2012 International Plumbing Code , the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code , the 2012 International Energy Conservation Code , the 2011 Electrical Code and the 2012 International Fire Code Ch. 18 15 Amending Section 16-16-130 concerning wireless communication facilities Ch. 16 16 Amending Sections 11-2-20, 11-2-60, 11-2-70, 11-2-90 and 11-2-120 concerning public right-of-way permits Ch. 11 17 Amending Sections 16-7-30, 16-7-40, 16-7-50, 16-7-60 and 16-7-70 concerning floodplain management regulations Ch. 16 18 Rezoning a portion of Lot 7, Block B, Cherry Hills Park Subdivision and amending the zoning map 19 Authorizing a supplemental appropriate to pay additional principal on the Special Improvement District Number 7 bonds 20 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, for fiscal year 2014 21 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2014 2014 1 Adding Sections 18-2-30, 18-2-40 and 18-2-50 concerning the adoption by reference of the National Green Building Standard Ch. 18 2015 1 Amending Article XVI of Chapter 16 concerning supplementary district regulation, by the addition of regulations requiring certain utilities to be placed underground when associated with the new construction or major addition of all single family residences, institutional structures, or similar land use. Ch. 16 2 Repealing and re-enacting Section 17-5-50 of Chapter 17 of this Code, concerning design principles for utilities Ch. 17 3 Amending Section 2-3-40(b) of Chapter 2 of this Code concerning the delegation of duties and powers of the Mayor to the City Manager Ch. 2 4 Amending Chapter 16 of this Code concerning legal non-conforming uses, short term rental of single family dwellings and associated provisions Ch. 16 5 Amending Sections 16-16-10(c) and 16-16-10(d)(2) of this Code concerning off-street parking requirements Ch. 16 6 Repealing and re-enacting Section 16-20-10 of Chapter 16 of this Code concerning nonprofit institutions, private clubs, public recreational facilities and nonprofit recreational facilities, by the addition of review criteria for expanded use permit requests Ch. 16 7 Amending Article 3 of Chapter 6 concerning Security Guard Businesses Ch. 6 8 Amending Section 16-16-130 of Chapter 16 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code concerning Wireless Communication Facilities Ch. 16 9 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation to Arapahoe County for the support of the High Line Canal conservancy efforts for fiscal year 2015 10 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for Executive SearchFirm expenses in fiscal year 2015 11 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado for fiscal year 2016 12 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2016 13 Amending Chapter 7 of this Code to add a new Article VII concerning regulations applicable to the operation of Unmanned Aircarft Systems Ch. 7 2016 1 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation in the 2015 budget for Grand Fund Expenditures for the John Meade Park Master Plan 2 Repealing and re-enacting Section 16-16-40 concerning fences Ch. 16 3 Amending Sections 7-7-30 and 7-7-40 concerning regulations applicable to Unmanned Aircraft Systems Ch. 7 4 Amending Sections 2-1-10, 2-1-40 and 2-1-50 concerning elections Ch. 2 5 Amending Sections 16-2-40 and 16-1-40 concerning procedures for text amendments and rezoning of property Ch. 16 6 Amending Article XI of Chapter 16 to establish a new O-2 Zoning District and make corresponding changes in Sections 16-4-10 and 16-15-40 concerning Open Space Zoning Regulations Ch. 16 7 Amending Section 10-5-40 concerning loitering Ch. 10 8 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado for fiscal year 2017 9 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2017 2017 1 Authorizing a site lease and lease purchase agreement between the City of Cherry Hills Village, Colorado and UMB Bank, N.A. (Solely in its capacity as Trustee) for the purpose of financing Public Buildings and Certain Park improvements; approving a not to exceed $12,900,000 principal amount of certificates of participation, series 2017 in connection therewith 2 Approving a first amendment to agreement relating to subdivision and development of Glenmoor of Cherry Hills and authorizing a temporary and limited waiver of section 18-10-60 of the Cherry Hills Village Municipal Code 3 Rezone the Quincy Farm property, 4400 E. Quincy Avenue, From R-1 (21/2-acre Residential District) to O-2 (Open Space, Conservation and Historic Area District) and amending the Zoning Map 4 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2017 related to Public Works Vehicles 5 Amending Section 18-10-60 of Chapter 18 concerning construction hours Ch. 18 6 Repealing and re-enacting Articles I through VIII of Chapter 18 concerning Building Regulations and enacting a new Article I.5 Ch. 18 7 Amending Section 16-16-130 concerning wireless communication facilities Ch. 16 8 Amending Article III of Chapter 11 concerning procedures for Parks, Trails and City Property usage Ch. 11 9 Adding a new Division 6 to Article III of Chapter 17 concerning subdivision plat renaming procedures Ch. 11 10 Amending Article XII of Chapter 18 to reduce the maximum number of marijuana plants in residential structures and the allowable cultivation area for such marijuana plants Ch. 18 11 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for fiscal year 2018 12 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2018 2018 1 Amending the budget for fiscal year 2017 by creating a Certificate of Participation (COP) Project Fund and appropriating funds therein 2 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation in the Capital Fund for fiscal year 2018 for design and construction of traffic improvements at Colorado Boulevard and Quincy Avenue 3 Vacating the Bridle Path Easement between Lots 3 and 4 of the Olson Subdivision 4 Amending the 2018 budget to transfer previously appropriated funds for the traffic improvement at Colorado Boulevard and Quincy Avenue, authorized by Ordinance No. 2, Series 2018, to the General Fund and the Parks and Recreation Fund, and to remove the $750,000 appropriation from the 2018 Capital Fund Budget, less any funds expended to date 5 Amending Article IV of Chapter 4 concerning sales tax definitions Ch. 4 6 Making findings and determinations with respect to a petition concerning the organization of the proposed Cherry Hills Village Charlou Park 3rd Filing General Improvement District, providing for the question of the organization of such district to be referred to the electors thereof 7 Authorizing a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 2018 for the High Line Canal Underpass Project at Hampden Avenue and Colorado Boulevard 2019 1 Declaring the organization of the Cherry Hills Village Charlou Park 3rd filing general Improvement District 2 Amending the budget for fiscal year 2019 3 Rezone 120 Meade Lane, John Meade park, and Alan Hutto Memorial Commons from R-1(21/2 acre Residential District), C-1(Community District) and O-1(Open Space, Park and Recreation Area District) to O-2(Open Space, conservation and Historic Area District) to rezone 2450 E. Quincy Avenue from C-1 and C-1 and O-2 and amending the Zoning Map 4 Amending Chapter 2, Article 6 concerning duties and responsibilities of the Planning and Zoning Commission in maintaining the City's Master Plan Ch. 2 8 Adopting a budget and levying property taxes for the fiscal year 2019 9 Authorizing appropriations for fiscal year 2019 10 Amending Table 1-D in Article I of Chapter 18 to increase drainage review and engineering fees Ch. 18  
CODE COMPARISON TABLE 
Prior Code New Code 1-1-1 ..... 1-1-20 1-1-2 ..... 1-3-80 1-1-3 ..... 1-3-50. 1-3-60 1-1-4 ..... 1-4-40 1-2-1 ..... 1-1-60 1-2-2 ..... 1-1-60 1-2-3 ..... 1-3-40 1-2-4 ..... 1-3-90 1-3-1 ..... 1-2-50 1-3-2 ..... 1-2-10, 1-2-30 1-3-3 ..... 1-3-10 1-4-1 ..... 1-4-20, 1-4-30 1-4-2 ..... 1-4-70 1-4-3 ..... 1-4-80 1-5-1 ..... 2-2-10 1-5-2 ..... 2-3-30 1-5-3 ..... 2-3-30 1-5-4 ..... 1-6-20 1-5-5 ..... 1-6-10 1-6-1 ..... 2-3-40 1-6-2 ..... 2-3-40 1-6-3 ..... 2-3-40 1-6-4 ..... 2-3-40 1-6-5 ..... 2-3-40 1-6-6 ..... 2-3-40 1-7-1 ..... 2-7-10 1-7-2 ..... 2-7-20 1-7-3 ..... 2-7-30 1-8-1 ..... 2-1-20 1-8-2 ..... 2-1-30 1-8-3 ..... 2-1-40 1-8-4 ..... 2-1-50 1-9-1 ..... 2-4-10 1-9-2 ..... 2-4-20 1-9-3 ..... 2-4-40, 2-4-50 1-9-4 ..... 2-4-60 1-9-5 ..... 2-4-30, 2-4-80 1-9-6 ..... 2-4-70, 2-4-90 1-9-7 ..... 2-4-110 1-9-8 ..... 2-4-120 1-9-9 ..... 2-4-130 1-10-1 ..... 4-1-10 1-10-2 ..... deleted 1-11-1 ..... 1-7-10 1-11-2 ..... 1-7-20 1-11-3 ..... 1-7-30 1-12-1 ..... 2-3-60 1-13-1 ..... 4-2-10 1-13-2 ..... 4-2-20 1-13-3 ..... 4-2-30 1-13-4 ..... 4-2-40 1-13-5 ..... 4-2-50 1-13-6 ..... 4-2-60 1-13-7 ..... 4-2-70 1-14-1 ..... 2-3-50 1-14-2 ..... 2-3-50 1-14-3 ..... 2-3-50 1-15-1 ..... 4-3-10 1-15-2 ..... 4-3-20 1-15-3 ..... 4-3-30 1-15-4 ..... 4-3-40 1-15-5 ..... 4-3-50 1-15-6 ..... 4-3-60 1-15-7 ..... 4-3-70 2-1-1 ..... 2-6-20 2-1-2 ..... 2-6-30 2-1-3 ..... 2-6-40 3-1-1 ..... 4-4-10 3-1-2 ..... 4-4-20 3-1-3 ..... 4-4-30 3-1-4 ..... 4-4-40 3-1-5 ..... 4-4-50 3-1-6-1 ..... 4-4-110 3-1-6-2 ..... 4-4-120 3-1-6-3 ..... 4-4-130 3-1-7-1 ..... 4-4-210 3-1-7-2 ..... 4-4-220 3-1-7-3 ..... 4-4-230 3-1-7-4 ..... 4-4-240 3-1-7-5 ..... 4-4-250 3-1-7-6 ..... 4-4-260 3-1-8 ..... 4-4-310 3-1-9 ..... 4-4-320 3-1-10 ..... 4-4-330 3-1-11 ..... 4-4-340 3-1-12 ..... 4-4-350 3-1-13 ..... 4-4-360 3-1-14 ..... 4-4-370 3-1-15 ..... 4-4-380 3-1-16 ..... 4-4-390 3-1-17 ..... 4-4-400 3-1-18 ..... 4-4-410 3-1-19 ..... 4-4-420 3-1-20 ..... 4-4-430 3-1-21 ..... 4-4-440 3-1-22 ..... 4-4-450 3-1-23 ..... 4-4-460 3-1-24 ..... 4-4-470 3-1-25 ..... 4-4-480 3-1-26 ..... 4-4-490 3-1-27 ..... 4-4-610 3-1-28 ..... 4-4-620 3-1-29 ..... 4-4-630 3-1-30 ..... 4-4-640 3-2-1 ..... 5-3-10 3-2-2 ..... 5-3-20 3-2-3 ..... 5-3-30 3-2-4 ..... 5-3-40 3-2-5 ..... 5-3-50 3-2-6 ..... 5-3-60 3-2-7 ..... 5-3-70 3-2-8 ..... 5-3-80 3-2-9 ..... 5-3-90 3-3-1 ..... 6-3-10, 6-3-20 3-3-2 ..... 6-3-30 3-3-3 ..... 6-3-40 3-3-4 ..... 6-3-50 3-3-5 ..... 6-3-60 3-3-6 ..... 6-3-70 3-3-7 ..... 6-3-80 3-3-8 ..... 6-3-90 3-3-9 ..... 6-3-100 3-3-10 ..... 6-3-110 3-3-11 ..... 6-3-120 3-3-12 ..... 6-3-130 3-3-13 ..... 6-3-140 3-3-14 ..... 6-3-150 3-3-15 ..... 6-3-160 3-3-16 ..... 6-3-170 3-3-17 ..... 6-3-180 3-4-1 ..... 5-2-10 3-4-2 ..... 5-2-20 3-4-3 ..... 5-2-30 3-4-4 ..... 5-2-40 3-4-5 ..... 5-2-50 3-4-6 ..... 5-2-60 3-4-7 ..... 5-2-70 3-4-8 ..... 5-2-80 3-4-9 ..... 5-2-90 3-4-10 ..... 5-2-100 3-4-11 ..... 5-2-110 3-4-12 ..... 5-2-120 3-4-13 ..... 5-2-130 3-4-14 ..... 5-2-140 3-4-15 ..... 5-2-150 3-4-16 ..... 5-2-160 3-4-17 ..... 5-2-170 3-4-18 ..... 5-2-180 3-4-19 ..... 5-2-190 3-5-1 ..... 18-11-10 3-5-2 ..... 18-11-20 3-5-3 ..... 18-11-30 3-6-1 ..... 6-4-10 3-6-2 ..... 6-4-20 3-6-3 ..... 6-4-30 3-6-4 ..... 6-4-40 3-6-5 ..... 6-4-50 3-6-6 ..... 6-4-60 3-6-7 ..... 6-4-70 3-6-8 ..... 6-4-80 3-6-9 ..... 6-4-90 3-6-10 ..... 6-4-100 3-6-11 ..... 6-4-110 3-6-12 ..... 6-4-120 3-6-13 ..... 6-4-130 3-6-14 ..... 6-4-140 3-6-15 ..... 6-4-150 3-6-16 ..... 6-4-160 3-6-17 ..... Deleted 3-7-1 ..... 5-1-10 3-9-1 ..... 4-5-10 3-9-2 ..... 4-5-20 3-9-3 ..... 4-5-30 3-9-4 ..... 4-5-40 3-9-5 ..... 4-5-50 3-9-6 ..... 4-5-60 3-9-7 ..... 4-5-70 3-9-8 ..... 4-5-80 3-9-9 ..... 4-5-90 3-9-10 ..... 4-5-100 3-9-11 ..... 4-5-110 3-9-12 ..... 4-5-120 3-9-13 ..... 4-5-130 3-9-14 ..... 4-5-140 3-9-15 ..... 4-5-150 3-9-16 ..... 4-5-160 3-9-17 ..... 4-5-170 3-9-18 ..... 4-5-180 3-9-19 ..... 4-5-190 3-10-1 ..... 4-6-10 3-10-2 ..... 4-6-20 3-10-3 ..... 4-6-30 3-10-4 ..... 4-6-40 3-10-5 ..... 4-6-50 3-10-6 ..... 4-6-60 3-10-7 ..... 4-6-70 3-10-8 ..... 4-6-80 3-10-9 ..... 4-6-90 3-10-10 ..... 4-6-100 3-10-11 ..... 4-6-110 4-2-1 ..... 7-1-10 4-2-2 ..... 7-3-20 4-2-3 ..... 7-3-30 4-2-4 ..... 7-3-40 4-2-5 ..... 7-3-50 4-2-6 ..... 7-3-60 4-2-7 ..... 7-3-70 4-3-1 ..... 13-1-10 4-3-2 ..... 13-1-20 4-3-3 ..... 13-1-30 4-3-4 ..... 13-1-40 4-3-5 ..... 13-1-50 4-3-6 ..... 13-1-60 4-3-7 ..... 13-1-70 5-1-1 ..... deleted 5-1-1-1 ..... deleted 5-1-2 ..... 18-1-10 5-1-2-1 ..... 18-1-20 5-1-2-2 ..... 18-1-10 5-1-3 ..... 18-3-10 5-1-3-1 ..... 18-3-20 5-1-4 ..... 18-4-10 5-1-5 ..... 18-5-10 5-1-5-1 ..... 18-5-20 5-1-6 ..... 18-6-10 5-1-7 ..... 18-7-10 5-1-7-1 ..... 18-7-20 5-1-8 ..... 18-9-10 5-1-9 ..... 18-9-20 6-1-1 ..... 16-1-10 6-1-2 ..... 16-1-20 6-2-1 ..... 16-2-10 6-2-2 ..... 16-2-20 6-2-3 ..... 16-2-30 6-2-4 ..... 16-2-40 6-2-5 ..... 16-2-50 6-2-6 ..... 16-2-60 6-2-7 ..... 16-2-70 6-2-8 ..... 16-2-80 6-2-9 ..... 16-2-90 6-3-1 ..... 16-3-10 6-3-2 ..... 16-3-20, 16-3-30, 16-3-40, 16-3-50, 16-3-60 6-3-3 ..... 16-3-70 6-3-4 ..... 16-3-80 6-3-5 ..... 16-3-90 6-4-1 ..... 16-4-10 6-4-2 ..... 16-4-20 6-4-3 ..... 16-4-30 6-5-1 ..... 16-5-10 6-5-1-1 ..... 16-5-20 6-5-2 ..... 16-5-30 6-6-1 ..... 16-6-10 6-6-1-1 ..... 16-6-20 6-6-2 ..... 16-6-30 6-7-1 ..... 16-7-10 6-7-1-1 ..... 16-7-20 6-7-2 ..... 16-7-30 6-8-1 ..... 16-9-10 6-8-1-1 ..... 16-9-20 6-8-2 ..... 16-9-30 6-9-1 ..... 16-10-10 6-9-1-1 ..... 16-10-20 6-9-2 ..... 16-10-30 6-10-1 ..... 16-11-10 6-10-2 ..... 16-11-20 6-10-3 ..... 16-11-30 6-11-1 ..... 16-8-10 6-11-1-1 ..... 16-8-20 6-11-2 ..... 16-8-30 6-11-3 ..... 16-8-40 6-11-4 ..... 16-8-50 6-11-5 ..... 16-8-60 6-11-7 ..... 16-8-70 6-11-8 ..... 16-8-80 6-11-9 ..... 16-8-90 6-11-10 ..... 16-8-100 6-12-1 ..... 16-12-10 6-12-2 ..... 16-12-20 6-12-3 ..... 16-12-30 6-13-1 ..... 16-13-10 6-13-2 ..... 16-13-20 6-13-3 ..... 16-13-30 6-14-1 ..... 16-14-10 6-14-2 ..... 16-14-20 6-14-3 ..... 16-14-30 6-14-4 ..... 16-14-40 6-14-5 ..... 16-14-50 6-14-6 ..... 16-14-60 6-14-7 ..... 16-14-70 6-14-8 ..... 16-14-80 6-14-9 ..... 16-14-90 6-14-10 ..... 16-14-100 6-15-1 ..... 16-16-10 6-15-2 ..... 16-16-20 6-15-3 ..... 16-16-30 6-15-4 ..... 16-16-40 6-15-5 ..... 16-16-50 6-15-6 ..... 16-16-60 6-15-7 ..... 16-16-70 6-15-8 ..... 16-15-10, 16-15-20, 16-15-30, 16-15-40, 16-15-50, 16-15-60, 16-15-70, 16-15-80, 16-15-90 6-15-9 ..... 16-16-80 6-15-10 ..... 16-16-90 6-15-11 ..... 16-16-100 6-15-12 ..... 16-16-110 6-15-13 ..... 16-16-120 6-15-14 ..... 16-16-130 6-16-1 ..... 16-17-10 6-16-2 ..... 16-17-20 6-16-3 ..... 16-17-30 6-16-4 ..... 16-17-40 6-16-5 ..... 16-17-50 6-16-6 ..... 16-17-60 6-16-7 ..... 16-17-70 6-16-8 ..... 16-17-80 6-16-9 ..... 16-17-90 6-17-1 ..... 16-18-10 6-17-2 ..... 16-18-20 6-17-3 ..... 16-18-30 6-17-4 ..... 16-18-40, 16-18-50, 16-18-60 6-17-5 ..... 16-18-70 6-18-1 ..... 16-19-10 6-18-2 ..... 16-19-20 6-18-3 ..... 16-19-30 6-18-4 ..... 16-19-40 6-18-5 ..... 16-19-50, 16-19-60, 16-19-70, 16-19-80, 16-19-90, 16-19-100 6-18-6 ..... 16-19-110, 16-19-120 6-18-7 ..... 16-19-130 6-18-8 ..... 16-19-140 6-18-9 ..... 16-19-150 6-18-10 ..... 16-19-160 6-19-1 ..... 16-20-10 6-19-2 ..... 16-20-20, 16-20-30, 16-20-40 6-19-3 ..... 16-20-50 7-1-1 ..... 17-1-10 7-2-1 ..... 17-2-10 7-2-2 ..... 17-2-20 7-2-3 ..... 17-2-30 7-2-4 ..... 17-2-40 7-2-5 ..... 17-2-50 7-2-6 ..... 17-2-60 7-2-7 ..... 17-2-70 7-2-8 ..... 17-2-80 7-3-1 ..... 17-3-10 7-3-2 ..... 17-3-20 7-3-3 ..... 17-3-30 7-3-4 ..... 17-3-40 7-3-5-1 ..... 17-3-110 7-3-5-2 ..... 17-3-120 7-3-5-3 ..... 17-3-130 7-3-6-1 ..... 17-3-210 7-3-6-2 ..... 17-3-220 7-3-6-3 ..... 17-3-230 7-3-7 ..... 17-3-410 7-3-8 ..... 17-3-420 7-4-1 ..... 17-4-10 7-4-2 ..... 17-4-20 7-4-3 ..... 17-4-30 7-4-4 ..... 17-4-40 7-4-5 ..... 17-4-50 7-5-1 ..... 17-5-10 7-5-2 ..... 17-5-20 7-5-3 ..... 17-5-30 7-5-4 ..... 17-5-40 7-5-5 ..... 17-5-50 7-5-6 ..... 17-5-60 7-6-1 ..... 17-6-10 7-6-2 ..... 17-6-20 7-6-3 ..... 17-6-30 7-6-4 ..... 17-6-40 7-6-5 ..... 17-6-50 7-6-6 ..... 17-6-60 7-6-7 ..... 17-6-70 8-1-1 ..... 11-2-10 8-1-2-1 ..... 11-2-110 8-1-2-2 ..... 11-2-120 8-1-2-3 ..... 11-2-130 8-1-2-4 ..... 11-2-140 8-1-2-5 ..... 11-2-150 8-1-2-6 ..... 11-2-160 8-1-3-1 ..... 11-2-210, 11-2-220 8-1-3-2 ..... 11-2-230 8-1-3-3 ..... 11-2-240 8-1-3-4 ..... 11-2-250 8-1-3-5 ..... 11-2-260 8-1-4-1 ..... 11-2-310 8-1-4-2 ..... 11-2-320 8-1-4-3 ..... 11-2-330 8-1-4-4 ..... 11-2-340 8-1-4-5 ..... 11-2-350 8-1-4-6 ..... 11-2-360 8-1-5 ..... 11-2-20 8-1-6 ..... 11-2-30 8-1-7 ..... 11-2-40 8-1-8 ..... 11-2-50 8-2-1 ..... 11-3-10 8-2-1-1 ..... 11-3-20 8-2-2 ..... 11-3-30 8-2-2-1 ..... 11-3-40 8-2-2-2 ..... 11-3-50 8-2-2-3 ..... 11-3-60 8-2-2-4 ..... 11-3-70 8-2-2-5 ..... 11-3-80 8-2-2-6 ..... 11-3-90 8-2-2-7 ..... 11-3-100 8-2-2-8 ..... 11-3-110 8-2-2-9 ..... 11-3-120 8-2-2-10 ..... 11-3-130 8-2-2-11 ..... 11-3-140 8-3-1 ..... 11-4-10 8-4-1 ..... 11-5-10 8-4-2 ..... 11-5-20 8-4-3 ..... 11-5-30 8-4-4 ..... 11-5-40 8-4-5 ..... 11-5-50 8-4-6 ..... 11-5-60 9-2-1-1 ..... 10-8-40 9-2-1-2 ..... 10-8-20 9-2-2 ..... 10-10-10 9-2-3-1 ..... 10-5-10 9-2-3-2 ..... 10-9-10 9-2-3-3 ..... 10-1-30 9-2-3-4 ..... 10-1-40 9-2-4-1 ..... 10-2-50 9-2-4-2 ..... 10-2-70 9-2-4-3 ..... 10-2-20 9-2-4-4 ..... Deleted 9-2-5-1 ..... 10-5-130 9-2-5-2 ..... 10-5-130 9-2-6-1 ..... 10-4-30 9-2-6-2 ..... 10-4-20 9-2-6-3 ..... Deleted 9-2-7 ..... 10-10-20 9-2-8 ..... 10-5-40 9-2-9 ..... 10-6-10 9-2-10 ..... 10-10-30 10-1-1 ..... Deleted 10-1-2 ..... 8-1-10 10-1-3 ..... 8-1-20 10-1-4 ..... 8-1-50 10-1-5 ..... 8-1-30 10-1-6 ..... 8-1-40 10-2-1 ..... Deleted 10-2-2 ..... Deleted 10-2-3 ..... Deleted 10-3-1 ..... Deleted 10-3-2 ..... Deleted  
1980 Code: 
1-3-10, 1-4-20, 1-4-40, 1-4-50, 1-4-80, 6-3-40, 7-3-20, 7-3-30, 7-3-40, 7-3-50, 7-3-60, 7-3-70, 10-1-40, 10-5-40, 10-5-130, 10-8-20, 10-8-40, 10-10-10, 11-2-50, 11-2-110, 11-2-160, 13-1-10, 13-1-20, 13-1-30 
ORDINANCE DISPOSITION TABLE 
Ord. No. Year Subject Disposition 4 1947 Fireworks 10-10-10 6 1950 Rehabilitation Authority 2-7-30 9 1951 Sanitary sewer regulations 13-1-40, 13-1-70 2 1955 Sanitary sewer regulations 13-1-50 7 1955 Offense penalty 10-1-40 10 1955 Offenses 10-5-130 11 1955 Weapons 10-8-20 3 1964 Weapons 10-8-40 11 1964 Social Security coverage 2-3-60 8 1966 Planning and Zoning Commission 2-6-40 9 1968 Nuisances 7-3-20-7-3-70 14 1968 Excavations 11-2-50, 11-2-110 15 1968 Fund management 4-1-10 20 1968 Severability 1-3-90, 1-6-10 2 1970 Zoning 16-1-10, 16-1-20, 16-2-40-16-2-60, 16-4-10, 16-4-30, 16-5-10, 16-5-30, 16-6-10, 16-6-30, 16-7-10, 16-7-30, 16-9-10, 16-9-30, 16-10-10, 16-10-30, 16-12-10-16-12-30, 16-13-20, 16-14-30, 16-14-60-16-14-90, 16-16-30 4 1970 Offenses 10-4-20, 10-4-30 2 1971 Excavations 11-2-160 4 1973 Planning Commission membership 2-6-20 1 1978 Traffic 8-1-50 11 1978 City Manager duties 2-3-40 15 1978 Public Improvements fund 4-1-50 2 1979 Subdivisions 17-2-50, 17-2-80, 17-3-10, 17-3-30, 17-3-40, 17-3-230, 17-3-410, 17-3-420, 17-4-10-17-4-50, 17-5-40-17-5-60 4 1979 Merchant guards 6-3-10, 6-3-30-6-3-110, 6-3-180 7 1979 Service expansion fees 18-11-10, 18-11-20, 18-11-30 9 1980 Merchant guards, weapons 6-3-110, 10-8-20 10 1980 Subdivisions 17-3-230 16 1980 Zoning 16-1-10, 16-2-40, 16-2-50, 16-5-10, 16-5-30, 16-6-30, 16-7-30, 16-9-30, 16-10-30, 16-12-20, 16-13-30, 16-16-80, 16-16-90 2 1981 Planning Commission 2-6-20 7 1981 Boundaries of annexed land 2-1-30 9 1981 Zoning 16-1-10 13 1981 Local improvements 11-4-10 3 1985 Subdivisions 17-3-20 5 1985 Animals 7-6-20, 7-6-80-7-6-100, 7-6-240-7-6-280, 7-6-300-7-6-340 12 1985 Zoning 16-2-40, 16-5-10, 16-5-30, 16-6-30, 16-7-30, 16-9-30, 16-12-30, 16-16-100 17 1985 Penalties 4-2-70 23 1985 Use tax 4-5-30, 4-5-190 14 1986 Sports events occupation tax 4-6-110 16 1986 Zoning 16-1-10 4 1987 Planning Commission 2-6-20, 2-6-30 9 1987 Public Service Company franchise 5-2-190 12 1987 Zoning 16-12-10 1 1988 Security systems and alarms effective date Deleted 1 1989 Zoning 16-1-10 4 1989 Zoning 16-1-10 5 1989 Service expansion fees 18-11-10 7 1989 Zoning 16-2-10-16-2-30 8 1989 Zoning 16-16-40 9 1989 Floodplains 16-17-10, 16-17-30, 16-17-40, 16-17-60-16-17-80 15 1989 Zoning 16-16-40 17 1989 Use tax 4-5-10, 4-5-30 1 1990 Trial by jury 2-4-130 3 1990 Parks and rights-of-way 11-3-140 7 1990 Juveniles 1-4-30, 10-6-10 1 1991 Zoning 16-2-30 2 1991 Door-to-door soliciting 10-10-20 3 1991 Zoning 16-1-10, 16-5-30 6 1991 Code enforcement 2-3-50 10 1991 Sales tax audit procedures 4-4-640 7 1992 Zoning 16-5-10 8 1992 Zoning 16-16-70 10 1992 Unclaimed property disposition 1-7-10, 1-7-20, 1-7-60 3 1993 Subdivisions 17-1-10 4 1993 Zoning 16-2-40, Subdivisions 17-2-50 6 1993 Hawkers and peddlers 10-10-30 1 1994 Zoning 16-2-30 Subdivisions 17-3-20 3 1994 Zoning 16-5-30, 16-16-130 5 1994 Zoning 16-16-130 1 1995 Zoning 16-16-130 2 1995 Merchant guards 6-3-40, 6-3-80 3 1995 Floodplains 16-17-40 1 1996 Zoning 16-4-10, 16-8-10, 16-8-30-16-8-80, 16-8-100 3 1996 Zoning 16-4-10 5 1996 General penalty 1-4-20 6 1996 Write-in affidavits 2-1-40, 2-1-50 7 1996 Subdivisions 17-3-30 8 1996 Occupation tax 5-3-10-5-3-90 2 1997 Door-to-door soliciting 10-10-20 4 1997 Zoning 16-8-30, 16-8-80 8 1998 Zoning 16-2-30, 16-14-100, 16-17-90 Subdivisions 17-3-20 3 1999 Zoning 16-1-10, 16-14-20 5 1999 Zoning 16-3-10, 16-3-50-16-3-90 7 1999 Zoning 16-1-10, 16-5-20, 16-6-20, 16-7-20, 16-8-20, 16-9-20, 16-10-20, 16-18-10-16-18-30, 16-18-50-16-18-70 14 1999 Vested property rights 16-19-10-16-19-40, 16-19-100, 16-19-120-16-19-160 1 2000 Subdivisions 17-4-10, 17-4-20, 17-4-50 2 2000 Zoning 16-1-10, 16-16-60 5 2000 Zoning 16-16-130 12 2000 Zoning 16-1-10, 16-2-30, 16-3-50, 16-5-30, 16-6-30, 16-7-30, 16-8-80, 16-8-90, 16-9-30, 16-10-30, 16-14-10, 16-14-20, 16-14-40, 16-14-50, 16-16-40, 16-16-100 13 2000 Zoning 16-1-10, 16-3-20, 16-5-10, 16-16-10, 16-16-20, 16-16-50, 16-16-120, 16-20-10, 16-20-40, 16-20-50 17 2000 Zoning 16-1-10, 16-4-10, 16-11-10-16-11-30, 16-16-110, 16-16-120, 16-20-10 16-20-20, 16-20-50 2 2001 Zoning 16-2-70-16-2-90 3 2001 Subdivisions 17-6-10-17-6-70 5 2001 Right-of-way vacations 11-5-10-11-5-60 8 2001 Service expansion fees 18-11-20 9 2001 District boundaries 2-1-20 10 2001 Public works contracting 4-3-10-4-3-70 12 2001 Floodplains 16-17-30, 16-17-70 14 2001 Zoning 1 2002 Zoning 16-1-10, 16-13-10-16- 13-30, 16-18-20, 16-18-70 2 2002 Subdivisions 17-3-310-17-3-370 6 2002 Cable television franchise 5-1-10 10 2002 Unclaimed property 1-7-10-1-7-130 12 2002 Door-to-door solicitation       Rpld/Rnctd 10-10-20 13 2002 Model Traffic Code 8-1-10-8-1-60 17 2002 Building codes 1, 2 Ch. 18, Arts. I-X 18 2002 Signs 1, 2       Ch. 16 Art. XV 3 16-20-50 19 2002 False alarms 6-4-100, 6-4-120 1 2003 Construction practices 18-10-10 2 2003 Parks and Recreation Fund       Added 4-1-40 5 2003 Animal control 1, 2 
      Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 7, Art. V 6 2003 Fences and walls 1 16-16-40 7 2003 Alcoholic beverages 1 Ch. 6, Art. II 8 2003 Public nuisances 1       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 7, Art. I 9 2003 Adopts municipal code 1 1-1-10-1-1-70, 1-2-10-1-2-50, 1-3-10-1-3-90, 1-4-10-1-4-60, 1-5-10-1-5-30, 1-7-20, 2-1-10, 2-1-50, 2-2-20, 2-3-10-2-3-50, 2-4-10-2-4-30, 2-4-60-2-4-130, 2-5-10-2-5-50, 2-6-10, 2-6-30, 2-6-40, 2-7-30, 4-1-10-4-1-50, 4-2-10, 4-2-50-4-2-70, 4-4-10, 4-4-30, 4-4-130, 4-4-340, 4-4-450, 4-4-470, 4-4-630, 4-5-10, 4-5-60, 5-1-10, 5-3-80, 6-1-10-6-1-150, 6-2-10, 6-2-30, 6-2-50, 6-2-80, 6-2-100, 6-2-110, 6-2-130-6-2-150, 6-2-190, 6-3-10-6-3-50, 6-3-70-6-3-90, 6-3-110, 6-3-130, 6-3-140, 6-3-180, 6-4-20, 7-2-10-7-2-30, 7-3-10, 7-3-30, 7-4-10-7-4-30, 8-1-30-8-1-50, 10-1-10, 10-1-20, 10-1-40, 10-2-10-10-2-70, 10-3-10-10-3-40, 10-4-10-10-4-90, 10-5-10-10-5-130, 10-6-10-10-6-60, 10-7-10-10-7-90, 10-8-10-10-8-60, 10-9-10-10-9-40, 10-10-10, 10-10-20, 11-1-10, 11-1-20, 11-2-10-11-2-30, 11-2-50, 11-2-130-11-2-150, 11-2-220, 11-2-350, 11-2-360, 11-3-10, 11-3-30-11-3-140, 11-4-10, 11-5-20, 11-5-40, 13-1-20, 15-1-10-15-1-60, 16-1-10, 16-2-10, 16-2-30-16-2-60, 16-2-80, 16-3-30, 16-4-10, 16-4-30, 16-5-10-16-5-30, 16-6-10-16-6-30, 16-7-10-16-7-30, 16-8-10, 16-8-20, 16-8-80, 16-8-100, 16-9-10-16-9-30, 16-10-10-16-10-30, 16-11-10, 16-12-10, 16-13-10, 16-13-20, 16-14-10, 16-14-20, 16-15-40, 16-16-10, 16-16-40, 16-16-60-16-16-80, 16-16-100-16-16-130, 16-17-30-16-17-50, 16-17-70, 16-18-10-16-18-70, 16-19-20, 16-19-60-16-19-90, 16-19-150, 16-20-20, 16-20-40, 16-20-50, 17-2-10, 17-2-40, 17-2-50, 17-2-80, 17-3-10, 17-3-20, 17-3-40, 17-3-110-17-3-130, 17-3-350, 17-3-360, 17-3-420, 17-4-20, 17-4-30, 17-4-50, 17-5-40, 17-6-20, 17-6-30, 17-6-50, 17-6-60, 18-1-10, 18-1-20, 18-2-10, 18-2-20, 18-3-10, 18-3-20, 18-4-10, 18-4-20, 18-5-10, 18-5-20, 18-6-10, 18-6-20, 18-7-10, 18-7-20, 18-8-10, 18-8-20; 18-11-10, 18-11-20  
Ord. No. Year Subject Ord.  Disposition 11 2003 Zoning, conditional use permit approval 1 16-18-10 2 16-18-50 3 16-18-60 4 16-18-70 5 16-3-20 12 2003 Zoning, berm construction 1 16-16-100 2 16-1-10 1 2004 Zoning, approval of variances 1, 2 16-3-70 3 16-3-50 3 2004 Zoning, major event permit 1       Added Ch. 16, Art. XXI 5 2004 Zoning, temporary uses, structures 1 16-16-70 6 2004 Mail ballot elections 1 2-1-10 7 2004 Fees, costs, etc. included in Code text 1 2-4-80 2 2-4-120 3 2-4-130 4 6-1-50 5 6-2-150 6 6-2-190 7 6-3-40 8, 9 6-3-50 10 6-4-90 11 6-4-100 12 6-4-130 13 7-5-310 14 11-2-140 15 11-2-340 16 11-5-40 17 15-1-30 18 16-2-30 19 16-3-70 20 16-3-90 21 16-14-100 22 16-16-70 23 16-17-90 24 16-18-50 25 16-19-60 26 16-20-50 27 16-21-60 28 16-21-80 29 17-3-20 30 17-3-30 31 17-3-330 32 17-6-30 33 18-1-20 34 18-10-20 35 18-11-20 36       Added 1-1-80 37 Appx A 8 2004 Land dedication in subdivision process 1 17-3-30 9 2004 Security guard business licenses 1       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 6 Art. III 10 2004 Construction of berms 1 16-16-100 03 2005 Major event permits 1, 2 16-21-60 3 16-21-70 4       Added 16-21-110 07 2005 Establishing floodplain areas 1 16-17-40 2 18-1-20 08 2005 Building regulations 1, 2 18-1-20 Residential Code 3 18-2-20 Mechanical Code 4 18-3-20 Plumbing Code 5 18-4-20 Fuel Gas Code 6 18-5-20 Electrical Code 7 18-7-20 Fire Code 8 18-8-20 Violations and enforcement 9 18-9-30 10 2005 Public right-of-way permits 1, 2       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 11 Art. II 01 2006 Public right-of-way permits 1 11-2-20 02 2006 Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 1       Added Ch. 2 Art. VIII 2 17-3-120 03 2006 Fences and walls 1 16-16-40 05 2006 Building regulations, construction times 1 18-10-10 06 2006 Building regulations 1       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. X 01 2007 Zoning, definitions 1 16-1-10 Zoning, fences 2 16-16-40 02 2007 Code of Ethics 1       Added Ch. 2 Art IX 04 2007 Nuisances identified and declared 1 7-1-30 Exceptions to nuisance 2 7-1-40 06 2007 Stormwater quality and control 1       Added Ch. 19 07 2007 Off-street parking requirements 1-4 16-16-10 08 2007 Wireless communications facilities 1 16-5-20 2 16-6-20 3 16-7-20 4 16-8-20 5 16-9-20 6 16-10-20 7 16-11-30 16-11-40 8 16-12-20 16-12-30 16-12-40 9 16-13-20 10       Rpld/Rnctd 16-16-130 11       Added 16-16-140 12 16-18-20 13 16-18-30 14 16-18-50 15 16-18-60 16 16-12-20 17 16-13-30 09 2007 Vacation of public rights-of-way 1 11-5-50 2       Added 11-5-55 10 2007 City Parks and rights-of-way 1 11-3-10, 11-3-20, 11-3-40, 11-3-50, 11-3-80-11-3-130 2       Added 11-3-15 11 2007 Model Traffic Code 1 Ch. 8 Art. I 12 2007 Building regulations 1 18-10-70 13 2007 General offenses 1 10-4-10 2 10-4-50 3 10-4-60 4 10-4-70 5 10-4-80 6 10-5-110 14 2007 Gas and electric franchise 1       Rpld/rnctd Ch. 5, Art. II 01 2008 Building codes       Rpld/rnctd Ch. 18, Arts. I-VIII, 18-11-20 03 2008 Subdivision variance procedures 1 17-3-420 04 2008 Jury service fees 1 2-4-130 08 2008 Trespassing 1 10-4-30 09 2008 Building regulations 1 18-10-70 10 2008 Administration and personnel 1 2-8-20 Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 2 2-8-30 11 2008 Lighting 1 7-1-30 12 2008 Building regulations 1 18-10-20 Construction practices 2 18-10-30 15 2008 Fire sprinkler system requirements 1 18-2-20 16 2008 Mandatory gasoline surcharge 1 2-4-80 2 8-1-30 20 2008 Building regulations 1 18-1-20 01 2009 Permit fees 1 11-2-90 03 2009 Code of Ethics 1 2-9-20 04 2009 Planning and Zoning Commission 1 2-6-10 05 2009 Floodplain regulations 1 16-17-60 06 2009 Wireless communication facilities 1 16-16-130 07 2009 Animal regulations 1 7-5-50 08 2009 Throwing prohibited objects 1 10-5-100 10 2009 Permanent stormwater BMPs 1 19-1-120 11 2009 Residential District regulations 1 16-8-90 2 16-9-30 01 2010 Residential District regulations 1 16-8-80 02 2010 Subdivision regulations 1 Ch. 17, Art. III, Div. 4 05 2010 Streets and sidewalks 1       Added 11-1-30 2       Added 11-1-40 3 11-2-40 4       Rnmbd 11-2-180-11-2-280       as 11-2-190-11-2-290       Added 11-2-180 06 2010 Building regulations 1 18-1-20 2 18-2-20 3 18-3-20 4 18-4-20 5 18-5-20 07 2010 Business licenses 6-1-10-6-1-30 08 2010 Sales tax 4-4-10, 4-4-30, 4-4-120, 4-4-130, 4-4-210, 4-4-310 11 2010 Zoning regulations 1 16-16-50 14 2010 Building regulations 18-10-70 15 2010 Escrow deposit amounts 1 16-3-90 2 16-14-100 3 16-17-90 4 16-18-50 5 16-19-60 6 17-3-20 7 17-6-30 16 2010 Elections 1 2-1-10 2 2-1-40 3 2-1-50 17 2010 City records 1 1-6-10 19 2010 Zoning regulations 1 16-5-10 2 16-5-20 3 16-6-20 4 16-7-20 5 16-8-20 6 16-9-20 7 16-10-20 8 16-12-10 9 16-12-20 10 16-13-10 11 16-13-20 12       Added 16-16-150 13 16-18-20 20 2010 Zoning regulations 1 16-17-60 21 2010 Building Code 1       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. I Residential Code 2       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. II Mechanical Code 3       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. III Plumbing Code 4       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. IV Fuel Gas Code 5       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. V Energy Conservation Code 6       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. VI Electrical Code 7       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. VII Fire Code 8       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. VIII 22 2010 Model Traffic Code 1       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 8 23 2010 Alcoholic beverages 1 6-2-190 24 2010 Medical marijuana 1       Added Ch. 10, Art. XI 26 2010 Floodplain regulations 1 16-17-30 2 16-17-40 3 16-17-50 4 16-17-60 5 16-17-70 28 2010 Capital Fund 1 4-1-50 5 2011 Business licenses and regulations 1 6-2-10 2 6-2-20 3       Added 6-2-110       Rnmbd 6-2-110-6-2-190       as 6-2-120-6-2-200 4 6-2-160 6 2011 Preservation of established trees 1       Added 16-6-170 7 2011 Natural grade 1       Added 16-1-10 Retaining walls 2       Added 16-1-160 9 2011 Zoning 2 16-1-10 3 16-5-30-16-7-30, 16-9-30, 16-10-30 4       Added 16-16-180, 16-16-190 11 2011 Retail sales tax 1 4-1-130 2 4-4-310 2 2012 Open Space, Park and Recreation District 1 16-11-40 3 2012 Floodplain management regulations 1 16-17-60 4 2012 Supplementary district regulations 1 16-16-180 5 2012 Nonconforming provisions 1 16-14-20 7 2012 Buffer requirements 1 16-8-80 2 16-1-10 8 2012 Construction practices 1       Added 18-10-80 9 2012 Zoning 1 16-1-10 2 16-5-10 10 2012 Stormwater quality and control 1 19-1-20, 19-1-40, 19-1-60, 19-1-80, 19-1-110-19-1-130 11 2012 Council district boundaries 1       Rpld/Rnctd 2-1-20 1 2013 Rehabilitation Authority 1       Rpld Ch. 2, Art. VII 2 2013 Marijuana facilities 1       Added Ch. 10, Art. XII 3 2013 Dogs 1 7-5-340 6 2013 License renewal 1 6-3-110 8 2013 Marijuana 1 10-7-10 2 10-7-70 3 10-7-80 Abusing toxic vapors 4       Added 10-7-90       Rnmbrd 10-7-90       as 10-7-100 9 2013 Zoning requirements 1 16-1-20 10 2013 Maximum fine for violations 1 1-4-20 2 1-4-30 3 7-1-90 4 7-5-610 5 10-11-30 6 18-9-20 7 19-1-140 11 2013 Marijuana in residential structures 1       Added Ch. 18, Art. XII 13 2013 Public recreation facilities 1 16-20-10 2 16-20-30 3 16-20-40 4 16-20-50 14 2013 Building Code 1       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. I Residential Code 2       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. II Mechanical Code 3       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. III Plumbing Code 4       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. IV Fuel Gas Code 5       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. V Energy Conservation Code 6       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. VI Electrical Code 7       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. VII Fire Code 8       Rpld/Rnctd Ch. 18, Art. VIII 15 2013 Wireless communication facilities 1 16-16-130 16 2013 Public right-of-way permits 1 11-2-20 2 11-2-60 3, 4 11-2-70 5 11-2-90 6 11-2-120 17 2013 Floodplain management regulations 1 16-17-30 2 16-17-40 3 16-17-50 4 16-17-60 5 16-17-70 18 2013 National Green Building Standard 1       Added 18-2-30, 18-2-40, 18-2-50 3 2014 Pre-Application Neighborhood Input Meetings 1 18-10-80 4 2014 Elections 1 2-1-10 2 2-1-40 3 2-1-50 5 2014 Home Rule Charter 1 Charter  3.3 Charter  3.7 Charter  6.1 6 2014 Engineering and Construction Criteria 1 17-4-30 10 2014 Municipal Utilities 1       Rpld 13-1-10-13-1-70       Added 13-1-10-13-1-80 1 2015 Supplementary district regulation 1       Added 16-16-200 2 2015 Design principles for utilities 1 17-5-50 3 2015 City Manager 1 2-3-40 4 2015 Nonconforming Provisions 1 16-1-10 2 16-14-10 3 16-14-60 4 16-14-70 5       Rnmbrd 16-14-90       as 16-14-100 6       Rnmbrd 16-14-100       as 16-14-110 7       Added 16-14-90 5 2015 Off-street parking requirements 1 16-16-10(c) 2 16-16-10(d)(2) 6 2015 Nonprofit Institutions, Private Clubs, Public Recreational Facilities and Nonprofit Recreational Facilities 1 16-20-10 7 2015 Security Guard Businesses 1 6-3-10 2 6-3-70 8 2015 Wireless Communication Facilities 1 16-16-130 13 2015 Regulation of Unmanned Aircraft Systems 1       Added 7-7-10-7-7-50 2 2016 Fences 1       Rpld 16-16-40       Added 16-16-40 3 2016 Regulations applicable to Unmanned Aircraft Systems 1       Added 7-7-30(3) 2 7-7-40 4 2016 Elections 1 2-1-10 2 2-1-40 3 2-1-50 5 2016 Text Amendments 1 16-2-40 16-1-10 6 2016 Open Space Zoning Regulations 1       Rpld 16-11-10-16-11-40       Added 16-11-10-16-11-40 16-11-110-16-11-130 2 16-4-10(a) 3 16-15-40(b)(2) 7 2016 Loitering 1 10-5-40 5 2017 Construction hours 1 18-10-10(a) 2 18-10-20 3 18-10-60 6 2017 Building Regulations 1 18-1-10, 18-1-20 2 18-2-10-18-2-50 3 18-3-10, 18-3-20 4 18-4-10, 18-4-20 5 18-5-10, 18-5-20 6 18-6-10, 18-6-20 7 18-7-10, 18-7-20 8 18-8-10, 18-8-20 9       Added 18-1.5-10, 18-1.5-20 10 18-9-20-18-9-40 7 2017 Wireless communication facilities 1 16-16-130 8 2017 Procedures for Parks, Trails and City Property usage 1 Ch. 11, Art. III(title) 2 11-3-10 3 11-3-50 9 2017 Subdivision plat renaming procedures 1       Added 17-3-510-17-3-540 10 2017 Marijuana Cultivation in Residential Units 1 18-12-30 2, 3 18-12-40 4 18-12-50 5 2018 Sales Tax Definitions 1 4-4-10 4 2019 Powers and Duties 1 2-6-10 10 2019 Amendments 1 18-1-20  
