


CITY OF GUNNISON MUNICIPAL HOME RULE CHARTER

Adopted at Special Election July 10, 1962

AMENDED:

May 11, 1965:    Sections 3.7, 11.14 H & I

May 31, 1967:    Section 8.1

May 31, 1973:    Sections 2.11, 2.12, 2.14, 3.18, 3.19, 4.1, 6.3 & 8.3

May 10, 1977:    Section 3.19

May 8, 1979:    Section 3.17

May 21, 1981:    Sections 2.6, 2.9, 2.11, 2.14, 3.6, 3.7, 3.9, 3.13, 3.19, 4.3, 4.4, 4.7, 4.14, 5.7, 5.8, 6.7, 6.10, Article VIII, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4 & 10.5

May 10, 1983:    Article VI Section 6.10, Article VIII Section 8.8, Article X Section 11.5

May 14, 1991:    Article II Sections 2.8, 2.12, 2.15, 3.6, 3.12, 3.13, 3.16, 3.18, Article IV Section 4.2, 4.9, 4.10, Article V Sections 5.2, 5.5, 5.7, Article VI Section 6.4, 6.11, Article X, Sections 10.2, 10.10, Article VII Sections 7.2, 7.3, 7.5, 7.6

May 9, 1995:    Article II, Section 2.2

    Article II, Section 2.8

    Article III, Section 3.22 

May 8, 2001:    Article VI, Section 6.5

    Article VII, Section 7.12

May 12, 2015:    Article II, Sections 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 [2.9]

    Article IV, Section 4.10

    Article VI, Section 6.3

May 9, 2017:    Article II, Section 2.2

    Article III, Section 3.19

    Article IV, Section 4.13

    Article V, Section 5.1

November 6, 2018:    Article II, Sections 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5

 

CITY OF GUNNISON MUNICIPAL HOME RULE CHARTER

Table of Contents

Prefatory Synopsis

Preamble

Article I    General Provisions

Article II    Elections

Article III    Organization of Government

Article IV    General Provisions Regarding Officers and Personnel of the City

Article V    The Council: Procedure and Miscellaneous Powers and Duties

Article VI    Legislation

Article VII    City Finances

Article VIII    Bonded Indebtedness

Article IX    City Owned Utilities

Article X    Franchises

Article XI    Miscellaneous Legal Provisions

Article XII    Transitional Period

Certificate of Final Adoption

PREFATORY SYNOPSIS

The Gunnison Charter Convention was elected March 20, 1962, under the authority and method set out in Article XX of the Constitution of Colorado. The 21 members of the Convention were charged with the responsibility of drawing up a document in which would be prescribed the form and substance of Home Rule Government for the City of Gunnison.

Two objectives of the members of the Charter Convention have been:

First    That the Charter must reserve to the people of the City of Gunnison absolute right and power of self-government under the Home Rule Provisions of the Constitution;

Second    That the Charter must ensure the orderly and economical management of City Government guided and controlled by the people through their elected representatives.

To accomplish these objectives, the Charter provides for the Council-Manager form of City Government.

The policy-making, legislative, and budget making powers are vested in five Councilmen elected by popular vote from the City at large. Provisions are made for the recall of elected officers and for control of legislation by the people through initiative and referendum.

The rights of the people with respect to franchises are carefully safeguarded.

The power to create and control necessary Boards and Commissions is vested in the Council.

The administrative officer of the City will be a City Manager, appointed by the Council on the basis of his administrative abilities. Provision is made in the Charter for the removal of the City Manager at the pleasure of the Council.

The City Manager will prepare a budget, but final approval and adoption of such budget and all appropriations of City funds will remain in the hands of the Council. The acts of the City Manager will be subject to review by the Council.

To preserve the independence of the judicial arm of government, provision is made that the Municipal Judge will be appointed by the Council, subject to removal at any time by the Council.

Provision is made in the Charter, pending approval by the City electorate on July 10, 1962, for the Charter to go into effect as the governing document of the City of Gunnison on August 1, 1962. Further provision is made for the incumbent Councilmen – five in number, including four Councilmen and Mayor – to continue to serve as Councilmen for the City of Gunnison during the transition period between August 1, 1962 through May 20, 1963.

The newly elected Council shall take office on May 20, 1963, following the first election provided for under the Provisions of this Charter on May 14, 1963.

Members of the Charter Convention believe incumbent Councilmen, experienced in City Government, can carry into effect the Provisions of this Charter through the transition months – August, 1962 - May, 1963 – better than five newly elected Councilmen who would be chosen at a special election. Further, the expense of a special election would be unnecessary.

Charter Convention members have attempted to design this Charter to best meet the continuing needs of the City of Gunnison, and its projected growth during the coming years. They make no claims to presenting a document that will stand impervious to possible unforeseen requirements of future citizens, and thus, have provided a method to amend this Charter by popular vote. In putting together this Charter, Convention members have worked earnestly and long. In the process the opinions and views of many people have been secured and detailed studies of other Charters carried on.

The members of the Charter Convention believe this Charter will provide the basic law upon which the citizens of Gunnison may build a sound and progressive City Government.

PREAMBLE

We, the people of the City of Gunnison, Colorado, in order to promote the general welfare of our community and to exercise the rights, privileges, and responsibilities of self-government granted to us under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, do ordain and establish this Home Rule Charter for the City of Gunnison, Colorado.


ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS


Section 1.1 Name and Boundaries:

The municipal corporation heretofore existing as the City of Gunnison, in Gunnison County of the State of Colorado, shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate and under this Charter shall be known as the “City of Gunnison” with the same boundaries until changed in a manner authorized by law.


Section 1.2 Powers, Rights and Liabilities:

By the name of the City of Gunnison the municipal corporation shall have perpetual succession; shall own, possess and hold all property, real and personal heretofore owned, possessed and held by the City of Gunnison and does assume and shall manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities and shall acquire all benefits and does assume and shall pay all bonds, obligations and indebtedness of said City of Gunnison; may by the name of the City of Gunnison, sue and defend, plead and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters and proceedings; may purchase, receive, hold and enjoy, or sell and dispose of real and personal property; may have and use a common seal and alter the same at pleasure.

The City shall have all the power of local self-government and home rule and all the power possible for a City to have under the Constitution of the State of Colorado. The City shall also have all powers that now or hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the laws of the State of Colorado, and the enumeration of particular powers in this Charter is not exclusive of others. All such powers shall be exercised in the manner prescribed in this Charter or, if not provided for herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance of the Council of the City. All ordinances of the City of Gunnison in force at the time this Charter goes into effect shall continue in force except insofar as they may conflict with the Provisions of this Charter or shall be amended or repealed by ordinances enacted under the authority of this Charter.


Section 1.3 Form of Government:

The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the “Council-Manager Government.” Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution and by this Charter all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective Council.


ARTICLE II ELECTIONS


Section 2.1 Applicability of Colorado Municipal Election Code:

For any non-Gunnison County coordinated elections, the Colorado Municipal Election Code, and any amendments thereto, heretofore or hereafter adopted shall prevail, except those provisions which are inconsistent with the Charter. The Council shall provide by ordinance, resolution or motion, for the manner of holding City elections and such additional regulations in respect to elections as may be necessary to accomplish the intent of this article.


Section 2.2 Elective Officers and Terms of Office:

The elective officers of the City shall be five Council members, all of whom shall be nominated and elected from the City at large. At each regular City election there shall be elected three Council members and such additional number as may be required to fill vacancies pursuant to the provision of Section 4.7 Filling Vacancies in Elective Offices. The two receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of office of four years. The one receiving the third highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of office of two years. A number equal to the number of vacancies being filled (if any) who shall receive the next highest numbers of votes in order shall be elected for a term of office of two years.

A.    The terms of office for Council members shall commence on the first scheduled regular meeting following the Regular Municipal or Special election at which they are elected.

B.    Elections shall be non-partisan. There shall be no partisan designations affixed in any way or manner to any candidate for the office of City Councilmember.


Section 2.3 City at Large; Voting Precinct:

The City of Gunnison shall consist of one ward. The voting precinct of the City shall consist of one until changed by the Council as hereinafter provided. The Council shall by resolution from time to time establish convenient voting precincts in accordance with this Charter and statutes.


Section 2.4 Election Date:

A regular City election shall be held on the first Tuesday in November of each odd numbered year. Special City elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.


Section 2.5 Election Commission:

An Election Commission is hereby created, consisting of the City Clerk and two qualified electors of the City, who during their term of office shall not be elected officials or employees or candidates or nominees for elected City office. These two members shall be appointed by the Council from July 1 following a regular City election for a term of two years, and shall serve without compensation.

The City Clerk shall be chair. The Election Commission shall appoint the Board of Election judges and clerks for each voting precinct and have charge of all activities and duties required of it by statute and this charter relating to the conduct of elections in the City. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to be followed.

The Election Commission shall provide for ballots and sample ballots or voting machines for determination of the winner in the event of a tie vote or canvassing of returns and issuance of appropriate certificates.

The Election Commission shall only serve when the election is not coordinated with Gunnison County.


ARTICLE III ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT


Section 3.1 The City Council:

The City council shall consist of five members, one of whom shall serve as Mayor as provided in Section 3.4. The Council shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the city and shall have power and authority, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by statute, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the City, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances, and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof.


Section 3.2 Qualifications of Councilmen:

Members of the Council shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in Section 4.1 of this Charter. The Council shall be the sole judge of the election and qualifications of its own members, subject only to review by the Court.


Section 3.3 Compensation of Mayor and Councilmen:

The members of the Council shall receive such compensation as the Council shall by ordinance prescribe; provided however, they shall neither increase nor decrease the compensation of any member during his term of office except members of the Council whose terms do not expire at the next regular City election, who shall receive the same salary as that provided for incoming members, for the remainder of their term of office. The Mayor and Councilmen may, upon order of the Council, be paid such necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service on behalf of the city as are authorized and itemized.


Section 3.4 Election of Mayor; Mayor Pro Tem:

The Council shall, at its first meeting following each regular City election, and after the newly elected members take office, elect one of its members to serve as Mayor and one to serve as Mayor Pro Tem; both for a term expiring at the first Council meeting following each regular City election. Such election shall be by written ballot and by majority of the members of the council in office at the time. In the event of absence or disability of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the Council may designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor during such absence or disability.


Section 3.5 Duties of Mayor:

A.    Insofar as required by statute, and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be the executive head of the city. He shall have a voice in all proceedings of the Council equal with that of other members of the Council but shall have no veto power. He shall be the presiding officer of the Council.

B.    The Mayor shall be a conservator of the peace, and in emergencies may exercise, within the City, the powers conferred by the Governor of the State of Colorado for purposes of military law, and shall have the authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the city and to suppress riot and disorder.

C.    The Mayor shall execute and authenticate by his signature such instruments as the Council, this Charter, or any statutes of the State of Colorado, or laws of the United States shall require.


Section 3.6 Administrative Services:

The administrative officers of the City shall be the City Manager and Director of Finance and City Clerk, and such additional administrative officers as may be created by ordinance. The Council may, by ordinance, combine any administrative offices in any manner it deems necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the City. The City Manager shall be appointed by the Council for an indefinite period, and shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the Council and shall have his compensation fixed by the Council. All administrative officers of the City, except the City Manager, shall be appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite period. The appointment of Director of Finance and City Clerk shall be subject to confirmation by the Council. Such officers shall be responsible to the City Manager and shall have their compensation fixed by the Council. Such officers, except the Director of Finance and City Clerk, may be discharged by the City Manager without confirmation by the Council. Except as may be otherwise required by this Charter, the Council shall establish by resolution such departments of the City as it deems necessary or advisable and shall prescribe therein the functions of each department and the duties, authorities, and responsibilities of the officers of each department.

The City Manager may prescribe such duties and responsibilities of the officer of those departments responsible to him which are not inconsistent with this Charter or with any resolution or ordinance. All personnel employed by the city who are not elected officers of the city or administrative officers by or under authority of this Charter shall be deemed to be employees of the City. The head of each department shall have the power to hire, suspend or discharge the employees of his department, with confirmation by the City Manager.


Section 3.7 City Manager, Appointment and Qualifications:

The Council shall appoint a City Manager within one hundred eighty (180) days after any vacancy exists in such position. The City Manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the majority of the Council. He shall be selected solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his actual experience in and his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office as hereafter set forth.


Section 3.8 City Manager, Functions and Duties:

The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City. He shall be held responsible to the City Council for the following functions and duties, any of which may be delegated at his discretion:

A.    For the efficient administration of all administrative departments of the City;

B.    To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced;

C.    To appoint the heads of the several City departments whose appointment is not otherwise specified in this Charter, and to direct and supervise such department heads;

D.    To give to the proper department or officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any franchise, contracts or agreements;

E.    To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or any of its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract, are faithfully kept and performed;

F.    To recommend an annual budget to the Council and to administer the budget as finally adopted under the policies formulated by the Council, and to keep the Council fully advised at all times as to the financial conditions of the City;

G.    To recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; and to attend Council meetings with the right to take part in discussions but not to vote;

H.    To exercise and perform all administrative functions of the city that are not imposed by this Charter or ordinance upon some other official;

I.    To be responsible for the maintenance of a system of accounts of the city which shall conform to generally accepted principles and procedures of governmental accounting. He shall submit financial statements to the Council quarterly, or more often as the Council directs;

J.    To act as Purchasing Agent for the city and in such capacity to purchase all supplies and equipment and dispose of same in accordance with procedures established by the Council;

K.    To establish, subject to approval by the Council, appropriate personnel rules and regulations governing officers and employees of the City;

L.    To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him by ordinance or by direction of the Council.


Section 3.9 Acting City Manager:

The City Manager shall designate immediately upon his appointment a qualified City employee to perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability. Such designation shall be made by letter and filed with the Director of Finance. If he fails to make such designation, the Council may, by resolution, appoint a qualified City employee to perform the duties of City Manager until he shall return. In the event the position of City Manager becomes vacant, the Council may appoint an Acting City Manager for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days. Such Acting City Manager shall, while he is in such office, have all the responsibilities, duties, functions, and authority of the City Manager.


Section 3.10 Removal of the City Manager:

The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term which may be terminated by a majority vote of the City Council. Upon such termination, the Council may in its discretion provide termination pay.


Section 3.11 Relationship of Council to Administrative Services and Departments:

Neither the Council nor any of its members shall dictate the appointment of any person to office by the City Manager or in any way interfere with the City Manager or other City officer to prevent him for exercising his judgement in the appointment or employment of officers and employees in the administrative service, except as provided elsewhere in this Charter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Manager.


Section 3.12 Director of Finance; Appointment; Powers and Duties:

The City Manager shall appoint a Director of Finance subject to confirmation by the Council. The City Manager may also appoint a deputy or deputies, subject to confirmation by the council, to serve under the supervision of the Director of Finance, who shall have authority to act in the absence of the Director of Finance.

The Director of Finance’s functions and duties shall be:

A.    To have custody of all monies of the City, and all evidences of indebtedness belonging to the City or held in trust by the City;

B.    To collect all monies of the City, the collection of which is not provided for elsewhere by this Charter or ordinance; to receive from other officers and employees of the City all monies belonging to and receivable by the City that may be collected by such officers and employees, including fines, fees, taxes, assessments, and all other charges;

C.    To keep and deposit all monies or funds in such a manner and only in such places as Council may determine and to report the same in detail to the City Manager;

D.    To disburse all City funds in accordance with the provisions of statute, this Charter, and procedures which may from time to time be established by the Council;

E.    To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by him by this Charter, by the Council, or by the City Manager;

F.    To prepare all financial statements for the City of Gunnison as required by this Charter.


Section 3.13 City Clerk; Appointment; Power and Duties:

The City Manager shall appoint a City Clerk, subject to confirmation by the Council. The City Manager may also appoint a deputy or deputies, subject to confirmation by the Council, to serve under the supervision of the City Clerk, who shall have authority to act in the absence of the City Clerk.

The City Clerk’s functions and duties shall be:

A.    To administer oaths and take acknowledgements under the seal of the City;

B.    To attend all meetings of the Council and keep a permanent journal of all proceedings in the English language;

C.    To act as custodian of the City seal and to affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and to attest the same;

D.    To act as custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the City, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for;

E.    To certify by his signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Council;

F.    To provide and maintain in his office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of the Charter;

G.    To conduct and administer all municipal elections under the provisions of State Law and Gunnison City Charter.


Section 3.14 Attorney; Functions and Duties:

The Attorney shall be appointed by, act as legal advisor to, and be attorney and counsel for the Council, and shall be responsible solely to the council. His functions and duties shall be:

A.    To advise any officer or department head of the City in matters relating to his official duties when so requested and shall file with the Director of Finance a copy of all written opinions given by him;

B.    To prosecute ordinance violations and to conduct for the City, cases in court and before other legally constituted tribunals. To file with the Director of Finance copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Council may direct;

C.    To prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds and other written instruments which are submitted to him by the Council and City Manager and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legal consequences thereof;

D.    To call to the attention of the Council all matters of law, and changes or developments therein affecting the City;

E.    To perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this Charter or by the Council.

Upon recommendation of the Attorney, or upon its own initiative, the Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the City has an interest, or to assist and counsel with the Attorney therein.


Section 3.15 Compensation of Attorney and Special Counsel:

The compensation of the Attorney shall be set by the Council. No compensation to special legal counsel shall be paid, except in accordance with an agreement between the council and the Attorney or Special Counsel made before the service for which compensation is to be paid has been rendered.


Section 3.16 Departments Created:

The functions of the City shall be performed by the following departments: Municipal Utilities, Finance, Public Safety, Public Works, Recreation, City Clerk, and such departments as are or may be established by this Charter or ordinances of the City. Upon recommendation of the city Manager, the Council may by ordinance consolidate or merge any of the said departments, whether set forth in the Charter or created by ordinance, in order to achieve more efficient operation and administration. All departments of the City, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, shall be under the supervision and control of the City Manager.


Section 3.17 Boards and Commissions:

Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, all boards and commissions shall be appointed by the Council, shall be advisory in character, shall serve without compensation unless the Council by ordinance shall provide otherwise, and shall be paid their authorized expenses actually incurred in the discharge of their official duties, as are provided by this Charter or by Ordinance.

Initial appointments by the Council shall specify the term of office of each individual in order to achieve overlapping tenure, and thereafter all appointments shall be for the full term specified. All members shall be subject to removal by the council for cause. The council shall make appointments to fill vacancies for the unexpired terms. Each board and commission shall choose its own chairman and vice-chairman and shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the proper conduct of its business.


Section 3.18 Zoning Board of Adjustments and Appeals:

There is hereby created and established a Board of Adjustment and Appeals consisting of five (5) members to be appointed by the Council for overlapping terms of three (3) years. Members shall have been a resident of the city for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the time of their appointment, and they shall hold no other office or position in the City administration.

The board shall have power to hear and determine appeals from refusal of building permits in violation of the zoning ordinance; to make exceptions to the terms of the zoning regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent; and to authorize variances from the strict application of the zoning regulations in such situations, and subject to such limitations as may be set by ordinance. The findings and decisions of the board shall be final, subject only to judicial review.

The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, show the vote taken, keep records of its examinations, and other official actions. Every order, requirement, decision or determination of the board shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. The board shall exercise the functions and powers and perform the duties assigned to it by this Charter and the ordinances of the City; and where not otherwise provided by ordinance or Charter, the board shall have the powers, perform the functions and follow the procedures set forth in the Statutes of the State of Colorado.


Section 3.19 Planning and Zoning Commission:

There is created and established hereby a Planning and Zoning Commission consisting of seven (7) members to be appointed by the Council and who shall have overlapping five (5) year terms. The members shall be citizens-at-large and shall have been residents of the City for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the time of their appointment, and they shall hold no other office or position in the City administration. The City Manager, or his designee, shall meet with the Commission in an advisory capacity. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be responsible for preparing a master plan for the City of Gunnison and keeping said plan updated in accordance with the statutes of the State of Colorado.


Section 3.20 Municipal Court:

There shall be a Municipal Court which shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases arising under this Charter or the ordinances of the City. The powers of and the procedure in such Municipal Court and the manner of enforcement of its orders and judgements, shall be such as is provided for under the 

Statutes of the State of Colorado, and the present ordinances of the City with respect to police magistrates, except as may otherwise be provided in this Charter or by ordinance hereafter enacted. The Council shall have the power to provide for juries for service in the Municipal Court.


Section 3.21 Qualification and Appointment of Judge:

The Municipal Court shall be presided over, and its functions exercised by, a Municipal Judge who shall be a licensed member of the Bar of this State, in good standing, appointed by the Council for a term to be at the pleasure of the Council. If no qualified member of the Bar satisfactory to the Council is available and willing to serve, any other person may be appointed until a qualified member of the Bar is willing to accept. He shall receive a fixed salary or compensation not dependent upon the outcome of the matters to be decided by him, and to be fixed by the Council from time to time. If absent, disqualified, or unable to act in any matter or case, the Municipal Judge may call any eligible person subject to council approval, to act and serve temporarily, and if he fails to, or cannot call in a substitute, the Council shall appoint a substitute. The Council shall provide a suitable place, and all supplies and things necessary for the proper functions of the Court.


Section 3.22 Limitation of Fines or Imprisonment:

The Council shall set the penalties for violation of municipal ordinances consistent with the statutes of the State of Colorado.


ARTICLE IV GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL OF THE CITY


Section 4.1 Eligibility for Office and Employment in the City:

No person shall hold any elective office of the City unless he shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years, and have been a resident of the City for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the last day for filing the original petition for such office or preceding the time of his appointment to fill a vacancy.

No person shall hold any elective office unless he is a qualified and registered elector of the City at such time of appointment and throughout his tenure of office. No person shall be eligible for elective or appointive City office who is in default to the City. The holding office by any person who is in such default shall create a vacancy unless such default be eliminated within thirty days after written notice thereof by the Council or unless such person in good faith be contesting the liability for such default.

Each candidate for elective office shall file with his petition his affidavit that he possesses the qualifications for such office provided in the section. Failure to file such affidavit shall invalidate his petition.

Each member of a City board or commission created pursuant to the Charter, shall have been a resident of the City for at least one year immediately preceding the date of his appointment and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the city on such day and throughout his tenure of office.

All officers of the City shall be United States citizens. Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, no officer elected under this Charter may be appointed to any office or be employed by the City during the term of office for which he was elected, provided that after the expiration of his term of office he may be appointed as a member of an independent board or commission or fill a vacancy in the position of Councilman.

The Council may by ordinance require residence in the City of Gunnison as a condition of employment of all full time employees of the City.


Section 4.2 Removals from Office:

Removals by the Council of elective and appointive officers or of members of boards or commissions shall be made for either of the following reasons:

A.    For any reason specified by statute for removal of City Officers; or

B.    For any act declared by this Charter to constitute misconduct in office. Such removals by the Council shall be made only after a hearing, of which such officer has been given notice in writing by the City Clerk at least ten days in advance, either personally or by delivering the same to his last known place of residence. Such notice shall include a copy of the charges against such officer. The hearings shall afford an opportunity to the officer, in person or by attorney, to be heard in his defense, to cross examine witnesses and to present testimony. If such officer shall neglect to appear at such hearing and answer such charges, his failure to do so may be deemed cause for his removal. A majority vote of the members of the Council in office at the time, exclusive of any member whose removal is being considered, shall be required for any such removal.


Section 4.3 Vacancies in Boards and Commissions:

The office of any member of any board or commission created by or pursuant to this Charter shall be declared vacant by the Council:

A.    For any reason specified by statute or by this Charter as creating a vacancy in office;

B.    If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this Charter;

C.    If such officer shall miss four (4) consecutive regular meetings of such board or commission, or twenty-five (25) per cent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the City, unless such absences shall be excused by such board or commission at the time of such absence;

D.    If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.2.


Section 4.4 Vacancies in Elective Office:

Any elective office of the City shall be declared vacant by the Council upon occurrence of any of the following events before the expiration of the term of such office:

A.    For any reason specified by statute or by this Charter as creating a vacancy in office;

B.    If no person is elected or qualified for the office at the election at which such office is to be filled;

C.    If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent court of the State of Colorado of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this Charter;

D.    If the officer shall be convicted of crime involving moral turpitude;

E.    If the officer shall absent himself continuously from the City for more than thirty (30) consecutive days in any one (1) year without the permission of the Council.

F.    In the case of any members of the Council, if such officer shall miss four (4) consecutive meetings of the council or twenty-five (25) per cent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the City, unless such absence shall be excused by the Council and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings of the Council at the time of such absence;

G.    If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.2 of this Charter.


Section 4.5 Resignations:

Resignations of elective officers and of members of boards and commissions shall be made in writing and filed with the City Clerk and shall be acted upon by the Council at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the City Clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made in writing to the appointing officer or body and shall be acted upon immediately.


Section 4.6 Filling Vacancies in Appointive Offices:

Vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled in the manner provided for making the original appointment. In the case of members of boards and commissions appointed for a definite term, such appointments shall be for the unexpired term.


Section 4.7 Filling Vacancies in Elective Offices:

Any vacancy that occurs in the City Council less than ninety (90) days after a regular City election shall be filled by the appointment, by majority vote of remaining members of the Council, of that person, if that person is still qualified and accepts the appointment, who was runner-up in the last election after those elected, provided that person polled ten (10) per cent of the vote cast. Otherwise, Council may, in its discretion, appoint a successor to serve until the next regular City election, or call for a special election, at which such vacancy shall be filled as provided in Section 2.2 for any balance of the unexpired original term.

Any vacancy that occurs in the City council more than ninety (90) days before the next regular City election and more than ninety (90) days after the last regular City election shall be filled within thirty (30) days by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council, said appointee to hold office until the Monday following the next regular City election at which election such vacancy shall be filled as provided in Section 2.2 for any balance of the unexpired original term.

Any vacancy that occurs in the City Council ninety (90) days or less before the next regular City election may not be filled.

If the vacancy in the office of councilman which the Council is authorized to fill is not filled within thirty (30) days after such vacancy occurs, or if two or more vacancies exist simultaneously in the office of councilman, such vacancy shall be filled for the respective unexpired terms at a special election.


Section 4.8 Change in Term of Office or Compensation:

Except by procedures provided in this Charter, the terms of office of the elective officers and members of boards and commissions appointed for definite terms shall not be shortened. The terms of elective officers of the City shall not be extended beyond the period for which any such officer was elected except that an elective officer shall after his term has expired, continue to hold office until his successor is elected and has qualified. The Council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any officer or employee after the service has been rendered except under those terms agreed to prior to the rendering of the service.


Section 4.9 Oath of Office and Bond:

Every officer elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by Section 7, Article XII of the constitution of the State of Colorado and shall file the same with the City Clerk, together with any bond required by this Charter, or by the Council. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this Section within ten days from the date of his election or appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall thereupon become vacant unless the Council shall, by resolution extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth.


Section 4.10 Delivery of Office:

Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment for any reason whatsoever, he shall within five days, or sooner on demand, deliver to his successor in office or to his superior, all books, papers, monies and effects in his custody as such officer or employee. Any officer violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under the statute. Any employee found guilty by a competent tribunal of violating this provision may be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both, as determined by the Court.


Section 4.11 Pecuniary Interest Prohibited:

No member of the Council shall use his position or influence to promote his own financial interests through contracts, sales, purchases or otherwise, when such action would not be to the best interest of the City.


Section 4.12 Compensation of Officers and Employees:

The compensation of all officers and employees of the City whose compensation is not provided for herein shall be fixed by the appointing officer or body within the limits of budget appropriations and in accordance with any pay plan which may be adopted by the Council. The respective salaries and compensation of officers and employees, as fixed by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall be in full for all official services of such officers or employees and shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions and other compensation receivable by such officers or employees for their services. Such fees, commissions and compensation shall belong to the City and shall be collected and accounted for by such officers or employees, and be paid into the City treasury and a statement thereof filed periodically with the City Manager. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the City.


Section 4.13 Anti-Nepotism:

The following relatives of any officer, employee, or elective official of the city who has the authority to hire, fire, or supervise employees, or of his spouse, shall not be hired by any officer, employee or elective official of the City without the prior consent of the City Council: spouse (in certain circumstances according to Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended), child, parent, brother or sister. All relationships shall include those arising from adoption.


ARTICLE V THE COUNCIL: PROCEDURE AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES


Section 5.1 Regular Meetings:

The Council shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. An organizational meeting shall be held on the Monday following each regular City election. Notices of all regular meetings shall be posted on the bulletin board in the Municipal Building.


Section 5.2 Special Meetings:

Special meetings shall be called by the City Clerk on the written request of the Mayor, or any two members of the Council, on at least twenty-four hours written notice to each member of the Council, served personally or left at his usual place of residence; but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Council are present or have waived notice thereof in writing; provided however, that such written notice shall not be required in case of emergency, where no more than two of the Councilmen cannot be reached in time. A majority of the Councilmen in office at the time, shall be the sole judge of what constitutes an emergency.


Section 5.3 Business at Special Meetings:

No business shall be transacted at a special meeting of the Council unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting, however, any business which may lawfully come before a regular meeting may be transacted at a special meeting if all the members of the Council present thereto and all the members absent file their written consent, except as provided in Section 5.2 regarding an emergency.


Section 5.4 Council Meeting Open to Public:

All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard under such roles and regulations as the council may prescribe.


Section 5.5 Quorum; Adjournment of Meetings:

A majority of the members of the council in office at the time shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all meetings, but in the absence of a quorum a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later time or date, and in the absence of all members the City Clerk may adjourn any meeting for not longer than one week.


Section 5.6 Compulsory Attendance and Conduct at Meetings:

Any two or more members of the Council may, by vote, either request or compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the City at any meeting of the Council. Any member of the council or other officer who, when notified of such request for his attendance, fails to attend such meeting for reason other than confining illness or absence from the City shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office unless excused by the Council. The presiding officer shall enforce orderly conduct at meetings and any member of the Council or other officer who shall fail to conduct himself in an orderly manner at any meeting shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. Any police officer designated by the presiding officer of the meeting shall serve as the Sergeant-at-Arms of the Council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section.


Section 5.7 Organization and Rules of the Council:

The Council shall determine its own organization, rules, and order of business, subject to the following provisions:

A.    A journal of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept in the English language by the City Clerk and shall be signed by the presiding officer and clerk of the meeting.

B.    A vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by “Yes” and “No” vote and entered upon the records, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall only be necessary to so state.

C.    No member of the Council shall vote on any question in which he has a conflicting interest, but on all other questions each member who is present shall vote when his name is called unless excused by unanimous consent of the remaining members present. Any member refusing to vote except when not so required by this paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office.

D.    The proceedings of the Council, or a brief summary thereof, shall either be published or posted on a bulletin board in the Municipal Building within (10) days following each meeting. Any such summary shall be prepared by the City Clerk and approved by the Mayor and shall show the substance of each separate proceeding of the Council.

E.    There shall be no standing committees of the Council.


Section 5.8 Investigations:

The Council or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office, or officer and to make investigations as to matters in which the municipality has an interest. The Council, for the purposes stated herein, may summon witnesses and cause oaths to be administered and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, and other evidence. Failure to obey such summons or to produce books, papers, and other evidence as orders under the provisions of this section shall, in the case of an administrative officer, constitute misconduct in office and in the case of an employee, a violation of this Charter.


Section 5.9 Providing for Public Health and Safety:

The Council shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property. The Council shall constitute the Board of Health and Safety of the City, and its officers shall possess all powers, privileges and immunities granted to boards of health by statute.


ARTICLE VI LEGISLATION


Section 6.1 Prior City Legislation:

All valid by-laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city which are not inconsistent with this Charter and which are in force and effect at the time of the effective date of the Charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. If any such ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation provided for the appointment of any officers or any members of any board or commission by the Mayor, such officers or members of any board or commission shall, hereafter be appointed by the Council.

Those provisions of any effective by-law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed.


Section 6.2 Ordinances and Resolutions:

All official action by the Council shall be by ordinance, resolution, motion or order. Action by resolution, motion or order shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be done so by this Charter or by state or federal laws pertaining to the internal affairs or concern of the City Government. In addition to such acts of the Council as may be required by other provisions of the Charter to be by ordinance, every act making an appropriation, creating an indebtedness, authorizing borrowing of money, levying a tax, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property, shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a short title and by number and by a code section number, when a codification of ordinances is completed.

Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The style of all ordinance shall be: “The Council of the City of Gunnison, Colorado ordains.”


Section 6.3 Procedure of Passage:

The course that an ordinance shall take for passage shall be:

A.    Introduction at any regular or special meeting by any member of the Council.

B.    Reading in full, unless otherwise provided by this Charter or provided by the Council to be read by title.

C.    Passage or rejection on the first reading by a roll call vote of the Council.

D.    If passed on first reading, the ordinance shall be published by title only within ten (10) days unless otherwise provided in this Charter.

E.    Not later than one hundred (100) days from the date of first reading, introduction a second time at a regular meeting before final passage or rejection by a roll call vote of the Council. An ordinance may be amended before final passage by a roll call vote of the Council.

F.    Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, if an ordinance is amended, it shall be published by title only after passage, with a notation that the ordinance has been amended, and shall take effect upon the date of such publication.

G.    The Council may, at its discretion, hold a public hearing before final passage of an ordinance where such hearing is not otherwise required.

H.    If an ordinance is not amended, it shall take effect upon final passage by a roll call vote of the Council after second reading, or upon such other date as set by council.

I.    Any emergency ordinance for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety may be introduced and adopted at any special or regular meeting of the Council, and they shall take effect immediately, provided said emergency ordinances are approved by at least three-fourths of the Council present. Facts showing such urgency and need shall be specifically stated in the measure itself and such ordinances shall be published in full within seven days.

    An emergency ordinance shall be in effect for no more than ninety days after passage, and shall not again be passed as an emergency ordinance.

    No ordinance making a grant of any special privilege, levying taxes, incurring indebtedness, authorizing borrowing of money, or fixing rates charged by a City-owned utility shall ever be passed as an emergency measure.

J.    Any ordinance in the passage of which the required publications were published by posting as set forth in Section 11.14 shall be published in full unless otherwise provided in this Charter, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, as soon as such newspaper publication is available; but such required newspaper publication of an ordinance, or of any notice of public hearing called in connection with the passage of said ordinance, shall not be a requirement for the effectiveness of any ordinance so passed.


Section 6.4 Recording of Ordinances:

All ordinances shall be recorded by the City Clerk in a book called “The Ordinance Book” and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and City Clerk to authenticate such records by their official signature thereon, but the failure to do so record and authenticate such ordinances shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation.


Section 6.5 Penalties for Violation of Ordinances:

The Council shall provide for the enforcement of its ordinance, where applicable, by fine or imprisonment, or both; but no such fine nor imprisonment shall exceed the fine or imprisonment authorized for municipal ordinance violations as set by statutes of the State of Colorado.


Section 6.6 Enactment of Codes by Reference:

In accordance with statutes now or hereafter in effect, the Council may enact any technical codes, any appropriate Colorado statute, or any detailed technical regulations promulgated or enacted by any municipality, state or federal agency, by reference thereto in an enacting ordinance, and without reading or publishing such codes or statutes in full.

In the event that any such code or statute, after being adopted by reference, is revised or amended by the agency or organization by whom it was promulgated, then any such revision or amended version may be adopted by reference by an ordinance passed in the usual manner without strict compliance with statutory regulations relative to notices and public hearings.


Section 6.7 Severability of Ordinances:

Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. Furthermore, if an existing ordinance is ruled to be unenforceable or void in its entirety, any ordinance which said ordinance succeeded shall be automatically in effect.


Section 6.8 Codification of Ordinances:

As soon as feasible, but not more than three years after the effective date of this Charter, the Council shall direct and complete the codification of all ordinances of the City and shall provide for the publication of subsequent amendments thereto so that such amendments may readily be made a part of such published code and maintained thereafter in current form. Any such codification may originally include provisions not previously contained in ordinances of the City.


Section 6.9 Initiation and Referendum:

An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an enacted ordinance may be had by petition, or the Council may, on its own notion, submit an ordinance to the electorate as hereafter provided.


Section 6.10 Petition Requirements:

An initiation petition shall be signed by qualified electors in a number not less than ten (10) percent of the number of persons who were registered electors of the City as of the date of the last regular City election, and all signatures on said petition shall be obtained within twenty-one (21) days before the date of filing the petition with the City Clerk. Any such petition shall be addressed to the council and may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers identical as to content and simultaneously filed by one person. An initiation petition shall set forth in full the ordinance it proposes to initiate, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one ordinance.

A referendum petition shall be signed by qualified electors in a number no less than eight (8) percent of the number of persons who were registered electors of the City as of the date of the last regular City election. A referendum petition shall identify the ordinance to have repealed. Each signer of a petition shall sign his name, the date, and his place of residence by street number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof stating the number of signers thereof, and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the City Clerk, who shall within fifteen (15) days canvass the signature thereon. If the petition does not contain a sufficient number of signatures of qualified electors of the City, or any other error or insufficiency shall be found in the petition, the City Clerk shall notify forthwith by registered mail the person filing such petition, and fifteen (15) days from such notification shall be allowed for filing of supplemental or corrected petition papers. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed by this section, the City Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting.


Section 6.11 Council Procedure on Initiation and Referendum Petitions:

Upon presentation to the Council of an initiation or referendum petition by the City Clerk, the Council shall, within thirty-one days either:

A.    Adopt the ordinance as submitted by initiation petition;

B.    Repeal the ordinance, or part thereof, referred to by a referendum petition; or

C.    Determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors.


Section 6.12 Submission of Initiation and Referendum Ordinances to Electors:

Should the council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, or should they, on their own motion submit an ordinance to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next regular City election held in the City for any other purpose, or at the discretion of the council, at a special election called for that specific purpose. In the case of an initiation petition, if no election is to be held in the City for any other purpose within one hundred-fifty days from the time the petition is presented to the Council, and it does not enact the ordinance, then the Council shall, by resolution, call a special election within sixty days from such date of presentation for the submission of the proposal. The result of all elections held under the provisions of this section shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon.


Section 6.13 Miscellaneous Provisions on Initiation and Referendum Petitions:

An ordinance adopted by the electorate may not be amended or repealed for a period of six months after the date of the election at which it was adopted, and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be re-enacted for a period of six months after the date of the election at which it was repealed, provided however, that any ordinance may be adopted, amended or appealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiatory procedure in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Charter, or if submitted to the electorate by the Council on its own motion. If two or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern.


Section 6.14 Ordinances Excepted:

Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, ordinances authorizing the issuance of bonds, levying taxes, the annual appropriation ordinances and those ordering improvements initiated by petition and to be paid for by special assessments shall be excepted from initiative and referendum powers.


ARTICLE VII CITY FINANCES


Section 7.1 Fiscal Year:

The fiscal year of the City of Gunnison, and all of its agencies, shall begin on the first day of January, and end on the thirty-first day of December of each year.


Section 7.2 Annual Budget:

The City Manager shall present a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year to the Council, together with a budget message, on or before October fifteenth of each year.


Section 7.3 Budget Hearings:

The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget on or before November fifteenth of each year. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once five days or more prior to such hearings, and a copy of the proposed budget shall be made available for inspection by the public, by depositing it in the office of the Director of Finance.

The Council may at any time before final adoption of the budget, increase, or decrease, add or strike out any item in it.


Section 7.4 Scope of Annual Budget:

The budget adopted by the Council shall contain:

A.    An estimate of the anticipated revenue of the city other than the tax levy for the ensuing year;

B.    An estimate of the General Fund cash surplus at the end of the current fiscal year, or of the deficit to be made up by appropriation;

C.    The estimated expenditures necessary for the operation of the several departments, offices, and agencies of the City;

D.    Debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year;

E.    The amount to be set aside for the public improvements fund, together with a schedule showing all recommended public improvement expenditures during the ensuing five years.

F.    An estimate of the sum required to be raised by the tax levy for the ensuing fiscal year, and the rate of levy necessary to produce such sum based on the percentage of current levy collection experience during the three preceding fiscal years;

G.    A balance between the total estimated expenditures, including any deficit to be met, and monies set aside for public improvements and total anticipated revenue, plus any surplus. All estimates shall be in detail showing revenues by source, and detailed expenditures by organizational units, activities, character and object.


Section 7.5 Adoption of Budget and Appropriations:

Not later than December fifteenth of each year, the Council shall adopt on final reading an ordinance for the budget and an ordinance of the annual appropriations. When finally adopted, the budget shall become a public record and sufficient copies shall be deposited with the Director of Finance to insure adequate circulation.


Section 7.6 Certification of Tax Levy:

Not later than December fifteenth of each year, or such other date required by law the Council shall fix the amount of tax levy which shall be assessed upon each dollar of assessed valuation of all taxable property within the corporate limits of the City of Gunnison, and shall cause the same to be certified to the Board of County Commissioners of the County of Gunnison as required by law. If the council should fail in any year to make such levy as above provided, the rate last fixed shall be the rate for the ensuing fiscal year, which rate shall be levied as by law provided.


Section 7.7 General Fund:

There is hereby established a fund to be known as the General Fund. All revenues not specifically allocated to any other fund shall be placed in the General Fund. All general functions of the City shall be financed by expenditures from the General Fund. The General Fund may contain an item for contingencies. Except in those cases where there is no logical account to which an expenditure can be charged, expenditure shall not be charged directly to contingencies, but instead, the necessary part of the appropriation for contingencies shall be transferred to the logical account and the expenditure charged to such account. No such transfer shall be made without the express approval of the Council, and then only for expenditures which could not be readily foreseen at the time the budget was adopted.


Section 7.8 Public Improvements Fund:

There is hereby established a fund to be known as the Public Improvements Fund for the purpose of paying the cost of capital improvements not specifically chargeable to other funds. The Council shall have the power to define the rules and regulations pertaining to such funds by ordinance, and shall have power to transfer from time to time monies from the General Fund to the Public Improvements Fund. Appropriations for construction or other permanent Improvements from the Public Improvements Fund shall not lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; unencumbered balances from projects accomplished or abandoned shall be deposited in any bond sinking fund wherein the faith and credit of the City was pledged, and the same used for payment of such outstanding bond indebtedness of the City, or if none, to any other fund. Any appropriated or unencumbered balance in the Public Improvements Fund may be transferred by the Council to any fund, or used to pay outstanding bonded indebtedness of the City.


Section 7.9 Special Funds:

Additional funds which shall be known as special funds shall be created by ordinance to provide for monies to be held or used for special purposes such as: depreciation and obsolescence, debt service, equipment and building replacement, special services, local improvements, city-owned utilities, trust funds and endowments, and such other purposes as the Council may determine.


Section 7.10 Transfer of Funds:

The City Manager may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or portion thereof, from one classification of expenditure to another within the same department, office, or agency. Report of any such transfer shall be made to the Council. The Council may, by resolution, transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one department, office, or agency to another. The Council may also by resolution, transfer any excess earnings of any City-owned utility to the General Fund of the City without establishing a liability for the same.


Section 7.11 Additional Appropriations:

The Council may make additional appropriations by ordinance during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the City, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget, unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public health, peace or safety.


Section 7.12 Departmental Appropriations Revert:

Any annual departmental appropriation, or any portion thereof, remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of the fiscal year, shall revert to the respective fund.


Section 7.13 Expenditures Forbidden:

No expenditures shall be made for any charitable or benevolent purposes to any person, corporation, or organization not under the control of the City, nor to any denominational or sectarian institution or association.


Section 7.14 Audit of Accounts:

An independent audit shall be made annually of all financial affairs of the City, and more frequent audits may be made if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audits shall be made by certified public accountants, experienced in municipal accounting, selected by the Council.


ARTICLE VIII BONDED INDEBTEDNESS


Section 8.1 Forms of Borrowing:

The City may borrow money and issue securities in evidence thereof as follows:

A.    Short term notes;

B.    Anticipation warrants;

C.    General obligation bonds;

D.    Revenue bonds;

E.    Industrial revenue development bonds;

F.    Local improvement bonds; 

G.    Any other like securities.


Section 8.2 Short Term Notes:

The City may, by resolution of the City Council without an election, issue short term notes maturing within twelve (12) months of the date of this issuance. Such notes are not indebtedness within the limitations of Sections 8.3 and 8.4.


Section 8.3 General Obligations Securities:

No bonds or other evidence of indebtedness payable in whole or in part from the proceeds of ad valorem taxes or to which the full faith and credit of the City are pledged shall be issued until the question of their issuance shall be submitted to a vote of the registered electorate at a special or general municipal election and approved by a majority of those voting, but voter approval shall not be necessary for the issuance of such securities in connection with acquiring water and rights thereto, or acquiring, improving, or extending a municipal water system or any combination of such purposes, nor for acquiring, constructing, improving, or extending a municipal sewer system, or sewer treatment facilities, or any combination thereof, or for acquiring, constructing, extending, improving a municipal storm drainage system, or any combination thereof, nor for securities issued pursuant to Section 8.7 and 8.8 hereof.


Section 8.4 Limitations of Indebtedness:

The aggregate amount of bonds or other forms from the proceeds of ad valorem taxes or to which the full faith and credit of the City are pledged (including such debts relating to water and sewer, and excluding securities issued under Section 8.7) shall not exceed twenty (20) per cent of the assessed valuation of the taxable property within the City as shown in the most recent assessment.


Section 8.5 Revenue Bonds:

The City may, by ordinance of the City Council, without an election and without adherence to the limitations of Section 8.4, issue securities made payable solely from revenues other than the proceeds of ad valorem taxes, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the issuance of securities payable from revenue derived from the operation of the project or capital improvements acquired or bettered with the securities’ proceeds, or from any other projects or improvements, from the available proceeds of any sales tax, use tax, or excise tax, or from any part or combination of such sources. Interim securities and anticipation warrants are among the securities which may be issued and made so payable or made payable from the proceeds of the bonds.


Section 8.6 Industrial Revenue Development Bonds:

The City may, by ordinance of the City Council, without an election and without adherence to the limitations of Section 8.4 hereof, issue industrial revenue development bonds in accordance with the statutes of the State of Colorado.


Section 8.7 Local Improvement Bonds:

The City may, by ordinance of the City Council, contract or construct local or special improvements within a specified district of the City and determine the method of specially assessing the cost of such improvements, unless the owners of a majority of the property of such district oppose the project, or alternatively, if Council so provides by procedural ordinance, a majority of the owners of property in an assessment unit oppose the project to be constructed in such unit. In connection with local improvement bonds payable for special assessments to be levied in such districts, the City may provide a special surplus and deficiency fund. Such fund shall be maintained to provide separate accounting for any surplus or deficiency after the bonds for a district are completely paid. Any surplus may be applied to any other local improvement bonds or may be returned to the general fund when no other improvement bonds are outstanding. In addition, the City Council may provide for additional security by annual tax levied on all taxable property within the City of no more than three (3) mills, or in lieu of such a tax, may annually transfer to such special fund any available money of the City. The City may also pay out of such funds of the general fund the balance of any local improvement bond that had been retired, to the extent of eighty (80) per cent, in order for the remaining bonds to be retired as due. The City shall reimburse itself by collecting any unpaid assessments due in connection with the district. Local improvement bonds, as well as any other securities of the City, may be sold at public or private sale.


Section 8.8 Refunding Securities:

The City may, by ordinance, issue securities for the purpose of refunding outstanding securities as the same mature or in advance of maturity (without impairing them outstanding contractual rights) by means of escrow or otherwise. It shall be the duty of the council to authorize such refunding securities whenever it determines it to the best advantage of the City to do so. Refunding securities are made payable in whole or part from the proceeds of the ad valorem taxes, or if they constitute a pledge of the full faith and credit of the City, the refunding securities shall not be issued unless they are first submitted to a vote in conformity with Section 8.3 hereof, except that no such election shall be necessary as a condition precedent to the issuance of securities to refund general obligations originally issued with voter approval, water securities, sewer securities, or local improvement securities. General obligation refunding securities except water and sewer debts, shall be included in any debt limitation determination made pursuant to Section 8.4, but the securities so refunded shall not be included in such determination.


Section 8.9 Lease Agreement:

The City Council may, by ordinance, without the necessity of a vote of the registered electorate, enter into a rental or leasehold agreement that may provide for payment thereof by general appropriation levy, by imposition of usage fees on such rental of leasehold property, or a combination of both general appropriation levy and imposition of usage fees. The obligation to pay such rental or leasehold cost shall not be construed to be part of this Charter’s limitation on indebtedness.


ARTICLE IX CITY OWNED UTILITIES


Section 9.1 Authority and Powers:

The City shall have an exercise, with regard to City-owned utilities (refer to 11.14J) including water and water rights and acquisition thereof, and bonded indebtedness in connection therewith, all the authority and powers provided by the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Colorado. In addition, the City shall also have power to exchange water rights owned by it for water rights owned by other person, municipalities, or quasi-municipal corporations. The City shall also have the right to contract with such aforementioned persons or entities for the purpose of forming consolidated water or sewer districts, or for furnishing any municipal services, within or without the corporate limits of the City, provided any agreements or contract arising therefrom would clearly benefit the inhabitants of the City.


Section 9.2 Rates and Finances:

The Council shall by ordinance from time to time fix, establish, maintain, and provide for the collection of such rates, fees, or charges for water and electricity, and for water, sewer, electric service, and other utility service furnished by the City, as will produce revenues at least sufficient to pay the cost of operation and maintenance of said utilities in good repair and working order; to pay the principal of and interest on all bonds of the City payable from the revenues of said utilities; to provide and maintain an adequate fund for replacement of depreciated or obsolescent property, and for the extension, improvement, enlargement, and betterment of said utilities; to pay the interest on, and the principal of, any general obligation bonds issued by the City to extend or improve said utilities.

The provisions hereof shall be subject at all times to the performance by the City of all covenants and agreements made by it in connection with the issuance, sale or delivery of any bonds of the City, payable out of the revenues derived from the operation of its water, electric, sewer and other utilities, whether such revenue bonds be heretofore or hereafter issued.


ARTICLE X FRANCHISES


Section 10.1 Present Franchises:

All franchise ordinances of the City in effect at the time that this Charter is adopted shall remain in full force and effect, according to their provisions and terms, until the expiration date provided in such ordinances.


Section 10.2 Franchises Granted upon Vote:

No franchise shall be granted until such time as the Council shall determine, in its discretion, by resolution, the advisability and/or necessity of granting such a franchise, and until the question of whether or not the City should grant a franchise for the purposes approved by council has received an affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon at a special election called for that purpose. In the event the City council shall determine that the granting of such a franchise is neither advisable or necessary, it shall list its reasons for such determination at the request of any person seeking such a franchise. Should Council decide to refer the matter to a special election, said special election shall be held after the deposit by an applicant with the City Clerk and anticipated expenses of holding such an election, which amount shall be determined by the City Clerk. In the event there is more than one applicant for such a franchise, the City Clerk is authorized to collect from each applicant a pro rata share of the anticipated expenses.


Section 10.3 Powers of City Council:

After approval by the qualified electors as called for in Section 10.2, Council shall have full power and authority to determine and negotiate with the applicants the nature and extent of the franchise to be granted covering all areas of the franchise agreement, including but not limited to, the nature and extent of services to be provided, the means by which said services shall be provided, the geographic areas in which such services are to be provided, to approve the rates for such services to be provided by the franchisee, to fix the franchise fee payable to the City of Gunnison for such franchise, to provide for regulation of the franchisee, to determine which applicant, if more than one applicant, shall be awarded the franchise, and such other authority as may be appropriate to carry out the purposes of this Charter. Provided, however, that in no event shall an exclusive franchise ever be granted unless, by reason of the terms and conditions contained therein the granting of such an exclusive franchise will clearly be to the benefit of the inhabitants of the City.


Section 10.4 Extension of Territory:

With respect to any existing franchise, the Council may, by ordinance, extend the area to include streets, alleys, or public places and properties not embraced in such original franchise where public necessity and convenience would require, subject to all the terms and conditions of such original franchise and co-extensive with the terms thereof, without a vote of the qualified electors.


Section 10.5 Term, Compensation, Description:

No franchise, lease, or right to use the streets or public places or property of the City shall be granted for longer than twenty (20) years. Every grant of a franchise shall fix the franchise fees and manner of payment of said fees to be paid by grantee for use of the same, and no other compensation of any kind shall be enacted for such use during the life of the franchise. This provision shall not exempt the grantee from any lawful taxation upon his or its property, nor any license, charge, or other imposition levied by Council, not levied on account of the use granted by the franchise.


Section 10.6 Revocable Licenses:

After public hearing, the Council by ordinance may grant a revocable license to lay sidetracks and switches along or across any public thoroughfare, in accordance with standards and procedures to be adopted by the Council.


Section 10.7 Revocable Permits:

The Council may grant permits for the temporary use or occupation of any street, alley or public place, and establish conditions and compensation to be paid the City therefor.


Section 10.8 Condemnation or Purchases:

The right of the City to construct, purchase, or condemn any public utility, work or way, as provided by law, is expressly reserved.


Section 10.9 Assignments:

Assignment or leasing of a franchise shall be considered a forfeiture unless consent is given by the Council by ordinance.


Section 10.10 Books and Records:

The Council shall cause to be kept in the office of the City Clerk, an indexed franchise record in which shall be transcribed copies of all franchises granted by the City. The record shall be a complete history of all such franchises, and shall include a comprehensive and convenient reference to all actions at law affecting the same and copies of all annual and inspection reports, and such other information as the Council may require.


Section 10.11 Control of Franchise for Use of Water Reserved to City:

No franchise, right, or privilege shall be granted affecting the use of water belonging to the City, or affecting its water systems, without retaining complete and absolute control of the City.


Section 10.12 Common Use of Facilities:

The Council shall have power to require any holder of a franchise from the City, or other public utility, to allow the use of its right-of-way, poles, structures, and wires by any franchise holder, or the City itself, upon payment of a reasonable rental therefor; and the City may, under the terms prescribed by the Council, allow such franchise holders to use rights-of-ways, poles, structures and wires of City-owned utilities.


ARTICLE XI MISCELLANEOUS LEGAL PROVISIONS


Section 11.1 Water Rights in Annexation:

The City shall have power to purchase, or obtain, such existing water rights as may be used upon, or allotted to, any land which is annexed to the City.


Section 11.2 Restriction on Sales of Land and Water Rights:

Neither lands owned and used by the City for park or governmental purposes, nor water rights, shall be sold or conveyed without an affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified tax-paying electors of the City voting thereon, at any special or general election. Nothing in this provision, however, shall prohibit the City from exchanging, or changing point of diversion of water rights without such vote.


Section 11.3 Notice Required on Negligence Action:

No action for the recovery of compensation for personal injury, or death, or property damages against the city on account of its negligence, shall be maintained unless written notice of time, place, and cause of injury is given to the Director of Finance by the person injured, his agent or attorneys, within sixty days, and the action is commenced within two years of the occurrence of the accident causing the injury, or death, or property damage. The notice given under the provisions of this section shall not be deemed invalid or insufficient solely by reason of inaccuracy in stating the time, place, or cause of injury, if it is shown that there was no intention to mislead and that the City was, in fact, not mislead thereby.


Section 11.4 Right of Eminent Domain:

The City shall have the right of eminent domain as provided by the Constitution and the Statutes of the State of Colorado.


Section 11.5 Authority to Levy Taxes:

The Council shall have the power to levy and collect real property taxes. All existing taxes shall remain in force until repealed by ordinance. The Council may levy and collect such other taxes as may be lawful in the State of Colorado, upon approval of a majority vote of the qualified electors. The council may levy and collect assessments for local improvements, penalty assessments, licenses, fees and permits by ordinance.


Section 11.6 Contracts with Other Governmental Units:

The Council may, by resolution or by ordinance, enter into contracts or agreements with other governmental units or special districts for the use of buildings, equipment, or facilities, and for furnishing or receiving commodities or services.


Section 11.7 Bequests, Gifts, and Donations:

The Council, on behalf of the City, may receive bequests, gifts, and donations of all kinds of property in fee simple, or in trust, for public, charitable, or other purposes, and do all things and acts necessary to carry out the purpose of such gifts, bequests, and donations, with the power to manage, sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the terms of the gift, bequest, or trust.


Section 11.8 Purchases:

The Council shall establish by ordinance procedure for entering into contracts for purchases and contract for construction of public works.


Section 11.9 City Not to Pledge Credit:

The City shall not lend or pledge its credit or faith, directly or indirectly, or in any manner to, or in aid of any person, corporation, or other organization, public or private, for any amount or any purpose whatsoever, or become responsible for any debt, contract, or liability thereof.


Section 11.10 Article and Section Headings:

The article and section headings used in this Charter are for convenience only, and shall not be considered as part of this charter.


Section 11.11 Amendments:

This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by the Constitution of the State of Colorado. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions.


Section 11.12 Sundays and Holidays:

Whenever the date fixed by this Charter, or by ordinance, for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act will be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.


Section 11.13 Temporary Zoning:

In all proceedings for the annexation of territory to the City, the Council may determine temporary zoning and establish temporary zoning district or districts for the newly annexed territory at the time of the annexation of any territory to the City. Immediately upon annexation of any territory the Council shall comply with the statutory procedure for permanent zoning.


Section 11.14 Interpretations:

A.    All words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein.

B.    The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the singular, and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter.

C.    The word “person” may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate, and to partnerships, trusts, and associations as well as to individuals.

D.    The word “publication” shall mean publishing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. Only in time of emergency or disaster, or when no such newspaper is available, the requirements for publication may be met by posting such notice in at least one conspicuous place in each voting precinct within the City. Any notice published by posting shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City as soon as such newspaper is again available.

E.    Except in reference to signatures, the words “written” and “in writing” shall include printing, typewritten, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing, or any similar method.

F.    The word “statute” shall denote the laws of the State of Colorado in effect at the time the provision of the Charter containing the word “statute” is to be applied.

G.    The word “City” shall mean the City of Gunnison, Colorado, a municipal corporation.

H.    The term “taxpaying elector” or “qualified taxpaying elector” shall be held to mean and include only those persons who are qualified voters under the registration and election laws of this state and who, in the calendar year last preceding the election at which such vote is offered, shall have paid a tax or be liable for the payment of such tax upon real or personal property assessed to them and owned by them in the city where such vote is offered. The taking or placing of the title to property in the name of another, or the payment of taxes or the taking or issuing of a tax receipt in the name of another, for the purpose of attempting to qualify such person as a “taxpayer” or as a “taxpaying elector” or as a “qualified taxpaying elector” shall be deemed a fraud against the ballot and any ballot cast by such person shall be void.

I.    The words “qualified elector” shall mean a resident of the City who is qualified to vote under the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Colorado.

J.    The term “public utility” or “public utility corporation” when used in this Charter shall mean any person, firm, or corporation operating heat, power or light systems, communication systems, water, sewer or scheduled transportation systems, and serving or supplying the public. It shall not include any person, firm, or corporation owning or operating sidetracks or switches for the accommodation of manufacturing plants and business houses, or private telephone lines, and shall not include City-owned utilities within the corporate boundaries of the City of Gunnison.


ARTICLE XII TRANSITIONAL PERIOD


Section 12.1 Status of Transitional Provisions:

The purpose of this article is to provide for an orderly transition from the present City government to a Home Rule Government under the provisions of this Charter. This article shall constitute a part of this Charter during the transition period.


Section 12.2 Effective Date and Transition Period:

The effective date of this Charter shall be August 1, 1962. During the transition period from August 1, 1962, and the date when the newly elected Council take office on May 20, 1963, following the first election provided for in the Charter (May 14, 1963), the incumbent councilman and Mayor will serve as Councilmen under the provisions of this Charter, carrying on the functions, powers, and duties of their offices, as provided in this Charter.


Section 12.3 Present Council to Continue in Office:

Incumbent Councilmen serving during the transition period will continue at their present salaries, to serve and carry out the functions, powers, and duties of their offices, as provided in this Charter.


Section 12.4 Continuation of Present Boards and Commissions:

All boards and commissions in office at the time of adoption of this Charter shall continue to function with their present powers and duties. The temporary Election Commission required under this Charter shall be appointed within 60 days after adoption of the Charter.


Section 12.5 Continuation of Appointed Officers and Employees:

Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this Charter, all appointive officers and all employees of the City shall continue in that City office or employment, which corresponds to the City office or employment which they held prior to the effective date of the Charter, as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this Charter and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this Charter, except that any officer or employee who holds a position which this Charter provides be held at the pleasure of the appointing officer or body, shall hold such position only at such pleasure regardless of the term for which originally appointed.


Section 12.6 Term of Office Abolished:

The term of any elective office not provided by this Charter is hereby abolished as of August 1, 1962.


Section 12.7 First Election Under the Charter:

The first election under this Charter shall be held Tuesday, May 14, 1963, pursuant to Article II of this Charter. The Councilmen elected at such City election shall take office on Monday, May 20, 1963.


Section 12.8 Retirement Plans:

This Charter shall not affect any contractual relationship existing on the effective date of this Charter between the City and any officer or employee by reason of any retirement and pension plans in effect.

ADOPTED IN CONVENTION, THIS 19TH DAY OF MAY, 1962, AND SIGNED IN TRIPLICATE.

CERTIFICATE OF FINAL ADOPTION:

The undersigned members of the Gunnison Charter Convention, elected under Article XX, Constitution of the State of Colorado, do hereby certify that the foregoing is the Proposed Charter as finally approved and adopted for submission to the people of the City of Gunnison at a special election to be held July 10, 1962.

Copies of this Proposed Charter will be mailed to every resident of the City of Gunnison carried on the rolls of the City Treasurer, as paying monthly costs of lights, power, water and garbage collection.


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.10    City Code

1.20    Corporate Seal


Chapter 1.10 CITY CODE

Sections:

1.10.010    Title.

1.10.020    Acceptance.

1.10.030    Construction of words.

1.10.040    Interpretations.

1.10.050    Code adopted.

1.10.060    Code available for inspection.

1.10.070    Previous enactments not affected.

1.10.080    Code available for sale.


1.10.010 Title.

Upon adoption by the governing body, this city code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of the city of Gunnison. Any reference made to the number of any chapter contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the chapter itself, when reference is made to this city code by title in any legal document. (Code 1997 § 1-1-1).


1.10.020 Acceptance.

This city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect. (Code 1997 § 1-1-2).


1.10.030 Construction of words.

Whenever any word in any section of this city code importing the plural number is used, in describing or referring to any matters, parties, or persons, any single matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.

When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this city code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties, or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any chapter of this city code which contains any express provision excluding such construction where the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto. (Code 1997 § 1-1-3).


1.10.040 Interpretations.

In the determination of the provisions of each chapter of this code the following rules shall be observed:

A.    Intent to Defraud. Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any person.

B.    Liability of Employers and Agents. When the provisions of any chapter of this city code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth. (Code 1997 § 1-1-4).


1.10.050 Code adopted.

Pursuant to part 2 of article 16 of title 31, C.R.S, the “City of Gunnison Municipal Code, 2006” prepared and published under the direction of the city clerk of the city of Gunnison, P.O. Box 239, Gunnison, Colorado 81230, by Code Publishing, Inc., 9410 Roosevelt Way NE, Seattle, WA 98115, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 5-2006 § 1; Ord. 3-1997 § 1).


1.10.060 Code available for inspection.

One copy of such code is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk of the city of Gunnison during regular business hours. (Ord. 5-2006 § 2; Ord. 3-1997 § 2).


1.10.070 Previous enactments not affected.

The “City of Gunnison Municipal Code, 2006” is a codification of existing ordinances of general application within the city of Gunnison, Colorado, effective January 1, 2006, and the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section shall neither repeal nor alter ordinances previously enacted by the city council of the city of Gunnison, whether such ordinances are contained within the “City of Gunnison Municipal Code, 2006” or not. (Ord. 5-2006 § 3; Ord. 3-1997 § 4).


1.10.080 Code available for sale.

The city clerk of the city of Gunnison shall cause to be printed and made available for sale to the public, at a price determined by the city clerk to offset the cost of publishing and printing, the “City of Gunnison Municipal Code, 2006.” (Ord. 5-2006 § 4; Ord. 3-1997 § 5).


Chapter 1.20 CORPORATE SEAL

Sections:

1.20.010    Seal described.

1.20.020    Facsimile.


1.20.010 Seal described.

A seal, the impression of which is as follows: in the center the words “City Seal,” and around the outer edge the words, “City of Gunnison, Colorado, Incorporated February 28, 1880,” shall be and is hereby declared to be the seal of the city. (Code 1997 § 1-2-1).


1.20.020 Facsimile.

(Code 1997 § 1-2-2).


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND OPERATIONS

Chapters:

2.10    Council and Mayor Compensation

2.20    Purchasing Policy and Procedure

2.30    Board of Health

2.40    Police Department

2.50    Fire Department

2.60    Zoning Board of Adjustments and Appeals

2.70    Planning and Zoning Commission

2.80    Building Board of Appeals

2.90    Elections

2.100    Disposition of City-Owned Property


Chapter 2.10 COUNCIL AND MAYOR COMPENSATION

Sections:

2.10.010    Council and mayor compensation.


2.10.010 Council and mayor compensation.

Each councilmember of the city shall receive a salary of $500.00 per month, except the mayor, whose salary shall be $600.00 per month, all such salaries to be paid out of the general fund of said city as budgeted, appropriated, and directed by the city council. (Ord. 5-2005 § 1; Ord. 2-1997 § 2; Code 1997 § 2-1-1).


Chapter 2.20 PURCHASING POLICY AND PROCEDURE

Sections:

2.20.010    Definitions.

2.20.020    Policy objectives.

2.20.030    Roles and responsibilities.

2.20.040    Summary of purchasing thresholds.

2.20.050    Approval authority.

2.20.060    Petty cash.

2.20.070    Payment requests.

2.20.080    Purchasing cards.

2.20.090    Competitive bidding.

2.20.100    Formal/informal bid exceptions.

2.20.110    Cooperative purchasing.

2.20.120    Local preference.

2.20.130    Change orders.

2.20.140    Contract terms/city attorney review.

2.20.150    Independent contractor policy.

2.20.160    Professional services.

2.20.170    Authority to debar or suspend.

2.20.180    Miscellaneous purchasing provisions.

2.20.190    Emergency procurement.

2.20.200    Audit procedures.

2.20.210    Ethical responsibilities.


2.20.010 Definitions.

A.    “Change order” means work that is added to or deleted from the original scope of work of a contract; however, depending on the magnitude of the change, it may or may not alter the original contract amount and/or completion date.

B.    “Cooperative purchasing” involves sharing procurement contracts between governments. Cooperative procurement contracts are usually based on the common requirements of multiple governments. There are several types of cooperative purchasing arrangements, but the type the city will use the majority of the time will be so-called “piggyback options.” These occur when one or more organizations represent their requirements and include an option for other organizations to “ride” or “bridge” the contract as awarded.

C.    “Emergency conditions” means situations in which the health, welfare, and/or safety of employees or the public are endangered. This includes those instances when immediate repair to city property, equipment, or vehicles is necessary under the circumstances mentioned above.

D.    “Invitation for bid (IFB)” means a “formal” bid that may require advertising, bonds, and sealed bids. The department head or designee is responsible for the bid package and vendor eligibility. The specifications, delivery requirements, plans, drawings, and other items must be determined and finalized prior to the bid package being provided. Eligibility may be determined from a prequalification process, general advertising of project, or any other method deemed appropriate.

E.    “Liquidated damages” is a contractual clause where the city can collect as compensation upon a specific breach (e.g., late performance).

F.    “Payment bond” is a type of bond that covers a percentage of the contract amount. A claim on a performance bond can be used to perform unfinished work or defective work on a project.

G.    “Petty cash fund administrator” is the employee responsible for administering a petty cash fund.

H.    “Performance bond” is a type of bond designed to provide security to subcontractors and materials suppliers to ensure payment for their work, labor and/or materials on the project.

I.    “Public works project” is a contract of the city for the construction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of any building, structure, highway, bridge, viaduct, pipeline, public works, real property as defined in Section 24-30-1301(15), C.R.S., or any other work dealing with construction, which includes, but need not be limited to, moving, demolition or excavation performed in conjunction with such work.

J.    “Professional services” are services within the scope of the practice of architecture, consulting, engineering, professional land surveying, legal counsel, financial advisers, banks, or other service type industry.

K.    “Request for proposal (RFP)” is a process used to acquire supplies and services that involves the review of written proposals and the use of negotiations with the most qualified bidder(s). This process may also include the use of a request for qualifications (RFQ) as a preliminary step to the RFP process in an attempt to gather information and prequalify prospective bidders.

L.    “Request for qualification (RFQ)” is a process used to identify qualified providers of specified services to be used in the RFP process.

M.    “Requesting department” mean the department asking to purchase goods or services to be used for city business.

N.    “Retainage” means a portion of the agreed upon contract price deliberately withheld until the work is substantially complete to assure that contractor or subcontractor will satisfy its obligations and complete a construction project. Once work is deemed satisfactory, the retainage is released.

O.    “Sole source purchase” is procurement of goods or services that can only be obtained from a single supplier capable of meeting all specifications and purchase requirements or when it is in the city’s best interests.

P.    “Voucher” is a source document that serves as evidence of some expenditure of the city of Gunnison with appropriate authorization, and substantiates issuance of an accounts payable check or an electronic funds transfer. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.020 Policy objectives.

The purpose of this purchasing policy is to establish standards for all purchasing activity and procurement procedures. The objectives of the policy are to:

A.    Provide for the fair and impartial treatment of persons involved in public purchasing by the city of Gunnison.

B.    Procure goods and services at the lowest possible cost with the quality needed for effective use.

C.    Minimize or eliminate disruptions in operations resulting from the lack of material, equipment, or supplies.

D.    Avoid duplication, waste, and obsolescence with respect to the procurement of goods and services.

E.    Provide appropriate budgetary and fiscal control over all municipal expenditures.

F.    Comply with the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended and as applicable.

G.    Provide a uniform procedure for the purchase of materials, equipment, and services.

H.    Purchase goods and services from local vendors, using local preference as stated in GMC 2.20.120, when their goods and services are economically competitive and their quality is comparable to other goods and services.

I.    Require all vendors and other suppliers to fulfill all terms and conditions of contracts and other purchasing agreements.

J.    Secure all applicable federal and state tax exemptions appropriate to purchases or contracts for services.

K.    Assure applicability to all city departments, including elected offices. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.030 Roles and responsibilities.

A.    Purchases are initiated by the various departments of the city. Their primary responsibilities include the following:

1.    Ensure all employees involved in the procurement process are familiar with purchasing policies and procedures.

2.    Anticipate purchasing requirements.

3.    Ensure adequate funds are available for purchases of goods and services and are specifically included in the budget.

4.    Provide all contracts, agreements, and legal instruments to the city clerk’s office as official custodian.

5.    Take appropriate steps to ensure goods and services are purchased from qualified vendors in an efficient and effective manner.

6.    Obtain appropriate approvals throughout the purchasing process, with adequate supporting documentation, and ensure the appropriate budget line item is charged in the accounting system.

7.    Ensure materials received and the quality of work or services rendered meet the purchasing/contract terms before approving payment.

8.    Strive to maintain good relations with the city’s vendors.

B.    The finance department is responsible for administration of the purchasing policy. Its primary responsibilities include the following:

1.    Maintain the city’s accounting system to ensure spending authorization limits pursuant to the approved budget and approval paths are current.

2.    Implement procedures to help ensure city staff complies with this purchasing policy.

3.    Issue checks to vendors in a timely manner and maintain accounts payable records.

4.    Prescribe and maintain such forms as the finance director shall find reasonable and necessary to implement and support the purchasing procedures contained within this policy. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.040 Summary of purchasing thresholds.

The minimum thresholds as referenced in this purchasing policy are identified below. The city manager or department directors have the discretion to include more stringent thresholds on a case-by-case basis. Thresholds are subject to other provisions and exceptions as enumerated in the applicable subsequent sections of the purchasing policy.

A.    Signature Authority for Purchases Included in the Budget.

	Department Director	$0 – $25,000

	City Manager	$25,001 – $50,000

	City Council	Greater than $50,000

B.    City Attorney Review.

	City Standard Contract Form	$0 – $25,000

	Specific City Review	Greater than $25,000

C.    Competitive Bidding.

	Buyer’s Best Judgment	$0 – $5,000

	Informal Purchase	$5,001 – $25,000

	Formal Purchase	Greater than $25,000

D.    Bid Bond for Public Works Contracts.

	5% of the estimated project cost	$100,000 – $500,000

	10% of the estimated project cost	Greater than $500,000

E.    Performance Bond for Public Works Contracts.

	50% of the contract amount	Greater than $50,000

F.    Payment Bond for Public Works Contracts.

	50% of the contract amount	Greater than $50,000

G.    Retainage for Public Works Contracts.

	5% of the contract amount	Greater than $150,000

H.    Local Preference.

	10% of the bid amount	$0 – $250,000

	3% of the bid amount	Greater than $250,000

I.    Sole Source Approval.

	Finance Director	$0 – $25,000

	City Manager	Greater than $25,000

(Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.050 Approval authority.

A.    Approval authority is granted on an individual basis. The various approval thresholds related to this policy are identified in GMC 2.20.040.

B.    The finance department shall keep a current list of designated staff authorized to approve city expenditures. The list shall include the full signature and initials of each authorized individual and the authorization level granted to that individual along with the authorized employee delegating authorization where applicable. It is each department’s responsibility to update these signatures when staff changes occur. No purchase shall be divided to circumvent the above approval levels.

C.    Directors may request additional approval levels less than those in the table above to reflect intradepartmental procedures, but such requests are subject to approval by the finance director and will be implemented only to the extent the city’s purchasing system is able to support any such requests.

D.    When a director is out of the office, he/she may designate a staff member to approve vouchers/invoices in their absence up to the level of the director’s approval authority. Such designation shall be in writing (or via email) and provided to the finance director.

E.    Members of the city council and advisory boards and commissions are required to comply with the terms of this policy and may not commit city funds except as provided for by this policy or by formal action of the city council. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.060 Petty cash.

With the exception of the petty cash fund in the finance department, a petty cash fund may not be used to pay for purchases. Petty cash funds within other departments may only be used to make change for customer transactions.

A.    General controls for petty cash funds are as follows:

1.    New petty cash funds, or changes to amounts of existing funds, must be approved by the finance director.

2.    Petty cash must be kept in a locked box in a secure location.

3.    The petty cash fund administrator(s) is responsible for ensuring that the cash on hand equals the total authorized amount.

4.    The finance department or external auditors are authorized to verify that the cash on hand equals the total authorized amount at any time.

B.    The process for a purchase using the finance department petty cash fund is as follows:

1.    Complete a petty cash request form, obtaining required approvals, in order to receive the amount needed for the purchase for an amount not exceeding $40.00. Multiple requests/purchases may not be utilized to circumvent the $40.00 limit. The finance director must approve amounts greater than $40.00.

2.    Attach the invoice/receipt to the petty cash request form. The employee making the purchase is responsible for any shortfall when returning unused funds.

3.    The finance department shall issue a check to replenish the petty cash fund. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.070 Payment requests.

A.    Payment requests must be submitted on accounts payable vouchers as established by the finance director and include general ledger account coding and appropriate approvals based on the thresholds in GMC 2.20.040. Other requirements for payment requests are as follows:

1.    The voucher must include supporting documentation, which includes at least one of the following items:

a.    Vendor invoice.

b.    Itemized receipt.

c.    Copy of approved city council meeting minutes with a motion to make payment to a vendor.

d.    Properly executed contract or agreement that dictates payment to a vendor.

e.    Travel expense form.

2.    If documentation needs to be included with the check to be sent to the payee, copy and attach the documents to the voucher for finance to send to the vendor after the check is issued. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.080 Purchasing cards.

The city has issued purchasing cards to certain staff. Policy and procedures for use of these cards are addressed in a separate policy. All applicable portions of this purchasing policy apply to use of city purchasing cards. Split purchases with credit cards are not permitted if they are made to circumvent this policy. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.090 Competitive bidding.

Competitive bids are required according to the thresholds identified in GMC 2.20.040. Depending on the nature of the product or service, bids are not necessarily awarded to the lowest bidder. For those situations where the low bid is not accepted, the basis for the award should be documented in writing and included in the documentation submitted with the voucher. Exceptions to the requirement for competitive bidding are prescribed in GMC 2.20.100 and 2.20.110.

A.    Bidder’s List. Departments are encouraged, but not required, to maintain bidder’s lists. All formal bids shall be advertised on the city’s website, and vendors should be encouraged to subscribe to the notification service provided on the site. Public notice may also include publication in the city’s legal newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation.

B.    Types of Bids.

1.    Informal Purchase. A minimum of three informal written bids conforming to bid specifications shall be solicited prior to the purchase of any goods or entering into a contract for services. An informal written bid shall be a firm written price or quote for specific goods or services, which is valid for no less than 30 days. There is no requirement for notice.

2.    Formal Purchase. Formal invitation for bid (IFB) or request for proposals (RFP) shall be required. Request for bids shall be advertised in a newspaper of legal record and the city’s website a minimum of 10 days prior to the date set forth for bid opening. All solicitations requiring contracts, bonds or insurance according to GMC 2.20.140 shall be reviewed by the city attorney.

C.    Bid Evaluation. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the bid package, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total for life cycle costs. The bid package sets forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that is not set forth in the bid package.

D.    Bid Security. Bid security in accordance with the thresholds in GMC 2.20.040 shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for public works contracts. Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, or the equivalent in certified funds, or otherwise supplied in a form satisfactory to the city. When the invitation for bid requires security, noncompliance requires that the bid be rejected.

E.    Colorado Labor. Contractors who are working under a public works contract exceeding $50,000 must meet the 80 percent Colorado labor requirements, unless waived by the city council pursuant to the Colorado Revised Statutes.

F.    Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the bid package, unless the city manager or his designee shall determine that the public interest will be better served by accepting a different bid. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a complete statement of the reasons for placing the order with another bidder shall be made available to all bidders upon request.

G.    Cancellation of Invitation for Bids. An invitation for bids or any other solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is in the best interests of the city. The reasons therefor shall be put in writing and made part of the contract file. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.100 Formal/informal bid exceptions.

A.    Governmental Purchases. Purchases from federal, state or other local government units and purchases made through other governmental entities as may be authorized by ordinance or statute.

B.    Equipment and Compatibility. Equipment repairs and purchases where use of any other than specific vendors would result in incompatible component parts or would otherwise disrupt or impair services being provided.

C.    Single Vendor Availability. Sole source purchases may be made if it has been determined that there is only one good or service that can reasonably meet the need and there is only one vendor who can provide the good or service and is in the best interest of the city. If the requesting department believes use of a sole source provider is appropriate, documentation supporting this decision should be included with the voucher and approved by the department director. Sole source purchases must be approved according to the thresholds in GMC 2.20.040. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.110 Cooperative purchasing.

A.    City staff may use state of Colorado bids (solicited through the Bid Information and Distribution System), bids from the Multiple Assembly of Procurement Officials (MAPO), the General Services Administration (GSA) or Sourcewell (formerly National Joint Power Alliance) to get the benefit of the pricing available through those procurement systems. Similar organizations may be added to the above list with the approval of the finance director. While exempt from the formal bid process, these purchases are subject to the normal approval process. Depending on the nature of the product or service, bids are not necessarily awarded to the lowest cost vendor.

B.    Cooperative purchasing may also include bidding with other governmental entities to purchase in quantities. This practice may sometimes be beneficial for all entities involved as it may result in lower per-unit costs, while still assuring bid requirements are met. When cooperative bidding is done, each entity shall supply its own requirements; however, one entity shall be chosen to administer the bid process. Bid awards are to be determined either on an individual basis or as a total, whichever is the most cost-effective to all bidders. Depending on the nature of the product or service, bids are not necessarily awarded to the lowest cost bidder.

C.    In accordance with Section 11.6 of the City of Gunnison Municipal Home Rule Charter, the council may, by resolution or by ordinance, enter into contracts or agreements with other governmental units or special districts for the use of buildings, equipment, or facilities, and for furnishing or receiving commodities or services. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.120 Local preference.

It is the intention of the city of Gunnison whenever possible to use, without significant additional cost to the taxpayers, local businesses for the purchase of goods and supplies and all general services. The city intends to give local businesses an advantage in the bidding process according to the thresholds outlined in GMC 2.20.040 so that funds received from such contracts will be spent by the employees of local businesses in the local economy. For the purposes of this policy, a “local business” shall be defined as any business located or based in Gunnison County. A local business shall be awarded a contract if its bid is within the local preference percentage of the lowest responsible bidder who does not have the local business designation. In the event that the two lowest responsible bidders each have a local business designation, the lowest responsible bidder shall be awarded the contract. The provisions of the local preference shall be suspended if prohibited by an external source including, but not limited to, grantors, creditors, contractual agreements, or force of law. The provisions for local preference apply to consideration of cost only. Bids that include other requirements regarding product specifications, vendor qualifications, or other criteria based on the nature of the product or service may not necessarily be awarded to the lowest cost bidder. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.130 Change orders.

If a change order increases the dollar amount of the purchase above the approval level of the approver of the purchase, additional approval will be required based on the thresholds in GMC 2.20.040. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.140 Contract terms/city attorney review.

A.    Term. All service contracts must specifically state the term of the contract and the options for renewing the contract (if applicable) beyond the original term. In no case shall any service contract have an indefinite term. Generally, contracts should begin and end within the current fiscal year where practical. It must also be expressly stated in any multiyear service contract – which is any contract with a term extending beyond the current fiscal year – that all financial obligations of the city beyond the current fiscal year are subject to annual appropriation.

B.    Insurance. Contract documents must require the contractor to procure and maintain minimum insurance coverage at the direction of or as prescribed by standard contract forms by the city attorney.

C.    Performance Bond. A performance bond, satisfactory to the city and in accordance with the thresholds in GMC 2.20.040, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, shall be delivered to the city and shall become binding on the parties upon execution of public works contracts.

D.    Payment Bond. A payment bond, satisfactory to the city and in accordance with the thresholds in GMC 2.20.040, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, shall be delivered to the city for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the work provided for in public works contracts.

E.    Retainage. The contract shall include provisions for retainage of contract sums as prescribed by state law, and may include provisions for retainage in contracts not covered by state law.

F.    Liquidated Damages. The city may, by contract, require the contractor to waive, release, or extinguish its rights to recover costs or damages, or obtain an equitable adjustment, for delays in performing such contract if such delay is caused, in whole or in part, by the acts or omissions of the city or its agents, if the contract provides that an extension of time for completion of the work is the contractor’s remedy for such delay. Such clause is valid and enforceable, any provision of state law to the contrary notwithstanding.

G.    Final Payment. The city may include provisions to withhold the final payment until at least 10 days after notice of intention to pay is published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and after the city has received a release of statements of claim or liens. Other similar provisions may be included such as a requirement to provide a list of subcontractors, an affidavit attesting that all subcontractors have been paid and/or have each subcontractor provide a release of statements of claim or liens. Proof of publication should be submitted to the finance department. Claims against the contract shall be filed as prescribed by state law.

H.    Review. Contracts are to be reviewed by the city attorney based on the thresholds in GMC 2.20.040. Generally, all contracts/agreements should use the city’s standard form. Exceptions can only be approved by the city attorney or city manager.

I.    Signature Authority. Directors and the city manager may execute contracts with contractual commitments up to their approval authority as presented in GMC 2.20.040. All other contracts are to be approved by the city council. The city council may delegate signature authority to the city manager for specific contracts or contractual commitments. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.150 Independent contractor policy.

The city’s finance director or designee shall make the determination whether an individual is an independent contractor, as compared to an employee, and shall approve any contract arrangements.

The rules for determining whether an individual is or is not an independent contractor are complex. The determination needs to be made on a case-by-case basis as required by governing law. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.160 Professional services.

Professional services include architectural, engineering, financial, legal, consulting or other similar services. Requests for proposal, requests for qualifications or a similar process are typically used to solicit professional services. Evaluation of responses to such requests should consider whether the bidder:

A.    Possesses adequate technical and financial resources to perform the project or services or the ability to obtain the resources required for performance;

B.    Possesses necessary experience, organizational and technical skills in the relevant fields or the ability to obtain them, including without limitation arrangements with subcontractors;

C.    Proposes a reasonable approach to achieve the project or service objectives in an acceptable time frame;

D.    Has a satisfactory record of performance in developing and implementing similar projects or providing similar services in other jurisdictions; and

E.    Will perform the project or services at a reasonable cost compared with the level of effort expended.

Written justification for the service provider selected shall be attached to the voucher.

Approval of professional services is subject to the same approval thresholds and processes as any other expenditure. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.170 Authority to debar or suspend.

After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the city manager or designee, after the approval of the city council, is authorized to debar a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall be for a period of not more than three years. After the approval of the city council, the city manager is authorized to suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause to believe that the person has engaged in any activity which might lead to debarment. The suspension shall be for a period not to exceed three months. The causes for disbarment include:

A.    Conviction or commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract or in the performance of such contract or subcontract;

B.    Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects responsibility as a city contractor;

C.    Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals;

D.    Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by city manager to be so serious as to justify debarment action;

1.    Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract;

2.    A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; provided, that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment.

E.    After approval of a debarment or suspension by city council, the city manager shall issue a written order to debar or suspend which order shall be immediately mailed, by first class mail, or personally delivered to the debarred or suspended person. The order shall state the reasons for the action taken. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.180 Miscellaneous purchasing provisions.

A.    Computer Hardware/Software/Printers. All such purchases shall be made through or in coordination with the information technology department.

B.    Exempt Items. Certain expenditures are not subject to this policy. Such exempt items include debt service, payroll related disbursements and investment transactions.

C.    Gift Cards/Certificates. Any gift cards/certificates purchased for an employee of the city are taxable through payroll and must be preapproved by the city manager or finance director in writing. A listing of employees receiving gift cards must be submitted to payroll for processing.

D.    Personal Purchases. No personal purchases may be made using city funds, even with employee reimbursement.

E.    Professional Dues and Licenses. Professional dues, licenses, and memberships to associations and organizations that benefit the city will be paid from city funds but shall be the responsibility of the employee to obtain and maintain. Examples would include, but are not limited to: professional engineer license, water/wastewater treatment operator’s licenses, professional certifications, etc.

F.    Sales Tax. Sales tax is not to be charged on any purchase by the city within the state of Colorado. The city’s tax-exempt number is 98-06327000 and should be given to the vendor before the sale is completed. A copy of the city’s tax-exempt certificate is available from finance. Some types of purchases may be exempted from this provision at the discretion of the city manager or finance director. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.190 Emergency procurement.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this policy, the city manager or designee may make or authorize others to make emergency procurement when there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety under emergency conditions. The required purchasing procedures stipulated in other areas of this policy may be waived for emergency purchases where necessary. A written determination of the basis for emergency and for the purchase or selection of the particular vendor or contractor shall be included with the purchase documentation. A summary of all emergency purchases shall be submitted for review by the city council at the earliest council meeting possible if in excess of $25,000. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.200 Audit procedures.

Periodically, finance staff will review samples of check requests, new vendor requests and remittance address changes to ensure that city staff are complying with policy. Errors/violations of policy will be communicated to the finance director and department directors, as appropriate, in addition to communicating with the responsible staff. Additional training will be provided or other appropriate actions taken as required. (Ord. 9-2018).


2.20.210 Ethical responsibilities.

All city personnel are obligated to establish and maintain ethical relationships with all vendors or suppliers of city goods and services. The following are examples of unacceptable city employee relationships with vendors or suppliers. The list is not intended to be all-inclusive. City employees must also consider the appearance of fairness and propriety in their relationships with city vendors or suppliers.

A.    Seeking or accepting directly from any persons, partnerships, corporations, or other business entities or representatives which are doing or seeking to do business with the city of Gunnison services, cash or loans, vacations or pleasure trips, or any gifts exceeding the value of $50.00.

B.    Knowingly over- or underestimating the requirements of this policy and/or bids or failing to disclose the existing requirements in order to avoid doing business with a particular vendor or supplier.

C.    Misrepresenting competitors’ prices, quality, or services in order to obtain concessions from vendors or suppliers.

D.    Having personal investments in any business entity which will create a substantial conflict between private interests and public duties when the city of Gunnison employee is involved in making a particular purchasing decision.

Inexpensive advertising items bearing the name of a vendor (i.e., pens, pencils, paper weights, cups, caps, candy, calendars, etc.) are not considered articles of value or gifts in relation to this policy. (Ord. 9-2018).


Chapter 2.30 BOARD OF HEALTH

Sections:

2.30.010    Board created.

2.30.020    Health officer designated.

2.30.030    Health officer – Duties.

2.30.040    Deputy health officer.


2.30.010 Board created.

The council shall constitute the board of health of the city. (Code 1997 § 2-3-1).


2.30.020 Health officer designated.

The council shall appoint one physician to be and act as health officer of this city, and to hold such office during its pleasure. The health officer shall be the executive officer of the board of health. (Code 1997 § 2-3-2).


2.30.030 Health officer – Duties.

It shall be the duty of the health officer to exercise a strict supervision over the sanitary conditions of the city, to report to the council all nuisances as elsewhere provided in this code, and to report the spread of prevalence of any contagious or infectious disease, or other matters that may be or become detrimental to the public health. (Code 1997 § 2-3-3).


2.30.040 Deputy health officer.

The health officer of this city hereby is authorized and empowered to appoint one or more, but in any event no more than two, deputies to hold their offices during the pleasure of said health officer. Such appointment or appointments shall be made only with the consent of the board of health. Only the health officer shall exercise supervisory powers entrusted to him by this chapter over sanitary conditions of the city; and, toward that end, action at law or in equity to abate or cause to be abated such nuisances as elsewhere provided in this code shall be brought only upon the relation of said health officer. However, any deputy of said health officer hereby is empowered to direct by appropriate administrative order, in the name of said health officer, the abatement of such nuisances or the doing of anything reasonably necessary to cause an abatement thereof; and any such deputy also is empowered hereby to report to the council all nuisances, and to report the spread or prevalence of any contagious or infectious disease, or other matters that may be or become detrimental to the public health, and to the conduct investigations and make inquiries appropriate to those ends. (Code 1997 § 2-3-4).


Chapter 2.40 POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.40.010    Department created.


2.40.010 Department created.

There shall be and hereby is established a police department for the city, which shall consist of a chief of police and other employees as shall be authorized. (Code 1997 § 2-4-1).


Chapter 2.50 FIRE DEPARTMENT

Sections:

2.50.010    Department created.

2.50.020    Membership.

2.50.030    Suspension – Discharge.

2.50.040    Chief – Appointment – Removal.

2.50.050    Chief – Power and duties.

2.50.060    Records – Reports.

2.50.070    Elected officers.

2.50.080    Equipment.

2.50.090    Outside corporate limits.

2.50.100    By-laws.

2.50.110    Duties of light and water department at fires.


2.50.010 Department created.

There is hereby established the fire department of the city, which shall consist of a chief, two assistant chiefs, secretary, treasurer, and such other firefighters as may be admitted to membership as hereinafter provided. (Code 1997 § 2-5-1).


2.50.020 Membership.

The membership of the department shall include all those individuals presently members of the Gunnison Volunteer Fire Department, and such other persons as may be elected from time to time by a majority of the membership. Members must be residents of the County of Gunnison, readily available to fight fires within said city, and must satisfactorily meet the physical requirements prescribed by the chief. Each member shall be issued a badge and proper identification. (Code 1997 § 2-5-2).


2.50.030 Suspension – Discharge.

Any member may be suspended or discharged by the chief. Upon written request of any suspended or discharged member, mailed by registered mail to the chief within 10 days of any such suspension or discharge, a hearing shall be afforded such member before a board established pursuant to the by-laws of said department, and said board shall have the power to review the action taken by the chief and to affirm or reverse any suspension or discharge. (Code 1997 § 2-5-3).


2.50.040 Chief – Appointment – Removal.

The chief shall be appointed from the membership of the department by the city manager, upon recommendation of a majority of the members of the department, for an indefinite period. (Code 1997 § 2-5-4).


2.50.050 Chief – Power and duties.

The chief shall be responsible for the organization and proper administration of the department, the enforcement of all provisions of this chapter, the investigation and causes of fire, the care and maintenance of all equipment of the department, the conduct of a fire prevention and inspection program, and the training and instruction of the members. He shall have control and command of all members of the department and of all persons present at fires, insofar as necessary and incidental to the proper performance of his duties, and to that end he is hereby empowered to exercise the powers of a police officer. (Code 1997 § 2-5-5).


2.50.060 Records – Reports.

The chief shall be directly responsible to the city manager and shall make such reports and keep such records as may be required by the said city manager. (Code 1997 § 2-5-6).


2.50.070 Elected officers.

The two assistant chiefs, secretary, and treasurer shall be elected by a majority of the membership of the department and are directly responsible only to the chief. (Code 1997 § 2-5-7).


2.50.080 Equipment.

The city shall furnish the prevention, suppression, and notification equipment necessary to properly afford fire protection to the residents of this city. The purchase of all equipment shall be purchased according to the purchasing policy. (Code 1997 § 2-5-8).


2.50.090 Outside corporate limits.

No equipment of the department shall be used outside the corporate limits of the city, except upon permission of the chief or other officer in charge being first, and in all cases, only when such use will not jeopardize the interests of the city. (Code 1997 § 2-5-9).


2.50.100 By-laws.

The members of the department, by a majority vote thereof, may make and adopt by-laws for the organization and management thereof, provided they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and are first approved by the city council. (Code 1997 § 2-5-10).


2.50.110 Duties of light and water department at fires.

It shall be the duty of officers and representatives of the light and water service to work in conjunction with the fire chief and members of the fire department in case of a fire, and the officers and representatives of the light and water service may enter within any line established by the fire chief around burning structures for the purpose of disconnecting electric wiring or performing other necessary service connected with the department. (Code 1997 § 2-5-11).


Chapter 2.60 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS

Sections:

2.60.010    Board of adjustment.

*    Charter reference: City of Gunnison Home Rule Charter, Section 3.19, Planning and Zoning Commission.


2.60.010 Board of adjustment.

The Zoning Board of Adjustment and Appeals, created by the City Home Rule Charter and adopted July 10, 1962, shall hear and act upon those cases involving variances, hardship, and conditional use of land according to GMC Title 15. (Code 1997 § 2-6-1).


Chapter 2.70 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION*

Sections:

2.70.010    Commission established – Members.

*    Charter reference: City of Gunnison Home Rule Charter, Section 3.18, Zoning Board of Adjustments and Appeals.


2.70.010 Commission established – Members.

There is created and established hereby a planning and zoning commission consisting of seven members to be appointed by the council and who shall have overlapping five-year terms. The members shall be citizens-at-large and shall have been residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the time of their appointment, and they shall hold no other office or position in the city administration. The city manager, or his designee, shall meet with the commission in an advisory capacity. The planning and zoning commission shall be responsible for preparing a master plan for the city of Gunnison and keeping said plan updated in accordance with the statutes of the state of Colorado. (Ord. 4-2018; Code 1997 § 2-7-1).


Chapter 2.80 BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS

Sections:

2.80.010    Board created.

2.80.020    Rules and regulations.

2.80.030    Rate of compensation established.

2.80.040    Investigation and notification.

2.80.050    Right to appeal.


2.80.010 Board created.

The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members, to be appointed by the City Council, who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction. They shall determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and provide for reasonable interpretation of the provisions of the building code. The building official shall be an ex-officio member, and shall act as secretary of the board. (Code 1997 § 2-8-1).


2.80.020 Rules and regulations.

The board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the building official with a duplicate copy to the appellant and may recommend to the council such new legislation as is consistent therewith. (Code 1997 § 2-8-2).


2.80.030 Rate of compensation established.

Each and every member, excepting elective officials, of the following agencies of the City of Gunnison, namely, the Zoning Board of Adjustments and Appeals, the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Building Board of Appeals, shall be compensated at a rate of $50.00 for each and every meeting of the board or commission which the member attends. (Ord. 5-2005 § 2; Ord. 10-2000 § 2; Code 1997 § 2-8-3).


2.80.040 Investigation and notification.

The building official charged with enforcement of the city building codes set forth in GMC Title 14 shall send written notification to any property owner found to be in violation of such codes. Notification shall identify the methods, actions, procedures, or materials which are deemed to be in violation of such codes. Each notice shall specifically state the applicable code section which has been violated. If danger to property or persons is imminent, the building official may order that the danger be removed or the building official may take such steps as necessary to alleviate said danger. (Code 1997 § 2-8-4).


2.80.050 Right to appeal.

Any person deemed to be in violation of any of the provisions of the codes included in GMC Title 14 shall have the right to appeal such order or determination of the building official concerning interpretation of these codes. A written appeal must be submitted to the building department within five days of receipt of written notification of said violation. A meeting of the Building Board of Appeals shall be called to render a decision on such appeal within 30 days of receipt. The appellant, or his representative, may be present at said meeting.

If the Building Board of Appeals finds that the appellant is not in violation of said code, all stop work orders and other correction orders pertaining to the appeal shall become null and void.

If the appellant is found to be in violation of the pertinent codes, the appellant shall take such action as is necessary to correct the violation. In the event that the responsible party fails and refuses to make the proper corrections, all stop work orders and other correction orders shall remain in effect and the building official shall take whatever action is necessary to abate said violation. (Code 1997 § 2-8-5).


Chapter 2.90 ELECTIONS

Sections:

2.90.010    Write-in candidate affidavit.


2.90.010 Write-in candidate affidavit.

A.    The city of Gunnison hereby adopts the provisions of Section 31-10-306, C.R.S., and ordains that no write-in vote for any municipal office shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the clerk by the person whose name is written in prior to 64 days before the day of the election indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected. 

B.    The city of Gunnison adopts the provisions of Section 31-10-306, C.R.S., as such may be amended. (Ord. 3-2017 §§ 1, 2).


Chapter 2.100 DISPOSITION OF CITY-OWNED PROPERTY

Sections:

2.100.010    Purpose.

2.100.020    Guiding principles.

2.100.030    Definitions.

2.100.040    Procedure for disposition of city-owned real property.

2.100.050    When an election is required.


2.100.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish a uniform procedure for the disposition by the city council of city-owned real property. (Ord. 10-2018 § 1).


2.100.020 Guiding principles.

A.    To encourage sale, conveyance, and development of real property in a manner beneficial to the residents of the city;

B.    To allow for development of opportunities for improvements to city structures and facilities;

C.    To encourage development that will maximize the public investment in existing and future capital improvements and infrastructure development;

D.    To provide additional opportunities and options in the development of public-private partnerships and public-public partnerships, particularly, but without limitation, where collaboration between two entities or organizations may improve the capacity and effectiveness of one party to provide public services, infrastructure development, transportation options, etc.;

E.    To allow for flexibility and creativity in the development of real property within the city. (Ord. 10-2018 § 2).


2.100.030 Definitions.

A.    “Dedicated” shall mean any real property conveyed to the city by grant, deed, trust, or other means, that contains a specific use within the conveyance documents as a condition of ownership of the property.

B.    “Used or held for a governmental purpose” shall mean any real property that at the time of consideration for sale or disposition is being used to provide governmental services or functions, or is an existing and maintained park within the city. (Ord. 10-2018 § 3).


2.100.040 Procedure for disposition of city-owned real property.

A.    Property Not Dedicated to or Used for Governmental Purpose. The city council has authority to determine whether it is in the best interest of the city to sell or otherwise convey or dispose of city-owned real property that is not dedicated to or currently used or held for a specific governmental purpose. Council may determine the appropriate terms thereof according to the following considerations:

1.    The significance of the positive economic impact on the city, including, but not limited to, housing, the number of jobs, average salary, benefits, etc.;

2.    The potential of the development for providing quality housing, employment or community enrichment opportunities;

3.    The potential for the city to improve city structures and facilities;

4.    The monetary value of the land, as well as the monetary value of the proposed development upon completion;

5.    The request for and value of economic development incentives by a potential developer;

6.    The potential to expand the tax base for the city;

7.    Additional criteria the city council may wish to consider in making its determination.

    The city manager may develop site-specific recommendations to the city council for the sale or disposition of such real property pursuant to this section.

B.    Public Input Required. Prior to authorizing the sale or other disposition of a specific property under this section, the council shall hold at least one public hearing to allow for citizen input.

Should council determine that the sale or disposition of a particular property could have impacts upon adjoining property owners such that the opportunity for public input and comment beyond a public hearing before the council is desired, council may direct the planning commission to hold a public hearing with notice to adjacent property owners. Following the public hearing, the planning commission may make recommendations to the council regarding the proposed disposition and intended use(s) for the real property. (Ord. 10-2018 § 4).


2.100.050 When an election is required. 

Any property dedicated, used or held for a park or governmental purpose as defined above shall be subject to prior approval through a regular or special election. The council may also order an election for the sale of disposition of city-owned property at any time they deem it appropriate. (Ord. 10-2018 § 5).

 


Title 3 FINANCE

Chapters:

3.10    City Sales and Use Tax Code

3.20    Telephone Utility Tax

3.30    (Reserved)

3.40    Industrial Revenue Bonds


Chapter 3.10 CITY SALES AND USE TAX CODE

Sections:

3.10.010    Short title.

3.10.020    Definitions.

3.10.030    Licenses – Fee – Revocation.

3.10.040    Property and services taxed.

3.10.050    Vendor liable for tax.

3.10.060    Schedule of sales tax and distribution of receipts.

3.10.070    Rules and regulations.

3.10.080    Tax cannot be absorbed.

3.10.090    Reports of vendor.

3.10.100    Retailer – Multiple locations.

3.10.110    Credit sales.

3.10.120    Excess tax – Remittance.

3.10.130    Exemptions – Disputes.

3.10.140    Refunds.

3.10.150    Returns confidential.

3.10.160    Interest on deficiency.

3.10.170    Deficiency.

3.10.180    Deficiency notice and dispute resolution.

3.10.190    Location guides.

3.10.200    Court to order attendance.

3.10.210    Depositions.

3.10.220    Record of sales.

3.10.230    Tax lien.

3.10.240    Taxpayer’s petition for hearing.

3.10.250    Decisions of director.

3.10.260    Notices sent by certified mail.

3.10.270    License and tax additional.

3.10.280    Violations.

3.10.290    Authorization of use tax.

3.10.300    Exemptions.

3.10.310    Monthly return – Collection.

3.10.320    Tax constitutes lien.

3.10.330    Failure to make return.

3.10.340    Definitions – Additional.

3.10.350    Tax on motor vehicles.

3.10.360    Limitations.

3.10.370    Administration.

3.10.380    Purpose of tax.

3.10.390    Collection and enforcement.

3.10.400    Severability.


3.10.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “city sales and use tax increase ordinance, 1979.” (Code 1997 § 3-1-1).


3.10.020 Definitions.

In this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

A.    “Business” means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, direct or indirect.

B.    “City” means the municipality of city of Gunnison.

C.    “Coin-operated” means any device operated by coins or currency or any substitute therefor.

D.    “Construction or building materials” means tangible personal property which, when combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an integral and inseparable part of a structure or project including public and private improvements. Construction materials include, but are not limited to, such things as: asphalt, bricks, builders’ hardware, caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wall board, wall coping, wallpaper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms, or other items which do not remain as an integral and inseparable part of completed structure or project are not construction materials.

E.    “Consumer” means any person in the city who purchases, uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes tangible personal property or taxable services, purchased from sources inside or outside the city.

F.    “Director of finance” means the finance director of the city of Gunnison or such other person designated by the municipality; “director of finance” shall also include such person’s designee.

G.    “Engaged in” means performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption, within the city. “Engaged in business” in the city includes, but is not limited to, any one of the following activities by a person: (1) directly, indirectly, or by a subsidiary maintains a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse, or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction; (2) sends one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service, or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other reasons; (3) maintains one or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction; (4) owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or (5) makes more than one delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a 12-month period by any means other than a common carrier.

H.    “Farm auction closeout sale” means full and final disposition of all tangible personal property previously used by a farmer or rancher in farming or ranching operations which are being abandoned.

I.    “Gross sales” means the total amount received in money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all sales, leases, or rentals of tangible personal property or services.

J.    “License” means the city of Gunnison sales and/or use tax license.

K.    “Medical marijuana” means marijuana acquired, possessed, cultivated, manufactured, delivered, transported, supplied, sold, or dispensed to a person who qualifies as a patient with a debilitating medical condition(s) under Article XVIII, Section 14, of the Colorado Constitution, and which person holds a valid “registry identification card” issued by the state of Colorado pursuant to Colorado Constitution, Article XVIII, Section 14.

L.    “Mobile home” means any preconstructed building unit or combination of preconstructed building units, without motive power, where such unit or units are manufactured in a factory or at a location other than the residential site of the completed home, which is designed and commonly used for occupancy by persons for residential purposes, in either temporary or permanent locations, and which unit or units are not licensed as a vehicle.

M.    “Motor fuel” means gasoline, casing head or natural gasoline, benzol, benzene and naphtha, gasohol and any other liquid prepared, advertised, offered for sale, sold for use or used or commercially usable in internal combustion engines for the generation of power for the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft or railroad cars or railroad locomotives.

N.    “Newspaper” means a publication, printed on newsprint, intended for general circulation, and published regularly at short intervals, containing information and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The term “newspaper” does not include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit bulletins, advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs, reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications that include an updating or revision service, or books or pocket editions of books.

O.    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit.

P.    “Preprinted newspaper supplements” shall mean inserts, attachments or supplements circulated in newspapers that: (1) are primarily devoted to advertising; and (2) the distribution, insertion, or attachment of which is commonly paid for by the advertiser.

Q.    “Prescription” means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. Section 301 et seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol “Rx Only,” and is dispensed in accordance with any order in writing, dated and signed by a licensed veterinarian specifying the animal for which the medicine or drug is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label, or is dispensed in accordance with any written or electronic order dated and signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist, or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and any required information of the patient for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label.

R.    “Price” or “purchase price” means the aggregate value measured in currency paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered in consummation of a sale, without any discount from the price on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, and exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal government or by this chapter, and, in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the same time and place of the exchange, if: (1) such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer’s business, or (2) such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration, or certification under the laws of this state, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft. Any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax.

    “Price” or “purchase price” includes:

1.    The amount of money received or due in cash and credits.

2.    Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale in the usual course of the retailer’s business.

3.    Any consideration valued in money, whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the purchase price and other media of exchange.

4.    The total price charged on credit sales including finance charges which are not separately stated at the time of sale. An amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and separately stated at the time of sale is not part of the purchase price.

5.    Installation, applying, remodeling or repairing the property, delivery and wheeling-in charges included in the purchase price and not separately stated.

6.    Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible personal property to the purchaser.

7.    Indirect federal manufacturers’ excise taxes, such as taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock.

8.    The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon.

    “Price” or “purchase price” shall not include:

1.    Any sales or use tax imposed by the state of Colorado or by any political subdivision thereof.

2.    The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is to be sold thereafter in the retailers’ usual course of business. This is not limited to exchanges in Colorado. Out-of-state trade-ins are an allowable adjustment to the purchase price.

3.    Discounts from the original price if such discount and the corresponding decrease in sales tax due are actually passed on to the purchaser, and the seller is not reimbursed for the discount by the manufacturer or someone else. An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales.

S.    “Prosthetic devices” means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts or a licensed veterinarian. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories.

T.    “Purchase” or “sale” means the acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property, other taxable products or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, or sold. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales, and property and services acquired by:

1.    Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; or

2.    A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; the utilization of coin-operated devices, except coin-operated telephones, which do not vend articles of tangible personal property shall be considered short-term rentals of tangible personal property; or

3.    Performance of taxable services; or

4.    Barter or exchange for other tangible personal property, other taxable products, or services.

    The terms “purchase” and “sale” do not include:

1.    A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership;

2.    The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets;

3.    The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation’s assets to its stockholders, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets;

4.    A transfer of a partnership or limited liability company interest;

5.    The transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership or limited liability company, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets;

6.    The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder;

7.    The transfer of assets from a parent company to a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least 80 percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary company;

8.    The transfer of assets from a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least 80 percent by the parent company to a parent company or to another subsidiary which is owned at least 80 percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets;

9.    The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary companies, or between subsidiary companies closely held by the same parent company, or between companies which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by this chapter was paid by the transferor company at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor company. To such an extent any transfer referred to in this subsection shall constitute a sale. For the purposes of this subsection, a closely held subsidiary corporation is one in which the parent company owns stock possessing or membership interest at least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least 80 percent of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock.

U.    “Resident” means a person who resides or maintains one or more places of business within the city, regardless of whether that person also resides or maintains a place of business outside of the city.

V.    “Retail sales” means all sales except wholesale sales. For purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are deemed consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to a destination outside the limits of the city or to a common carrier for delivery to a destination outside the limits of the city. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the city, or has more than one place of business, the place at which the retail sales are deemed consummated for the purpose of this chapter shall be determined by the provisions of article 26 of title 39, Colorado Revised Statutes, and by rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Revenue. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the value of construction and building materials shall be exempt from the city’s sales tax if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the director of finance evidencing that local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid.

W.    “Retailer” means any person selling, leasing, renting, or granting a license to use tangible personal property or services at retail. “Retailer” shall include, but is not limited to, any: (1) auctioneer; (2) salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales as a direct or indirect agent of or obtains such property or services sold from a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer; (3) charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes; (4) retailer-contractor, when acting in the capacity of a seller of building supplies, construction materials, and other tangible personal property.

X.    “Return” means any form prescribed by the director of finance of the city of Gunnison for computing and reporting a total tax liability.

Y.    “Sale” includes installment and credit sales, and the exchange of property as well as the sale thereof for money, every such transaction, conditional or otherwise for a consideration, constituting a sale; the transaction of furnishing rooms or accommodations by any person, partnership association, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee, or any person acting in a representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person, or persons who for a consideration use, possess, or have the right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guest house, guest ranch, mobile homes, auto camps, trailer courts and parks, under any concession, permit, right to access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise, and also includes the sale or furnishing of electrical energy, gas, telephone, or telegraph services taxable under the terms of this chapter.

Z.    “Sales tax” means the tax that is collected or required to be collected and remitted by a retailer on sales taxed under this code.

AA.    “Special fuel” means kerosene oil, kerosene distillate, diesel fuel, all liquefied petroleum gases, and all combustible gases and liquids for use in the generation of power for propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft, railroad cars or railroad locomotives.

BB.    “Storage” means any keeping or retention of, or exercise dominion or control over, or possession of, for any length of time, tangible personal property not while in transit but on a stand still basis for future use when leased, rented or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the city from any person or vendor.

CC.    “Tangible personal property” means personal property that can be one or more of the following: seen, weighed, measured, felt, touched, stored, transported, exchanged, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses.

DD.    “Tax” means the use tax due from a consumer or the sales tax due from a retailer or the sum of both due from a retailer who also consumes.

EE.    “Tax deficiency” or “deficiency” means any amount of tax, penalty, interest, or other fee that is not reported and/or not paid on or before the date that any return or payment of the tax is required under the terms of this code.

FF.    “Taxable sales” means gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in this code.

GG.    “Taxpayer” means any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of this code.

HH.    “Use” means the exercise, for any length of time by any person within the city of any right, power or dominion over tangible personal property or services when rented, leased or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the city from any person or vendor or used in the performance of a contract in the city whether such tangible personal property is owned or not owned by the taxpayer. “Use” also includes the withdrawal of items from inventory for consumption.

II.    “Use tax” means the tax paid or required to be paid by a consumer for using, storing, distributing or otherwise consuming tangible personal property or taxable services inside the city.

JJ.    “Wholesale sales” or “wholesale” means a sale by wholesalers to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to users or consumers not for resale; latter types of sales shall be deemed to be retail sales and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

KK.    “Wholesaler” means any person doing an organized wholesale or jobbing business and selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers, for the purpose of resale, and not for storage, use, consumption, or distribution. (Ord. 2-2018 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 10-2017 § 1; Code 1997 § 3-1-2).


3.10.030 Licenses – Fee – Revocation.

A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling at retail, as the same is defined in this chapter, without first having obtained a license therefor, which license shall be granted and issued by the director of finance and shall be in force and effect until the thirty-first day of December of the year in which it is issued, unless sooner revoked. Such license shall be granted or renewed only upon application stating the name and address of the person desiring such a license, the name of such business and the location, including the street number of such business, and such other facts as the director of finance may require. It shall be the duty of each licensee on or before January 1st of each year during which this chapter remains in effect to obtain a renewal thereof if the licensee remains in the retail business or liable to account for the tax herein provided, but nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower the director of finance to refuse such renewal except revocation for cause of licensee’s prior license. Such license fee may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council of the city of Gunnison.

B.    In case business is transacted at two or more separate places by one person, a separate license for each place of business shall be required.

C.    Each license shall be numbered and shall show the name, residence, place, and character of business of the licensee and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. No license shall be transferable.

D.    The director of finance, on reasonable notice and after full hearing, may revoke the license of any person found by the director to have violated any provision of this chapter.

E.    Any finding and order of the director of finance revoking the license of any person shall be subject to review by the district court of the district where the business of the licensee is conducted, upon application of the aggrieved party. The procedure for review shall be, as nearly as possible, the same as now provided for the review of findings by certiorari.

F.    No license shall be required for any person engaged exclusively in the business of selling commodities which are exempt from taxation under this chapter. (Ord. 14-2016 § 2; Code 1997 § 3-1-3).


3.10.040 Property and services taxed.

There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax in the amount stated in GMC 3.10.060 as follows:

A.    On the purchase price paid or charged upon all sales and purchases of tangible personal property at retail.

B.    In the case of retail sales involving the exchange of property, on the purchase price paid or charged, including the fair market value of the property exchanged at the time and place of the exchange, excluding however, from the consideration or purchase price, the fair market value of the exchanged property, provided such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer’s business.

C.    Upon telephone and telegraph services, whether furnished by public or private corporations or enterprises for all intrastate telephone and telegraph service.

D.    For gas and electric service, whether furnished by municipal, public or private corporations or enterprises, for gas and electricity furnished and sold for domestic and commercial consumption and not for sale.

E.    Upon the amount paid for all meals and cover charges, if any, furnished in any restaurant, eating house, hotel, drug store, club, resort, or other such place at which meals or food are regularly sold to the public.

F.    On the entire amount charged to any person or persons for rooms or accommodations as defined in GMC 3.10.020. (Code 1997 § 3-1-4).


3.10.050 Vendor liable for tax.

Every retailer, also herein called “vendor,” shall, irrespective of the provisions of GMC 3.10.130, be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equivalent to the rate of tax provided in GMC 3.10.060 multiplied by all sales made by him of commodities or services as specified in GMC 3.10.040, and shall before the twentieth day of each month make a return to the director of finance for the preceding calendar month and remit an amount equivalent to said tax on such sales to said director, less four percent of the sum so remitted to cover the vendor’s expense in the collection and remittance of said tax. Such returns of the taxpayer or duly authorized agent shall contain such information and may be made in such manner and upon such forms as the director of finance may prescribe. The director may extend the time of making returns and paying the taxes due under such reasonable rules and regulations as he may prescribe, but no such extension shall be for a greater period than is provided for in GMC 3.10.090. The burden of proving and paying the same to the director of finance, or for making such returns, shall be on the retailer or vendor under such reasonable requirements of proof as the director may prescribe. In any event, the amount subject to tax imposed by this chapter shall not include the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by article 26 of title 39, C.R.S. (Ord. 21-2015 § 1; Ord. 7-2010 § 1; Ord. 7-2007 § 1; Ord. 5-2007 § 1; Ord. 4-1999 § 1; Code 1997 § 3-1-5).


3.10.060 Schedule of sales tax and distribution of receipts.

A.    There is imposed a tax in an amount equivalent to three percent of all sales of commodities and services specified in GMC 3.10.040. The receipts of the tax shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and shall be applied as specified in GMC 3.10.380.

B.    Commencing July 1, 2007, through and including June 30, 2032, there is imposed a tax, in addition to the tax set forth in subsection (A) of this section, in an amount equivalent to one percent of all sales of commodities and services specified in GMC 3.10.040. Commencing July 1, 2032, the tax specified in the preceding sentence shall be reduced to a tax, in addition to the tax set forth in subsection (A) of this section, in an amount equivalent to one-quarter of one percent of all sales of commodities and services specified in GMC 3.10.040. The receipts of the tax shall be deposited in the city park and recreation fund and shall be applied as specified in GMC 3.10.380.

C.    Commencing July 1, 2015, there is imposed a tax, in addition to taxes set forth in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, in the amount of five percent on the sale of medical marijuana, medical-marijuana-infused products, retail marijuana and retail marijuana products, and an excise tax in the amount of five percent of the cash value of the transaction on the sale by a retail marijuana cultivation facility or retail marijuana products manufacturing facility to a licensed marijuana establishment outside the city of Gunnison. All revenues derived from such tax shall be collected and spent to defray costs incurred in regulating the marijuana industry, funding social, recreational, and educational programs within the community as may be determined by the city, including substance abuse prevention, education and counseling programs, and to promote the general purposes of the city of Gunnison.

D.    Retailers shall add to the sale price or charge the tax imposed in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section, or the average equivalent thereof, insofar as such average equivalent is expressed in combined form with that of the tax imposed by operation of part 1 of article 26 of title 39, C.R.S., as amended, in accordance with schedules of said combined average equivalents duly adopted and promulgated by the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue. The retailer shall show such tax as a separate and distinct item, and when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge and shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the retailer until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. The retailer shall be entitled as collecting agent of the city to apply and credit the amount of collections against the rate to be paid under the provisions of GMC 3.10.050, remitting any excess of collections over said rate, less the five percent collection expense allowance, to the director of finance in the retailer’s next monthly sales tax return. (Ord. 5-2015 § 3).


3.10.070 Rules and regulations.

To provide uniform methods of adding the tax, or the average equivalent thereof, to the selling price, it shall be the duty of the director of finance to formulate and promulgate, after hearing, appropriate rules and regulations to effectuate the purpose of GMC 3.10.050 through 3.10.120. (Code 1997 § 3-1-7).


3.10.080 Tax cannot be absorbed.

It shall be unlawful for any retailer to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280 will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold, or if added that it or any part thereof will be refunded. Any person violating any of the provisions of GMC 3.10.050 through 3.10.120 shall be subject to the penalties herein provided. (Code 1997 § 3-1-8).


3.10.090 Reports of vendor.

If the accounting methods regularly employed by the vendor in the transaction of his business, or other conditions, are such that reports of sales made on a calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the director of finance, upon written request of the vendor, may accept reports at such intervals as will in his opinion better suit the convenience of the taxpayer and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax; provided, however, the director of finance may, by rule, permit taxpayers whose monthly tax collected is less than $10.00 to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than every three months. (Code 1997 § 3-1-9).


3.10.100 Retailer – Multiple locations.

A retailer doing business in two or more places or locations, taxable hereunder, may file one return covering all such business activities engaged in within the city. (Code 1997 § 3-1-10).


3.10.110 Credit sales.

In case of a sale upon credit, a contract for sale wherein it is provided that the price shall be paid in installments, and title does not pass until a future date, chattel mortgage or a conditional sale, there shall be paid upon each payment upon the account of purchase price, that portion of the total tax which the amount paid bears to the total purchase price. The director of finance may authorize a retailer doing business, wholly or partly on a credit basis, to make returns on the basis of cash actually received. Thereafter the retailer shall make returns and pay taxes on that basis until further order of the director of finance. GMC 3.10.050 through 3.10.120 shall not operate to relieve from the tax, installment or credit business done during the operations of GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280, but realized upon thereafter. (Code 1997 § 3-1-11).




3.10.120 Excess tax – Remittance.

If any vendor, during any reporting period, shall collect as a tax an amount in excess of one percent of his total taxable sales, he shall remit to the director of finance the full net amount of the tax herein imposed and also such excess. The retention by the retailer or vendor of any excess of tax collections over the one percent of the total taxable sales of such retailer or vendor or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the director of finance the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280 is declared to be unlawful and a violation of this chapter. (Code 1997 § 3-1-12).


3.10.130 Exemptions – Disputes.

There shall be exempt from taxation under the provisions of this chapter the following:

A.    All sales to the United States government, to the state of Colorado, its departments and institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof in their governmental capacities only, and to the city.

B.    All sales made to religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions and activities.

C.    All sales which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States or the state of Colorado or the Charter or code of the city.

D.    All sales of cigarettes.

E.    All sales and purchases of commodities and services under the provisions of GMC 3.10.020 to any occupant who is a permanent resident of any hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guest house, guest ranch, mobile home, auto camp, trailer court or park, and who enters into or has entered into a written agreement for occupancy of a room or rooms or accommodations for a period of at least 30 consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year.

F.    All commodities on which there has been paid a Colorado motor fuel tax or special fuel tax.

G.    Should disputes arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not any sale, service or commodity is exempt from taxation under this section, nevertheless the seller shall collect and the purchaser shall pay such tax, and the seller shall thereupon issue to the purchaser a receipt or certificate, on forms prescribed by the director of finance, showing the names of the seller and purchaser, the items purchased, the date, price, amount of tax paid, and a brief statement of the claim of exemption. The purchaser thereafter may apply to the director of finance for a refund of such taxes, and it shall then be the duty of the director of finance to determine the question of exemption, subject to review by the courts as provided in GMC 3.10.250.

H.    All sales of drugs dispensed in accordance with a prescription and all sales of prosthetic devices.

I.    All sales of personal property on which a specific ownership tax has been paid or is payable, when such sales meet both of the following conditions:

1.    The purchaser is a nonresident of or has his principal place of business outside of the city; and

2.    Such personal property is registered or required to be registered outside the limits of the city, pursuant to the laws of the state.

J.    All sales of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by a statutory or home rule city, town, or city and county equal to or in excess of the tax which would be imposed under this chapter. A credit (not to exceed the tax which would be imposed under this chapter) is hereby granted to the purchaser or user of such transaction against the tax imposed hereunder equal to the tax lawfully imposed and previously paid by the purchaser or user to another home rule or statutory city, town, or city and county. (Code 1997 § 3-1-13).


3.10.140 Refunds.

A.    A refund shall be made, or a credit allowed, for the tax so paid under dispute by any purchaser who has an exemption as in this chapter provided. Such refund shall be made by the director of finance after compliance with the following conditions precedent. Applications for refund must be made within 60 days after the purchase of the goods whereon an exemption is claimed and must be supported by the affidavit of the purchaser accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and certificate issued by the seller and be made upon such forms as shall be prescribed and furnished by the director of finance, which forms shall contain such information as said director shall prescribe. Upon receipt of such application the director shall examine the same with all due speed and shall give notice to the applicant by order in writing of his decision thereon. Aggrieved applicants, within 10 days after such decision is mailed to them, may petition the director for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided in GMC 3.10.240 and 3.10.250. The right of any person to a refund under this chapter shall not be assignable and except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, such application for refund must be made by the same person who purchased the goods and paid the tax thereon as shown in the invoice of the sale thereof. Any applicant for refund under the provisions of this section, or any other person who shall make any false statement in connection with an application for a refund of any taxes, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter.

B.    A refund shall be made or credit allowed by the director of finance to any person entitled to an exemption where such person establishes that a tax was paid by another on a purchase made on behalf of such person and that refund has not been granted to the person making the purchase and that the person entitled to exemption paid or reimbursed the purchaser to such tax.

C.    Such application for refund under subsection (B) of this section shall be made within three years after the date of purchase and shall be made on forms prescribed and furnished by the director of finance, which forms shall contain, in addition to the foregoing information, such pertinent data as the director shall prescribe. Upon receipt of such application and proof of the matters therein contained the director shall give notice to the applicant by order in writing of his decision thereon. Aggrieved applicants, within 10 days after such decision is mailed to them, may petition the director for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided in GMC 3.10.160 and 3.10.240. Any applicant for refund under the provisions of this subsection, or any other person who shall make any false statement in connection with an application for a refund of any taxes, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter.

D.    The burden of proving that sales, services, and commodities, on which tax refunds are claimed, are exempt from taxation under GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280, or were not at retail, shall be on the one making such claim under such reasonable requirements of proof as the director of finance may prescribe. Should the applicant for refund be aggrieved at the final decision of the director, he may proceed to have the same reviewed by the courts in the manner provided for review of other decisions of the director as provided in GMC 3.10.250; except that such reviews shall be in the district court for Gunnison County.

E.    All sales and purchases of meat cattle, sheep, lambs, swine, and goats, all sales and purchases of mares and stallions for breeding purposes, and all farm auction close-out sales shall be exempt from taxation under GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280, and the storage, use or consumption of such property shall be exempt from taxation under GMC 3.10.290 to 3.10.360.

F.    All sales and purchases of feed for livestock or poultry and all sales and purchases of orchard trees shall be exempt from taxation under GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280.

G.    Every vendor vending individual items of personal property through coin-operated vending machines at a price below the minimum taxable sale prescribed by GMC 3.10.060 shall be exempt from the provisions of GMC 3.10.050, but nevertheless such vendor shall pay the sales or use tax on the purchase of the personal property so vended in the coin-operated machine unless the purchase or sale shall be otherwise exempt under the provisions of this chapter.

H.    All sales and purchases of straw and other bedding for use in the care of livestock shall be exempt from taxation under GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280. (Code 1997 § 3-1-14).


3.10.150 Returns confidential.

Except in accordance with judicial order or as otherwise herein provided, the director of finance, his agents, clerks, and employees shall not divulge any information gained by them from any return filed under the provisions of GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280. The officials charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the director of finance in an action or proceeding under the provisions of GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280 to which he is a party, or on behalf of any action or proceeding under the provisions of GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280 when the report of facts shown thereby is directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of said reports or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return or report filed in connection with his tax, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and the items thereof, or the inspection by the city attorney or other legal representatives of the city of the report or return of any person who shall bring an action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action or proceeding is contemplated or has been instituted under GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280. Reports and returns shall be preserved for three years and thereafter until the director of finance orders them destroyed. (Code 1997 § 3-1-15).


3.10.160 Interest on deficiency.

As soon as practicable after the return is filed, the director of finance shall examine it, and if it then appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted is greater or less than shown in the return to be due, the tax shall be recomputed. If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the excess shall be refunded or credited against any subsequent remittance from the same person. If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the difference, together with interest thereof at the rate imposed under Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S., in accordance with Section 39-21-109, C.R.S., per month from the time the return was due, shall be paid by the vendor 10 days after written notice and demand to him from the director of finance. (Code 1997 § 3-1-16).


3.10.170 Deficiency.

If any part of the deficiency is due to negligence or intentional disregard of authorized rules and regulations with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added 10 percent to the total amount of the deficiency, and interest in such case shall be collected at the rate imposed under Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S., in accordance with Section 39-21-109, C.R.S., on the amount of such deficiency from the time the return was due, from the person required to file the return, which interest and addition shall become due and payable 10 days after written notice and demand to him by the director of finance. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added 100 percent of the total amount to the deficiency and in such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable 10 days after written notice and demand by the director of finance and an additional three percent per month on said amount shall be added from the date the return was due until paid. (Code 1997 § 3-1-17).


3.10.180 Deficiency notice and dispute resolution.

The city shall adhere to and follow the procedures for enforcement of this chapter and for dispute resolution as set forth in Section 29-2-106.1, C.R.S., and such procedures are herein incorporated by reference. (Code 1997 § 3-1-18).


3.10.190 Location guides.

The city shall make available to any requesting retailer a map or other location guide showing the boundaries of the city. (Code 1997 § 3-1-19).


3.10.200 Court to order attendance.

The municipal court of the city of Gunnison, Colorado, or any judge thereof, either in term time or vacation, upon the application of the director of finance, may compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers, records, or memoranda and the giving of testimony before the director of finance, by an attachment for contempt, or otherwise, in the same manner as production of evidence may be compelled before said court. (Ord. 7-2010 § 2; Code 1997 § 3-1-20).


3.10.210 Depositions.

The director of finance, or any party in an investigation or hearing before the director of finance, may cause the deposition of witnesses residing within or without the state to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in courts in this state, and to that end compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records, or memoranda. (Code 1997 § 3-1-21).


3.10.220 Record of sales.

It shall be the duty of every person engaging or continuing in business in the city, for the transaction of which a license is required under GMC 3.10.030, to keep and preserve suitable records of all sales made by him, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for the collection of which he is liable under GMC 3.10.050. It shall be the duty of every such person to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all invoices of goods and merchandise purchased for resale, and all such books, invoices, and other records shall be open for examination at any time by the director of finance or his duly authorized agents. (Code 1997 § 3-1-22).


3.10.230 Tax lien.

The tax imposed by GMC 3.10.050 shall be a first and prior lien upon the goods and business fixtures of or used by a retailer under lease, title retaining contract or other contract arrangement, excepting stock of goods sold or for sale in the ordinary course of business, and shall take precedence on all such property over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature, excepting any lien for the nonpayment of the state of Colorado sales or use tax. Any retailer who shall sell out his business or stock of goods, or shall quit business, shall be required to make out the return as provided in GMC 3.10.090 within 10 days after the date he sold his business or stock of goods or quit business, and his successor in business shall be required to withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover the amount of said taxes due and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall produce a receipt from the director of finance showing that the taxes have been paid, or a certificate that no taxes are due. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods shall fail to withhold the purchase money as above provided and the taxes shall be due and unpaid after the 10-day period allowed, he, as well as the vendor, shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes unpaid by the former owner. Likewise, anyone who takes any stock of goods or business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title retaining contract or other contract arrangement by purchase, foreclosure sale, or otherwise, takes the same subject to the lien for any delinquent tax owned by such merchant, and shall be liable for the payment of all delinquent sales taxes of such prior owner, not, however, exceeding the value of the property so taken or acquired.

Wherever the business or property of any taxpayer subject to this chapter shall be placed in receivership, bankruptcy, or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized under distraint for property taxes, all taxes, penalties, and interest imposed by this chapter and for which said retailer is in any way liable under the terms of this chapter shall be a prior and preferred claim against all the property of said taxpayer, except as to preexisting claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor, or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filing of the notice as provided in this section on the property of the taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade and business fixtures of such taxpayer, and no sheriff, receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property to any person subject to this chapter under process or order of any court, without first ascertaining from the director of finance the amount of any taxes due and payable under this chapter, and if there be any such taxes due, owing or unpaid, it shall be the duty of such officer to first pay the amount of said taxes out of the proceeds of said sale before making payment of any monies to any judgement creditor or other claims of whatsoever kind or nature, except the cost of the proceedings and other preexisting claims or liens as above provided. For the purposes of this chapter, the term “taxpayer” shall include “retailer.”

A.    All sums or money paid by the purchaser to the retailer as taxes imposed by this chapter shall be and remain public money, the property of the city, in the hands of such retailer and he shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the city until paid to the director of finance, and for failure to so pay the director of finance, such retailer shall be punished as provided by law.

B.    If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the tax as required by this chapter, the director of finance shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period of which the taxpayer is delinquent and, upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in addition thereto a penalty equal to the sum of $15.00 for such failure or 10 percent thereof, whichever is greater, together with interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S., plus one-half percent per month from the date when due, not exceeding 18 percent in the aggregate. Promptly thereafter, the director of finance shall give to the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty, and interest, which notice must be served personally or by certified mail. Such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment and such assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the director of finance 10 days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by certified mail; provided, however, that within said 10-day period, such delinquent taxpayer may petition the director of finance for a revision or modification of such assessment, and within such 10-day period, shall furnish the director the facts and correct figures showing the correct amount of such taxes. Such petition shall be in writing or orally, and shall be given under the oath of said taxpayer. Thereupon, the director shall modify such assessment in accordance with the facts submitted, which facts he deems correct. Such assessment shall be considered the final order of the director of finance, and may be reviewed by writ of certiorari as provided in this chapter; provided, that the taxpayer gives written notice to the director of finance of such intention within five days after receipt of the final order of assessment. 

C.    If any taxes, penalty, or interest imposed by this chapter and shown due by returns filed by taxpayer, or as shown by assessments duly made as provided herein, are not paid within five days after the same are due, the director of finance shall issue a notice, setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax, penalties, and interest, and date of the accrual thereof, and that the City claims a first and prior lien therefor on the real and tangible personal property of the taxpayer except as to any lien for the nonpayment of the state sales or use tax, preexisting claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgment creditor, or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filing of the notice as herein provided, on property of the taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade, and business fixtures of such taxpayer. Said notice shall be on forms prepared by the director of finance and shall be verified by him or his duly qualified deputy, and may be filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in the state in which the taxpayer owns real or tangible personal property, and the filing of such notice shall create such lien on such property in that county and constitute notice thereof. After said notice has been filed, or concurrently therewith, or at any time when taxes are due and unpaid, whether such notice be filed or not, the director of finance may issue a warrant directed to the Gunnison chief of police or the sheriff of any county of the state, commanding him to levy upon, seize, and sell sufficient of the real and personal property of the taxpayer found within his city or county for the payment of the amount due, together with interest, penalties, and costs as may be provided by law, subject to valid preexisting claims or liens. 

D.    The chief of police or sheriff shall forthwith levy upon sufficient of the property of the taxpayer, or any property used by such taxpayer in conducting his retail business, and said property so levied upon shall be sold in all respects with like effect and in the same manner as is prescribed by law in respect to executions against property upon judgment of a court of record, and the remedies of garnishment shall apply. The chief of police or sheriff shall be entitled to such fees in executing such warrant as are now allowed by law for similar services. 

E.    Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of the county clerk and recorder as herein provided, upon payment of all taxes, penalties, and interest covered thereby, shall be released by the director of finance in the same manner as mortgages and judgements are released.

F.    The director of finance may also treat any such taxes, penalties, or interest due and unpaid as a debt due the city from the vendor. In case of failure to pay the tax, or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest thereon when due, the director of finance may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties, and interest in such justice, county or district court of the county wherein the taxpayer resides, or has his principal place of business, having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected. The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the director of finance, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. Such action may be actions in attachment, and writs of attachment may be issued to the constable or sheriff as the case may be, and in such proceeding no bond shall be required of the director of finance, nor shall any constable or sheriff require of the director of finance an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment, or writ of execution upon any judgement entered in such proceedings, and the director of finance may prosecute appeals or writs of error in such cases without the necessity of providing bond therefor. It shall be the duty of the city attorney, when requested by the director of finance, to commence action for the recovery of taxes due under this chapter, and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies provided in this chapter.

G.    In any action affecting the title to real estate or the ownership or rights to possession of personal property, the city may be made a party defendant for the purpose of obtaining an adjudication or determination of its lien upon the property involved therein and in any such action service of summons upon the director of finance shall be sufficient service and binding upon the city.

H.    The director of finance is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed as in this chapter provided, and interest imposed in excess of the rate imposed under Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S., shall be deemed a penalty. (Ord. 7-2010 § 3; Code 1997 § 3-1-23).


3.10.240 Taxpayer’s petition for hearing.

If any person having made a return and paid the tax provided by GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280 feels aggrieved by the assessment made upon him by the director of finance, he may apply to the director of finance by petition in writing within 10 days after the notice is mailed to him for a hearing and a correction of the amount of the tax so assessed, in which petition he shall set forth the reasons why such hearing should be granted and the amount by which such tax should be reduced. The director of finance shall notify the petitioner in writing of the time and place fixed by him of such hearing. After such hearing, the director of finance shall make such order in the matter as is just and lawful and shall furnish a copy of such order to the petitioner. (Code 1997 § 3-1-25).


3.10.250 Decisions of director.

A.    Every decision of the director of finance shall be in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the vendor within 10 days, and all such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of 30 days after notice of such decision shall have been mailed to the vendor, unless proceedings are taken within said time for review thereof as provided in this section.

B.    The district court in and for Gunnison County, Colorado, shall have original jurisdiction in proceedings to review all questions of law and fact determined by the director of finance in administering the provisions of GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280 by writ of certiorari to the director of finance.

C.    Within 15 days after making application of the district court for a writ of certiorari, the party making such application shall file with the district court a surety bond in twice the amount of the taxes, interests and other charges stated in the determination and decision of the director of finance. At his option, the taxpayer may satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account deposit in a certificate of deposit issued by a state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with Section 11-35-101(1), C.R.S., equal to twice the amount of taxes. The taxpayer also, at his option, may deposit with the director of finance the disputed amount in lieu of posting bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the deficiency contested during the pendency of the action. (Code 1997 § 3-1-26).


3.10.260 Notices sent by certified mail.

A.    All notices required to be given to the retailer or vendor under the provisions of GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280 shall be in writing and, if mailed, postpaid by certified mail, return receipt requested, to him at his last known address shall be sufficient for the purpose of GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280. 

B.    Every hearing before the director of finance shall be held in Gunnison, Colorado. (Ord. 7-2010 § 4; Code 1997 § 3-1-27).


3.10.270 License and tax additional.

The license and tax imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to all other licenses and taxes imposed by law, except as herein otherwise provided. (Code 1997 § 3-1-28).


3.10.280 Violations.

It shall be unlawful for any retailer or vendor to refuse to make any return provided to be made in GMC 3.10.010 through 3.10.280, or to make any false or fraudulent return or false statement on any return, or fail and refuse to make payment to the director of finance of any taxes collected or due the city, or in any manner evade the collection and payment of the tax, or any part thereof, or for any person or purchaser to fail or refuse to pay any such tax, or evade the payment thereof, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax.

In addition to the foregoing, any person who shall knowingly and willfully swear to or verify any false statement shall be guilty of the offense of perjury and on conviction thereof shall be punished in the manner provided by law. (Code 1997 § 3-1-29).


3.10.290 Authorization of use tax.

A.    There is levied hereby and there shall be collected from every person in the city a tax or excise for the privilege of storing, using or consuming in this city any articles of tangible personal property purchased at retail, except that no use tax shall be collected for the privilege of storing any construction or building materials. Said tax shall be added to such storage or acquisition charges or costs, or the average equivalent thereof, insofar as such average equivalent is expressed in combined form with that of the tax imposed by operation of part 1 of article 26 of title 39, C.R.S., in accordance with schedules of said combined average equivalents duly adopted and promulgated by the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue. Said tax shall be payable to and shall be collected by the director of finance.

B.    There is imposed hereby a tax in an amount equivalent to three percent on such storage or acquisition charges or costs specified in subsection (A) of this section. The receipts of the tax shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and shall be applied as specified in GMC 3.10.380.

C.    Commencing July 1, 2007, through and including June 30, 2032, there is imposed hereby a tax, in addition to the tax set forth in subsection (B) of this section, in an amount equivalent to one percent on such storage or acquisition charges or costs specified in subsection (A) of this section. Commencing July 1, 2032, the tax specified in the preceding sentence shall be reduced to a tax, in addition to the tax set forth in subsection (B) of this section, in an amount equivalent to one-quarter of one percent on such storage or acquisition charges or costs specified in subsection (A) of this section. The receipts of the tax shall be deposited in the city park and recreation fund and shall be applied as specified in GMC 3.10.380. (Ord. 7-2007 § 3; Code 1997 § 3-1-30).


3.10.300 Exemptions.

The use tax imposed by GMC 3.10.290 through 3.10.360 shall not apply:

A.    To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property, the sale of which is subject to the retail sales tax imposed by other sections of this chapter and on which a retail sales tax has been paid.

B.    To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in the city, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of business.

C.    To the storage, use or consumption of motor fuel upon which there has accrued or has been paid a Colorado motor fuel tax or special fuel tax.

D.    To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the city by a nonresident for his own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within the city.

E.    To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by the United States government or by the state, or its institutions, or its political subdivisions in their governmental capacities only or by the city, or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions.

F.    To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit or use, any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished, and the container, label, or the furnished shipping case thereof.

G.    To the storage, use, or consumption of electricity, coal, coke, fuel oil, or gas for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, building construction, telegraph, telephone and radio communication, street and railroad transportation services, and all industrial uses.

H.    To the storage, use, or consumption of straw and other bedding for use in the care of livestock.

I.    To the storage, use, or consumption of printers ink and newsprint.

J.    To the storage, use, or consumption of cigarettes.

K.    To the storage, use, or consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sales or use tax of which has already been subjected to a sales or use tax of another home rule or statutory city, town, or city and county legally imposed on the purchaser or user equal to or in excess of the use tax which would be imposed under this chapter. A credit (not to exceed the tax which would be imposed under this chapter) is hereby granted to the purchaser or user of such transaction against the tax imposed hereunder equal to the use tax lawfully imposed and previously paid by the purchaser or user to another home rule or statutory city, town, or city and county.

L.    To the use or consumption of property which occurred more than three times after the most recent sale of the property if, within the three years following the sale, the property has been used within the state of Colorado for the principal purpose for which it is purchased. (Code 1997 § 3-1-31).


3.10.310 Monthly return – Collection.

A.    Every person subject to the provisions of GMC 3.10.290 through 3.10.360 and who has not paid the tax imposed hereby to a retailer, on or before the twentieth day of each month, shall make to the director of finance on forms prescribed by him a return showing in detail the tangible personal property stored, used, or consumed by him within the city in the preceding calendar month which is subject to the tax herein imposed, and on which the tax has not been paid to a retailer. Such return shall be verified by oath or affirmation of the taxpayer or his agent and shall be accompanied by a remittance of the tax shown thereon to be due. 

B.    Every retailer maintaining an office or place of business in the city, and every agent, within the city, of any retailer not maintaining an office or place of business in the city, making sales of tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption in the city, and not exempted as provided in GMC 3.10.300 at the time of making such sales or taking the orders therefor, or if the storage, use or consumption of such tangible personal property is not then taxable hereunder, shall collect the tax imposed by GMC 3.10.290 from the purchaser and give to the purchaser a receipt therefor, which receipt shall identify the property, the date sold or the date ordered, and the tax collected and paid. The tax required to be collected by such retailer or agent from such purchaser shall be displayed separately from the advertised price listed on the forms or advertising matter on all sales checks, order, sales slips or other proof of sales. It shall be unlawful for such retailer or agent to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by such retailer or agent, or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold, or if added, that it or any part thereof will be refunded. The tax required to be collected by such retailer or agent shall be remitted to the city in like manner as otherwise provided in this chapter for the remittance of sales taxes collected by retailers, and all such retailers or agents collecting the tax imposed by GMC 3.10.290 shall make returns on forms provided by the director of finance at such times and in such manner as is provided for the making of returns in the payment of the sales taxes. The procedure for assessing and collecting said taxes from such retailers or agents, or from the user when not paid to a retailer or agent, shall be the same as provided in this chapter for the collection of sales taxes, including collection by distraint warrant, and said taxes due and owing from any retailer or agent for the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property shall bear interest and be subject to the same penalties as is provided in this chapter for nonpayment or delinquencies of sales taxes. (Ord. 7-2010 § 5; Code 1997 § 3-1-32).


3.10.320 Tax constitutes lien.

Said tax shall be a first and prior lien on the tangible personal property stored, used, or consumed, subject only to valid mortgages or other liens of record on and prior to the recording of notice as required by GMC 3.10.230(C), and when such tax is collected by retailers or agents, shall be a first and prior lien on all the stock of goods or business fixtures of or used by such retailer, excepting goods sold in the ordinary course of business, which lien shall have precedence over all other liens of whatsoever kind or nature except as to any lien for the nonpayment of the state of Colorado sales or use tax, preexisting claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, judgment creditor, or purchaser whose rights have attached prior to the filing of the notice on property of the taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade, and business fixtures of such taxpayer. Upon default of payment thereof, the director of finance, after demand upon the person owing such tax, may bring an action in his name as director of finance in attachment, and seize any property to secure the payment of said tax, interest, and penalties. In any such proceeding, no bond shall be required of the director of finance, nor shall any chief of police or sheriff require from the director of finance an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of levy, and no chief of police or sheriff shall be liable in damages when acting in accordance with such writs. The remedies provided in this section shall be in addition to all other remedies. (Ord. 7-2010 § 6; Code 1997 § 3-1-33).


3.10.330 Failure to make return.

Any person who shall willfully fail or refuse to make the return required in GMC 3.10.310, or who shall make a false or fraudulent return, or who shall willfully fail to pay any tax owing by him, and any person who shall aid or abet another in an attempt to evade such tax, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter, and subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each such offense. (Ord. 19-1997 § 1; Code 1997 § 3-1-34).


3.10.340 Definitions – Additional.

A.    Person. The term “person” as used in GMC 3.10.290 through 3.10.360 means an individual, corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, association, estate, trust, receiver, or any other group acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number.

B.    Storage or Storing. The terms “storage” or “storing” means any keeping or retention of, exercise of dominion or control over tangible personal property in the city. (Code 1997 § 3-1-36).


3.10.350 Tax on motor vehicles.

Any resident of the city who shall purchase any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer outside the corporate limits of the city for use, consumption, or storage of such vehicle within the city shall immediately make a return, disclosing the terms of such transaction, to the director of finance, and thereupon pay the tax thereon as provided in this chapter. (Code 1997 § 3-1-37).


3.10.360 Limitations.

The taxes for any period, together with the interest thereon and penalties with respect thereto, imposed by this chapter shall not be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant issued, or suit for collection be instituted, or any other action to collect the same be commenced, more than three years after the date on which the tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which cases such lien shall continue only for one year after the filing of notice thereof. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade, tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be begun at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the director of finance may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. (Code 1997 § 3-1-38).


3.10.370 Administration.

The administration of this chapter is vested in and shall be exercised by the director of finance, who shall prescribe forms and reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with said sections for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment, and collection of the taxes imposed hereunder, and for the proper administration and enforcement of said sections. (Code 1997 § 3-1-39).


3.10.380 Purpose of tax.

A.    The funds derived from the tax imposed in GMC 3.10.060(A) and 3.10.290(B), after deducting so much thereof as may be necessary for the administrative expenses in administering this chapter, shall be devoted to the following purposes: No less than 30 percent for streets and related purposes, including, without limitation, the paying of principal of, premium, if any, and interest on any securities issued pursuant to Section 8.5 of the Charter of the city for the purpose of providing such improvements; no less than 10 percent for other capital improvements including, without limitation, the paying of principal of, premium, if any, and interest on any securities issued pursuant to Section 8.5 of the Charter of the city for the purpose of providing such improvements; and the remainder for general government expenses.

B.    There is hereby created a special fund of the city titled the “city park and recreation fund.” The funds derived from the taxes imposed in GMC 3.10.060(B) and 3.10.290(C), after deducting so much thereof as may be necessary for the administrative expenses in administering this chapter, shall be deposited to the city park and recreation fund. Moneys on deposit in the city park and recreation fund shall be used solely for park and recreation purposes including but not limited to (1) constructing, acquiring and improving capital improvements, (2) acquiring and improving real property interests and equipment, (3) operating and maintaining capital improvements, real property interests and equipment and (4) providing for the payment of revenue bonds issued for such purposes. (Ord. 2-2009 § 4; Ord. 7-2007 § 4; Ord. 5-2007 § 3; Ord. 4-1999 § 3; Code 1997 § 3-1-40).


3.10.390 Collection and enforcement.

The director of finance is hereby authorized to contract with the Colorado Department of Revenue for the collection and enforcement of the sales and use tax levied under the provisions of this chapter and shall have the authority to pay out from the funds derived from said sales and use tax the necessary costs and expenses of the Department in collecting and enforcing the same. (Code 1997 § 3-1-41).


3.10.400 Severability.

If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter with each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or clause regardless of the fact that any one or more of such sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, or clauses might be held invalid. (Code 1997 § 3-1-42).


Chapter 3.20 TELEPHONE UTILITY TAX

Sections:

3.20.010    Levy of tax.

3.20.020    Effective date.

3.20.030    Filing statement.

3.20.040    Failure to pay.

3.20.050    Penalty clause.

3.20.060    Inspection of records.

3.20.070    Local purpose.

3.20.080    Tax in lieu of other taxes, etc.


3.20.010 Levy of tax.

There is hereby levied on and against each telephone utility company operating within the city a tax on the occupation and business of maintaining a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the city and of supplying local exchange telephone service to the inhabitants of the city. The annual amount of tax levied hereby shall be equal to $4.00 per telephone account for which local exchange telephone service is provided within the corporate limits of the city on the effective date as provided in GMC 3.20.020 and upon each anniversary of the effective date. (Code 1997 § 3-2-1).


3.20.020 Effective date.

The tax levied by this chapter shall commence on January 1, 1979, and shall be due and payable in four equal installments with the first such installment due three months after the effective date. (Code 1997 § 3-2-2).


3.20.030 Filing statement.

Within 30 days after the effective date as provided in GMC 3.20.020, each telephone utility company subject to this chapter shall file with the city clerk, in such form as the clerk may require, a statement showing the total accounts for which local exchange telephone service was provided within the corporate limits of the city on the effective date. Such statement shall be filed within 30 days after each anniversary of the effective date showing such accounts on the anniversary date. (Code 1997 § 3-2-3).


3.20.040 Failure to pay.

If any telephone utility company subject to the provisions of this chapter shall fail to pay the taxes as herein provided, the full amount thereof shall be due and collected from such company, and the same together with an addition of 10 percent of the amount of taxes due shall be and hereby is declared to be a debt due and owing from such company to the city. The city attorney of the city upon direction of the city council shall commence and prosecute to final judgement and determination in any court of competent jurisdiction an action at law to collect the said debt in the name of the city of Gunnison, Colorado, by and on behalf of the people of the state of Colorado. (Code 1997 § 3-2-4).


3.20.050 Penalty clause.

If any officer, agent, or manager of a telephone utility company which is subject to the provisions of this chapter shall fail, neglect, or refuse to make or file the annual statement of accounts provided in GMC 3.20.030, the said officer, agent, manager, or person shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $1,000; provided, that each day after said statement shall become delinquent during which the said officer, agent, manager, or person shall so fail, neglect, or refuse to make and file such statement shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 19-1997 § 2; Code 1997 § 3-2-5).


3.20.060 Inspection of records.

The city, its officers, agents, or representatives shall have the right at all reasonable hours and times to examine the books and records of the telephone utility company which are subject to the provisions of this chapter and to make copies of the entries or contents thereof. (Code 1997 § 3-2-6).


3.20.070 Local purpose.

The tax herein provided is upon occupations and businesses in the performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. It is expressly understood that none of the terms of this chapter is construed to mean that any telephone utility company is issued a franchise by the city. (Code 1997 § 3-2-7).


3.20.080 Tax in lieu of other taxes, etc.

The tax herein provided shall be in lieu of all other payments by or fees and taxes on any telephone utility subject to the provisions of this chapter, other than ad valorem taxes, and in addition shall be in lieu of any free service furnished by the city and said telephone utility. (Code 1997 § 3-2-8).


Chapter 3.30 (Reserved)


Chapter 3.40 INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS

Sections:

3.40.010    Short title.

3.40.020    General.

3.40.030    Application requirement.

3.40.040    Analysis criteria.

3.40.050    Fee.


3.40.010 Short title.

This chapter may be referred to as the “industrial revenue bond ordinance 1981.” (Code 1997 § 3-4-1).


3.40.020 General.

A.    It is the duty of the city manager to give prompt and energetic attention to all applications made pursuant to this chapter. The city manager or his designee shall report to the city council of the city within 30 days of the date of receipt of a completed application.

B.    The city council will make all necessary determinations of the desirability of projects and will not delegate this authority to any agent, contractor, or employee of the city.

C.    The city council will not employ the provisions of the County and Municipality Development Revenue Bond Act to industries presently located in other parts of the state if the result of such act is to induce removal of these industries from their present locations.

D.    The city council declares its intention to require the payment of ad valorem real estate taxes on any project held in the name of the city or on any other governmental entity in the same amount and manner as if the ownership of the real estate remained in private hands rather than in the ownership of the city or other entity.

E.    The city will require information and proof of such matters necessary to establish the bona fide purposes of the applicant while not unnecessarily divulging information to the competitive disadvantage of the applicant.

F.    The city will, in performing its duties, seek to protect and enlarge the good fiscal reputation of the city.

G.    Materials supplied under the following sections of this chapter shall not be made public unless and until the city council at a public meeting agrees to issue the revenue bonds provided for hereunder, but this shall not preclude the city council from giving such public notice of its consideration of the application as necessary to attract comments and suggestions of members of the community. (Code 1997 § 3-4-2).


3.40.030 Application requirement.

In order to properly process and consider applications to issue bonds for projects set forth herein, certain information shall be required to be submitted by any applicant, which information is detailed as follows:

A.    A legal opinion from an attorney who is a qualified municipal bond counsel acceptable to the city council stating that the applicant’s proposal falls within the intent and meaning of the County and Municipality Development Revenue Bond Act.

B.    Evidence that the proposed bond issue can be sold to an acceptable underwriter or to an experienced investor or group of investors, and that the issue has met satisfactorily all requirements of such underwriter or investor group.

C.    A history of the applicant, including a description of its operations.

D.    The historical financial statistics of the applicant for the last two years, including but not limited to, the following:

1.    Net sales;

2.    Gross profits;

3.    Net income;

4.    Cash flow;

5.    Net worth;

6.    Earnings available for debt service;

7.    Net fixed assets;

8.    Working capital.

E.    A financial position statement from Dun and Bradstreet, or a comparable firm, on the applicant, or a statement that the financial status of the applicant has not been reviewed by a firm.

F.    A list of the major customers of the applicant, and the annual sales to each of said major customers for the preceding five years, if applicable.

G.    A resume of the principals and key employees of the applicant, including directors and officers, if the applicant is a corporation.

H.    The applicant’s pro forma balance sheets, income statements, and cash flow projections for the next five years reflecting the proposed revenue bond issue.

I.    The applicant’s prepared financial statements dated within 120 days of the application date.

J.    Copies of the applicant’s certified financial statements for the preceding two years.

K.    A complete list or description of the assets to be purchased or constructed, and expenses incidental to the acquisition of said assets, including costs of sale of the revenue bond.

L.    A bond redemption and interest payment schedule using estimated interest rates upon his application.

M.    A lease payment schedule, loan payment schedule, or formula for retirement of the bonds and payment of taxes and costs of maintaining the project in good repair and properly insured.

N.    Any other matters specifically required by the city council in light of the specific project, which may not be set forth above.

O.    The city council may waive any of the foregoing requirements set forth herein if, in the judgement of the city council, they are not applicable to the specific project. (Code 1997 § 3-4-3).


3.40.040 Analysis criteria.

At such time as the applicant has satisfied all of the above application requirements, as well as paid the fee set forth below, the city council will review the material and evidence submitted and make its final decision either approving or disapproving the issuance of revenue bonds for the proposed project. Such decision shall be at the full and complete discretion of the city council. In analyzing the application, the city shall reply on the following criteria:

A.    Whether or not the proposed project is in accordance with the goals, concepts, and objectives for development as set forth by the city master plan.

B.    The property on which any project will be located must be within the corporate boundaries of the city and such property must have affixed thereto a zoning district classification which permits the proposed project use.

C.    Whether or not the proposed project has availability of adequate water and sewer services or includes providing for new development of such services. The cost of necessary off-site capital improvements, including, but not limited to, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, utility easements, water and sewer lines, and traffic control devices.

D.    The ratio of net worth of the applicant to the total project value.

E.    The coverage factor for debt service of the applicant from its earnings.

F.    The prior financial success of the applicant in the same or similar endeavors for a period of five years prior to the date of application.

G.    The projected life of the facility or equipment purchased.

H.    The presence or lack thereof of any litigation pending or threatened in any manner against the applicant. (Code 1997 § 3-4-4).


3.40.050 Fee.

At the time the application for funding under the County and Municipality Development Revenue Bond Act is submitted to the city, it shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee to cover cost of analysis in the amount of $1,000. At the time the city issues its industrial revenue bonds in support of the project, the applicant shall pay a fee equal to one-quarter of one percent of the total amount of the bond issue to cover all administration of the bond issue. Applicant shall be credited with the amount of $500.00 against the fee. (Code 1997 § 3-4-5).

 


Title 4 JUDICIARY

Chapters:

4.10    Municipal Court

4.20    Penalty


Chapter 4.10 MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections:

4.10.010    Jurisdiction.

4.10.020    Governing procedures.

4.10.030    Verbatim record of proceedings.

4.10.040    Municipal court administration.

4.10.050    Court costs.

4.10.060    Payment of funds.

4.10.070    Deferred judgments and deferred prosecutions.

4.10.080    Restitution.


4.10.010 Jurisdiction.

The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all suits and actions for violation of any of the provisions of this code or other municipal ordinances or for violations of the City Charter. (Code 1997 § 4-1-1).


4.10.020 Governing procedures.

Actions for violations of the provisions of this code or any other municipal ordinance or City Charter shall be governed by the requirements of the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, as the same have been promulgated or may hereafter be amended by the Colorado Supreme Court, and by those statutes* of the state of Colorado not in conflict with the terms of this chapter. (Code 1997 § 4-1-2).

*    See § 13-10-101, C.R.S., et seq.


4.10.030 Verbatim record of proceedings.

The municipal court judge and municipal court clerk are hereby charged with the responsibility and duty of keeping a verbatim record of the proceedings and evidence at trials or other proceedings of the city by means of electric recording devices. The city council shall provide all materials and facilities necessary for the keeping of such verbatim record. (Code 1997 § 4-1-3).


4.10.040 Municipal court administration.

The city council hereby establishes the position of municipal court clerk. The city manager, after consultation with the municipal court judge, shall designate a city employee(s) to perform the duties of the municipal court clerk as such are delegated by law, court ruling, or the municipal court judge. The municipal court clerk may serve without posting bond. The city council shall annually assign two of its members to serve as liaisons to the municipal court and its personnel and shall advise council as necessary. (Ord. 7-2016 § 1; Code 1997 § 4-1-4).


4.10.050 Court costs.

The municipal court judge is empowered and directed to assess court costs, in the amount of $20.00, against any defendant who is found guilty of an ordinance violation, or City Charter violation, either after a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or who enters into a plea agreement, or who after trial is found guilty of an ordinance or Charter violation. In addition to any other court costs and fees, the municipal court judge is empowered and directed to impose a $50.00 administration fee for each deferred judgment or deferred prosecution agreement approved by the municipal court for an ordinance or City Charter violation. In addition to any costs and fees ordered, the municipal court judge may assess costs of incarceration, to include charges by the jail facility to the city of Gunnison for the housing, care or treatment of the defendant while incarcerated. Costs shall be limited to those amounts actually incurred by the city. (Ord. 1-2011 § 1; Ord. 6-2007 § 1; Code 1997 § 4-1-5).


4.10.060 Payment of funds.

All fines, forfeitures, penalties, and costs collected for violations of any of the provisions of this code, other municipal ordinances, or the City Charter shall, as soon as collected, be paid to the treasurer by the municipal court clerk or municipal court judge. The treasurer shall make and deliver to the person paying said sums to them a receipt therefor. (Code 1997 § 4-1-6).


4.10.070 Deferred judgments and deferred prosecutions.

In addition to all other powers vested in the municipal court by Colorado state law and the Colorado Supreme Court, the municipal court shall have the authority to grant deferred prosecutions and deferred judgments in all cases within the jurisdiction of the municipal court in those circumstances and upon such terms as the municipal court deems appropriate. (Ord. 6-2007 § 2).


4.10.080 Restitution.

Any order of a conviction of any offense set forth in the Gunnison Municipal Code may include consideration of restitution. 

A.    Any such restitution order shall include:

1.    An order of a specific amount of restitution be paid by the defendant; or 

2.    An order that the defendant is obligated to pay restitution but that the specific amount of restitution shall be determined within 90 days immediately following the order of conviction, unless good cause is shown for extending the time period by which the restitution amount shall be determined.

B.    “Conviction” means a verdict of guilty by a judge or jury or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere that is accepted by the court for a violation of any provision of the Gunnison Municipal Code. “Conviction” also includes having received a deferred judgment and sentence or deferred adjudication, except that a person shall not be deemed to have been convicted if the person has successfully completed a deferred sentence or deferred adjudication.

C.    “Restitution” means any quantifiable pecuniary loss suffered by a victim or by the city of Gunnison that relates to a violation of the Gunnison Municipal Code for which the defendant has pled guilty or nolo contendere, including guilty pleas relating to deferred sentences, or for which a defendant has been found guilty by the court. “Restitution” does not include damages for physical or mental pain and suffering, loss of consortium, loss of enjoyment of life, loss of future earnings, or punitive damages. “Restitution” shall also include all costs incurred by a government agency relating to any clean-ups related to a nuisance violation, or costs relating to housing an animal in a shelter, whether the shelter is a public or private animal shelter.

D.    Any order for restitution entered pursuant to this section shall be a final civil judgment in favor of the city of Gunnison and any victim. Notwithstanding any other civil or criminal statute or rule, any such judgment shall remain in force until the restitution is paid in full. (Ord. 1-2011 § 2).


Chapter 4.20 PENALTY

Sections:

4.20.010    Penalty.

4.20.020    Application.

4.20.030    Liability of officers.


4.20.010 Penalty.

Except where a different penalty is specifically provided in any section of this code or by ordinance, any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be fined in a sum of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 3-1997 § 3; Code 1997 § 4-2-1).


4.20.020 Application.

The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this city code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this city code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this city code.

In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this city code the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.

Whenever the doing of an act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this city code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (Code 1997 § 4-2-2).


4.20.030 Liability of officers.

No provision of this city code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the governing body to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (Code 1997 § 4-2-3).


Title 5 GENERAL OFFENSES

Chapters:

5.10    General Offenses

5.20    Traffic

5.30    Nuisances

5.40    Animals

5.50    Undesirable Plant Management


Chapter 5.10 GENERAL OFFENSES

Sections:

5.10.010    Definitions.

5.10.020    Abusing toxic vapors.

5.10.030    Assault.

5.10.040    Conspiracy.

5.10.050    Criminal attempt.

5.10.060    Criminal mischief.

5.10.070    Criminal trespass.

5.10.080    Disorderly conduct.

5.10.090    Disturbing the peace.

5.10.100    Disturbing a lawful assembly.

5.10.110    False reporting.

5.10.120    Harassment.

5.10.130    Indecent exposure.

5.10.140    Obstructing a peace officer or firefighter.

5.10.150    Obstructing highway or other passageway.

5.10.160    Marijuana accessories.

5.10.161    Sale of marijuana accessories.

5.10.170    Repealed.

5.10.180    Possession of marijuana.

5.10.181    Public use of marijuana.

5.10.182    Unlicensed transfer, sale or purchase of marijuana.

5.10.183    Personal cultivation of marijuana.

5.10.184    Knowingly allowing underage persons to possess or consume marijuana on private property.

5.10.185    Unlawful acts related to licensed commercial marijuana establishments.

5.10.187    Immunity for persons who suffer or report an emergency drug or alcohol overdose event.

5.10.188    Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and Colorado Code of Regulations (CCR).

5.10.190    Prostitution.

5.10.200    Theft.

5.10.210    Repealed.

5.10.220    Consumption of malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors in public places.

5.10.230    Underage possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol.

5.10.240    Underage purchase of ethyl alcohol.

5.10.241    Knowingly allowing underage persons to possess or consume ethyl alcohol on private property.

5.10.250    Evidence of ethyl alcohol.

5.10.260    Weapon offenses.

5.10.270    Closure of public parks.

5.10.271    Unlawful possession of tobacco products by persons under the age of 18.

5.10.272    Penalties and procedures.

5.10.280    Applicability to juveniles.

5.10.290    Penalties.

5.10.300    Surcharges levied on certain offenses.


5.10.010 Definitions.

“Bodily injury” means physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical or mental function.

“Criminal negligence” means a person acts with criminal negligence when, through a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise, he fails to perceive a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or that a circumstance exists.

“Ethyl alcohol” means any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol.

“Intentionally” or “with the intent” means offenses defined herein in which the mental culpability requirement is expressed as “intentionally” or “with the intent” are declared to be specific intent offenses. A person acts “intentionally” or “with the intent” when his conscious objective is to cause the specific result proscribed herein as an offense. It is immaterial to the issue of specific intent whether or not the result actually occurred.

“Knowingly” means offenses defined herein in which the mental culpability requirement is expressed as “knowingly” are declared to be general intent offenses. A person acts knowingly with respect to conduct or to a circumstance described herein when he is aware that his conduct is of such nature or that such circumstance exists. A person acts knowingly, with respect to a result of his conduct, when he is aware that his conduct is practically certain to cause the result.

“Marijuana” or “marihuana” means all parts of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin including marijuana concentrate. “Marijuana” or “marihuana” does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, or sterilized seeds of the plant which are incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product.

“Marijuana accessories” means any equipment, products, or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.

“Marijuana cultivation facility” means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers.

“Marijuana establishments” means a marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana testing facility, a marijuana product manufacturing facility, or a retail marijuana store.

“Marijuana product manufacturing facility” means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers.

“Marijuana products” means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and tinctures.

“Marijuana testing facility” means an entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana.

“Medical marijuana center” and other medical marijuana related terms defined in GMC 15.40.010, Definitions.

“Obscene” means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, or excretory functions.

“Possession of ethyl alcohol” means that a person has or holds any amount of ethyl alcohol anywhere on his/her person, or that a person owns or has custody of ethyl alcohol, or has ethyl alcohol within his/her immediate presence and control.

“Premises” means real property, buildings, and other improvements thereon, and the stream banks and beds of any nonnavigable fresh water streams flowing through such real property, or privately owned motor vehicles or conveyances.

“Private property” means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a person and/or persons for habitation which is not open to the public or privately owned real property which is not open to the public.

“Public place” means a place to which the public or a substantial number of the public has access, and includes but is not limited to highways, transportation facilities, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds, and the common areas of public and private buildings and facilities.

“Recklessly” means a person acts recklessly when he consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or that a circumstance exists.

“Retail marijuana store” means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers.

“Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury which, either at the time of the actual injury or at a later time, involves a substantial risk of death, a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, a substantial risk of protracted loss or impairment of the function of any part or organ of the body, or breaks, fractures, or burns of the second or third degree.

“Tobacco product” means any product that contains or is derived from tobacco or contains nicotine, and is intended to be ingested or inhaled by or applied to the skin of any individual; including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, e-cigarettes, vape pens or vaporizing apparatus, except that “tobacco product” does not mean any product that the Food and Drug Administration of the United States Department of Health and Human Services has approved as a tobacco use cessation product.

“Toxic vapors” means the following substances or products containing such substances:

1.    Alcohols, including methyl, isopropyl, propyl, or butyl;

2.    Aliphatic acetates, including ethyl, methyl, propyl, or methyl cellosolve acetate;

3.    Acetone;

4.    Benzene;

5.    Carbon tetrachloride;

6.    Cyclohexane;

7.    Freons, including freon 11 and freon 12;

8.    Hexane;

9.    Methyl ethyl ketone;

10.    Methyl isobutyl ketone;

11.    Naphtha;

12.    Perchlorethylene;

13.    Toluene;

14.    Trichloroethane; or

15.    Xylene. (Ord. 2-2017 § 1; Ord. 13-2013 § 1; Ord. 2-2013 §§ 2 – 4; Ord. 4-2011 § 1; Ord. 1-2011 § 3; Code 1997 § 5-1-1).


5.10.020 Abusing toxic vapors.

A.    No person shall knowingly smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors for the purpose of causing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulled senses of the nervous system. No person shall knowingly possess, buy, or use any toxic vapor for the purposes described in this section, nor shall any person knowingly aid any other person to use any such substance for the purposes described in this section. This section shall not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia or other substances for medical or dental purposes.

B.    During any trial for a violation of this section, any bottle, can, or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can, or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can, or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. Evidence that the bottle, can, or other container lists one or more of the substances defined as toxic vapors as one of its ingredients shall be prima facie evidence that the substance in such container contains toxic vapors and emits the fumes thereof.

C.    Abusing toxic vapors is a petty offense. (Code 1997 § 5-1-2).


5.10.030 Assault.

A.    No person shall knowingly or recklessly cause bodily injury to another person.

B.    Assault is a misdemeanor. (Code 1997 § 5-1-3).


5.10.040 Conspiracy.

A.    A person commits conspiracy to commit a crime if, with the intent to promote or facilitate its commission, he/she agrees with another person or persons that they, or one or more of them, will engage in conduct which constitutes a crime or an attempt to commit a crime, or he/she agrees to aid the other person or persons in the planning or commission of a crime or of an attempt to commit such crime.

B.    No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit a crime unless an overt act in pursuance of that conspiracy is proved to have been done by him/her or by a person with whom he/she conspired.

C.    If a person knows that one with whom he/she conspires to commit a crime has conspired with another person or persons to commit the same crime, he/she is guilty of conspiring to commit a crime with the other person or persons, whether or not he/she knows their identity.

D.    If a person conspires to commit a number of crimes, he/she is guilty of only one conspiracy so long as such multiple crimes are part of a single criminal episode.

E.    It is an affirmative defense to a charge of conspiracy that the offender, after conspiring to commit a crime, thwarted the success of the conspiracy under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of his criminal intent.

F.    Conspiracy is a petty offense. (Code 1997 § 5-1-4).


5.10.050 Criminal attempt.

A.    A person commits criminal attempt if, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for commission of an offense, he/she engages in conduct constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the offense. A substantial step is any conduct, whether act, omission, or possession, which is strongly corroborative of the firmness of the actor’s purpose to complete the commission of the offense. Factual or legal impossibility of committing the offense is not a defense if the offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be, nor is it a defense that the crime attempted was actually perpetrated by the accused.

B.    It is an affirmative defense to a charge of criminal attempt that the defendant abandoned his/her effort to commit the crime or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting the complete and voluntary renunciation of his/her criminal intent.

C.    Criminal attempt is a petty offense. (Code 1997 § 5-1-5).


5.10.060 Criminal mischief.

A.    No person shall knowingly damage the real or personal property of another person.

B.    No person shall injure, mark, or deface any trees or flowers planted for ornament or shade of the streets or private lots.

C.    No person shall throw stones, snowballs, water-filled balloons, or other missile against or upon or in any way deface or injure any building, tree, vehicle, or person, whether on public or private property.

D.    Criminal mischief is a misdemeanor. (Code 1997 § 5-1-6).


5.10.070 Criminal trespass.

A.    No person shall unlawfully enter or remain in or upon the premises of another without permission.

B.    Criminal trespass is a petty offense. (Code 1997 § 5-1-7).


5.10.080 Disorderly conduct.

A.    No person shall make a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture, or display in a public place, and the utterance, gesture, or display tends to incite an immediate breach of peace.

B.    No person shall abuse or threaten a person in a public place in an obviously offensive manner.

C.    Repealed by Ord. 2-2015.

D.    No person shall urinate or defecate in a public place or upon private property visible from a public place.

E.    No person shall fight with another in a public place, except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skills.

F.    Violation of subsections (A), (B), (C), and (D) of this section are petty offenses. Violation of subsection (E) of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2-2015 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-1-8).


5.10.090 Disturbing the peace.

A.    No person shall in a public or private place make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any unreasonably loud or unusual noise which seriously inconveniences other persons in the area. For the purpose of this section, a member of the police department is empowered to make a prima facia determination as to whether such noises constitute a public nuisance.

B.    No person shall permit another to commit an act of disturbing the peace as described above in or upon any premises owned, possessed, or under his management or control when it is in his power to prevent such an act.

C.    Noise caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate safety, health, or welfare of the community or individuals of the community shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

D.    Applications for a permit to hold a public event which may violate the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the city manager or his duly authorized representative. Such permit shall be valid only at the specific times, dates, and conditions noted in the permit.

E.    Disturbing the peace is a misdemeanor. (Code 1997 § 5-1-9).


5.10.100 Disturbing a lawful assembly.

A.    No person shall, with the intent to prevent or disrupt any lawful meeting, procession, or gathering, significantly obstruct or interfere with the meeting, procession, or gathering by physical action, verbal utterance, or any other means.

B.    Disturbing a lawful assembly is a misdemeanor. (Code 1997 § 5-1-10).


5.10.110 False reporting.

A.    No person shall knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to any government agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property.

B.    No person shall report or knowingly cause the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern when he knows that it did not occur.

C.    No person shall report or knowingly cause the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when he knows that he has no such information or knows that the information is false.

D.    False reporting is a misdemeanor. (Code 1997 § 5-1-11).


5.10.120 Harassment.

A.    No person shall, with the intent to harass, alarm or annoy another, strike, shove, kick, or otherwise touch or subject an individual to physical contact.

B.    No person shall, with the intent to harass, alarm or annoy another, initiate communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise, by telephone, telephone network, data network, text message, instant message, computer, computer network, or computer system in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or make any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal by telephone, computer, computer network, or computer system that is obscene.

C.    No person shall, with the intent to harass, alarm or annoy another, make a telephone call or cause a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation.

D.    No person shall, with the intent to harass, alarm or annoy another, make repeated insults, taunts, challenges, or other communications in offensively coarse language to another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response.

E.    No person shall, with intent to harass, alarm or annoy another, while in a public place, direct obscene language at, make obscene gestures to, or follow another person.

F.    No person shall make repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another’s home or private residence or other private property.

G.    As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, “obscene” means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, or excretory functions.

H.    Harassment is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1-2011 § 4; Code 1997 § 5-1-12).


5.10.130 Indecent exposure.

A.    No person shall perform in a public place, or where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public, an act of sexual intercourse, deviant sexual intercourse, lewd exposure of the body done with the intent to arouse or satisfy the sexual desire of any person, or lewd fondling or caressing of the body of another person. No person shall knowingly expose his genitals to the view of any person over the age of 14 under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the other person.

B.    Indecent exposure is a misdemeanor. (Code 1997 § 5-1-13).


5.10.140 Obstructing a peace officer or firefighter.

A.    No person shall obstruct a peace officer or firefighter by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference, or an obstacle to knowingly obstruct, impair, or hinder the enforcement of the city ordinances, the preservation of the peace, the prevention, control, or abatement of a fire by a peace officer or firefighter, acting under the color of his/her official authority.

B.    Obstructing a peace officer or firefighter is a misdemeanor. (Code 1997 § 5-1-14).


5.10.150 Obstructing highway or other passageway.

A.    No person shall intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly, without legal privilege:

1.    Obstruct a highway, street, sidewalk, waterway, building entrance, elevator, aisle, stairway, or hallway to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, or any other place used for the passage of persons, vehicles, or conveyances, whether the obstruction arises from his acts alone or from his acts and the acts of others; or

2.    Disobey a reasonable request or order to move issued by a person he knows to be a peace officer, a fireman, or a person with authority to control the use of the premises, to prevent obstruction of a highway or passageway or to maintain public safety by disbursing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire, riot, or other hazard.

B.    For purposes of this section, “obstruct” means to render impassable or to render passage unreasonably inconvenient or hazardous.

C.    Obstructing a highway or other passageway is a petty offense.

D.    Penalty. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, a person shall be fined the sum of $100.00. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, in addition to any fine, a person may be required to perform useful public service. (Ord. 5-1997 §§ 1, 2; Code 1997 § 5-1-15).


5.10.160 Marijuana accessories.

A.    No person under 21 years of age who does not hold a valid medical marijuana card in compliance with the Colorado Revised Statutes shall possess marijuana accessories if he/she knows or reasonably should know that the marijuana accessory could be used under circumstances in violation of the law.

B.    It shall be a violation of this section for a person under the age of 21 to possess marijuana accessories, and such violation shall be a petty offense. (Ord. 2-2013 § 5; Code 1997 § 5-1-16).


5.10.161 Sale of marijuana accessories.

A.    No person shall offer for sale or sell marijuana accessories unless licensed by the city of Gunnison.

B.    Unlicensed sale of marijuana accessories is a petty offense. (Ord. 2-2013 § 8).


5.10.170 Drug paraphernalia, determination, considerations.

Repealed by Ord. 2-2013. (Code 1997 § 5-1-17).


5.10.180 Possession of marijuana.

A.    No person under the age of 21 who does not possess a medical marijuana card in compliance with the Colorado Revised Statutes shall possess marijuana or consume marijuana within the city.

B.    No person 21 years of age or older who does not possess a medical marijuana card in compliance with the Colorado Revised Statutes shall possess more than one ounce of marijuana, except as permitted pursuant to Colorado Constitution, Article XVIII, Section 16(3)(b).

C.    No person who possesses a medical marijuana card in compliance with the Colorado Revised Statutes shall possess more than two ounces of marijuana, except as permitted pursuant to Colorado Constitution, Article XVIII, Section 14(4)(b).

D.    Licensed persons engaged in the transportation or movement of marijuana, in the course of doing business for a licensed marijuana establishment, are exempt from this section.

E.    Possession of not more than one ounce of marijuana or consumption of marijuana by a person under the age of 21 is a petty offense.

F.    Possession of more than one ounce but less than two ounces of marijuana is a petty offense. Possession of two ounces but less than six ounces of marijuana is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 7-2015 § 3).


5.10.181 Public use of marijuana.

A.    No person shall openly or publicly consume or use marijuana.

B.    No person shall use marijuana in a way that endangers others.

C.    Public consumption or usage of marijuana is a petty offense. (Ord. 2-2013 § 8).


5.10.182 Unlicensed transfer, sale or purchase of marijuana.

A.    No person shall transfer, sell, trade, exchange, or give, with or without remuneration, any amount of marijuana to a person under the age of 21.

B.    No person under the age of 21 may obtain marijuana by any means, with or without remuneration.

C.    No person shall transfer, sell, trade, or exchange, with remuneration, any amount of marijuana to a person 21 years of age and older without a license.

D.    No person shall give, without remuneration, more than one ounce of marijuana to a person 21 years of age and older.

E.    No person 21 years of age or older may obtain more than one ounce of marijuana, with or without remuneration.

F.    Restrictions placed on transferring, exchanging or giving of marijuana does not apply to persons who are in compliance with the Colorado Revised Statutes pertaining to medical marijuana.

G.    The transfer, sale, trade, or exchange of marijuana in violation of this section is a misdemeanor. Obtaining marijuana in violation of this section is a petty offense. (Ord. 7-2015 § 4).


5.10.183 Personal cultivation of marijuana.

A.    No individual shall cultivate or allow cultivation on premises under their control of more than six marijuana plants, three of which are mature flowering plants, except as allowed pursuant to Colorado Constitution, Article XVIII, Section 14(4)(b) or Section 16. The marijuana produced by such cultivation, in excess of legal possession limits, shall be maintained on the premises where grown. Marijuana cultivated by an individual shall not be sold.

B.    Cultivation of more than six plants by a primary caregiver, medical marijuana patient or by multiple individuals on a single property is prohibited:

1.    Within a single-family dwelling unit where the aggregate area used for the production and growing of marijuana plants exceeds a contiguous 25-square-foot secure area;

2.    Within the common area of a multifamily dwelling unit;

3.    Within any dwelling, apartment, duplex, residence, or location where individuals reside where the aggregate area used for the production and growing of marijuana plants exceeds 25 square feet;

4.    If the property is not in compliance with the International Building Code as adopted by the city of Gunnison;

5.    If the property is not in compliance, to the standard used for licensed marijuana establishments, as to odor provisions of the LDC, Section 3.15(B)(10).

C.    No person shall openly or publicly cultivate marijuana. “Openly or publicly cultivated” means the plants, lights, sounds and odors associated with cultivation are clearly visible and identifiable from a public place or cause a public nuisance.

D.    No person shall cultivate marijuana except in a secure area as defined in the LDC.

E.    No person shall cultivate marijuana in a residence where a person under 21 years of age lives unless the cultivation area is in a secure area denying the underage person access.

F.    No person shall cultivate marijuana in a residence visited by persons under 21 years of age without ensuring that access to the cultivation site is reasonably restricted preventing access for the duration of the underage person’s visit.

G.    Violation of any part of this section is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 7-2015 § 5).


5.10.184 Knowingly allowing underage persons to possess or consume marijuana on private property.

A.    No person who is in possession and control of private property shall knowingly allow any persons less than 21 years of age to possess or consume marijuana anywhere on private property in their possession and control.

B.    No person in possession and control of private property shall knowingly host, permit, or allow persons under 21 years of age to gather at said property where marijuana is available, without making reasonable efforts to ensure that persons under 21 years of age do not consume marijuana.

1.    Reasonable efforts include, but are not limited to, limiting the amount of marijuana available, limiting the size of the gathering, restricting access to marijuana by persons under 21 years of age, and obtaining valid state identification documents confirming a person’s age.

C.    The provisions of this section shall not apply if the person in possession or using marijuana possesses a valid medical marijuana card and is in compliance with the Colorado Revised Statutes.

D.    Knowingly allowing underage persons to possess or consume marijuana on private property is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2-2013 § 8).


5.10.185 Unlawful acts related to licensed commercial marijuana establishments.

A.    It is unlawful to allow an unauthorized person into a limited-access area.

B.    It is unlawful to allow a person licensed pursuant to state statute to be within a limited-access area without the person’s license badge displayed as required by state statute, except as provided in Sections 44-11-701 and 44-12-701, C.R.S.

C.    It is unlawful to sell or permit the sale of marijuana or marijuana products to a person under 21 years of age who does not possess a medical marijuana card in compliance with the Colorado Revised Statutes.

D.    It is unlawful to sell or permit the sale of medical marijuana or medical marijuana products to a person not authorized to purchase medical marijuana pursuant to Colorado statute.

E.    It is unlawful to present false, altered or fraudulent identification or documents when purchasing marijuana or marijuana products.

F.    It is unlawful for a person under 21 years of age to purchase marijuana, marijuana concentrate or marijuana products who does not possess a medical marijuana card in compliance with the Colorado Revised Statutes.

G.    It is unlawful for a person not authorized to purchase medical marijuana or medical marijuana products to purchase from a medical marijuana business.

H.    It is unlawful to sell more than a quarter of an ounce of retail marijuana and no more than a quarter of an ounce equivalent of a retail marijuana product during a single transaction to a nonresident of Colorado.

I.    It is unlawful to sell more than one ounce of retail marijuana and no more than an ounce equivalent of a retail marijuana product during a single transaction.

J.    It is unlawful to sell, serve, or distribute marijuana, marijuana concentrate or products containing marijuana except during the hours provided for in the city of Gunnison Land Development Code.

K.    It is unlawful for a person to consume marijuana or products containing marijuana or marijuana concentrate in a licensed marijuana establishment, and it is unlawful for a marijuana licensee to allow marijuana or products containing marijuana or marijuana concentrate to be consumed upon its licensed premises.

L.    It is unlawful to have on any licensed premises any marijuana, marijuana products, or marijuana paraphernalia that shows evidence of marijuana usage or marijuana products having been consumed or partially consumed.

M.    It is unlawful for any person licensed to sell marijuana or marijuana products to:

1.    Display any signs that are inconsistent with the LDC;

2.    To use advertising material that is misleading, deceptive, or false, or that is designed to appeal to minors.

N.    All sales, transfers and distribution of marijuana by a licensed marijuana establishment shall occur only upon licensed premises, and the licensee shall be strictly prohibited from delivery of marijuana to any person at any other location.

O.    The transfer, sale, trade, or exchange of marijuana in violation of this section is a misdemeanor. Obtaining marijuana in violation of this section is a petty offense. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1; Ord. 7-2015 § 6).


5.10.187 Immunity for persons who suffer or report an emergency drug or alcohol overdose event.

A.    A person shall be immune from criminal prosecution for an offense under GMC 5.10.160, 5.10.180, 5.10.181, 5.10.182(A), (B) or (D), and 5.10.184:

1.    The person reports in good faith an emergency drug or alcohol overdose event to a law enforcement officer, to the 911 system, or to a medical provider;

2.    The person remains at the scene of the event until a law enforcement officer or an emergency medical responder arrives or the person remains at the facilities of the medical provider until a law enforcement officer arrives;

3.    The person identifies himself or herself to, and cooperates with, the law enforcement officer, emergency medical responder, or medical provider; and

4.    The offense arises from the same course of events from which the emergency drug or alcohol overdose event arose.

B.    The immunity described in subsection (A)(1) of this section also extends to the person who suffered the emergency drug or alcohol overdose event.

C.    The immunity described in subsection (A)(1) of this section does not apply to a licensee or employee or agent of a marijuana establishment working within the scope of their employment. (Ord. 7-2015 § 7).


5.10.188 Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and Colorado Code of Regulations (CCR).

Except as otherwise specifically provided, the city of Gunnison ordinances related to marijuana incorporate the requirements and procedures set forth in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the Colorado Code of Regulations. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this section and the provisions of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and Colorado Code of Regulations or any other applicable state or local law, the more restrictive provision, article or section shall be used. (Ord. 7-2015 § 8).


5.10.190 Prostitution.

A.    No person shall perform, offer to perform, or agree to perform any act of sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, or anal intercourse, with any person not his/her spouse, in exchange for money or other things of value.

B.    No person shall by word, gesture, or action endeavor to further the practice of prostitution in any public place or within public view.

C.    No person shall engage in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct with a prostitute.

D.    Prostitution is a misdemeanor. (Code 1997 § 5-1-19).


5.10.200 Theft.

A.    No person shall knowingly obtain or exercise control over anything of value of another without authorization, or by threat or deception, and:

1.    Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use and benefit of the thing of value; or

2.    Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value in such a manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; or

3.    Uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment, or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; or

4.    Demands any consideration to which he/she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person.

B.    If any person knowingly conceals unpurchased goods, wares, or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment, whether the concealment be on his/her own person or otherwise, and whether on or off the premises of said store or mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima facie evidence that the person intended to commit the crime of theft.

C.    If any person conceals upon his person or otherwise and carries away any unpurchased goods, wares, or merchandise held or owned by any store or mercantile establishment, the merchant or any employee thereof or any peace officer, acting in good faith and upon probable cause based upon reasonable grounds therefor, may detain and question such person in a reasonable manner for the purpose of ascertaining whether the person is guilty of theft. Such questioning of a person by a merchant, merchant’s employee, or peace or police officer does not render the merchant, merchant’s employee, or peace officer civilly or criminally liable for slander, false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution, or unlawful detention.

D.    This section does not apply if the thing of value is over $100.00.

E.    Theft is a misdemeanor. (Code 1997 § 5-1-20).


5.10.210 Theft of rental property.

Repealed by Ord. 2-2015. (Code 1997 § 5-1-21).


5.10.220 Consumption of malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors in public places.

A.    No person shall consume malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors, as defined under the Colorado Liquor Code, in or upon any public park of the city of Gunnison, or any public highway, street, or alley within the city of Gunnison, unless such place is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption upon such premises pursuant to part 101 of article 5 of title 44, C.R.S.

B.    Public consumption of malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 12-2018 § 1; Ord. 6-2005 § 1; Ord. 3-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-1-22).


5.10.230 Underage possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol.

A.    No person under 21 years of age shall possess or consume ethyl alcohol.

B.    It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in this section that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed by a person under 21 under the following circumstances:

1.    While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property and the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed with the consent of his/her parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; or

2.    When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person’s body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed in the Colorado Revised Statutes, or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed, or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes, or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than one-half of one percent of ethyl alcohol by weight; or

3.    The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol which takes place for religious purposes protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.

C.    Prima facie evidence of a violation of GMC 5.10.220 shall consist of:

1.    Evidence that the defendant was under 21 years of age and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol;

2.    Evidence that the defendant was under 21 years of age and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment.

D.    Illegal possession or consumption of alcohol by an underage person is a petty offense. (Code 1997 § 5-1-23).


5.10.240 Underage purchase of ethyl alcohol.

A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain or attempt to obtain ethyl alcohol by misrepresentation of age or by any other method in a place where ethyl alcohol is sold when such person is under 21 years of age.

B.    Underage purchase of ethyl alcohol is a petty offense. (Code 1997 § 5-1-24).


5.10.241 Knowingly allowing underage persons to possess or consume ethyl alcohol on private property.

A.    No person who is in possession and control of private property shall knowingly allow any persons under 21 years of age to possess or consume any ethyl alcohol anywhere on the private property in their possession and control.

B.    No person in possession and control of private property shall knowingly host, permit, or allow persons under 21 years of age to gather at said property, where ethyl alcohol is available, without making reasonable efforts to ensure that persons under 21 years of age do not consume ethyl alcohol, and ethyl alcohol is consumed by one or more persons under 21 years of age.

1.    Reasonable efforts include, but are not limited to, limiting the amount of ethyl alcohol available, limiting the size of the gathering, restricting access to ethyl alcohol by persons under 21 years of age, and obtaining valid state identification documents confirming a person’s age.

C.    It shall be an affirmative defense to this section if the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed in accordance with GMC 5.10.230(B).

D.    Knowingly allowing underage persons to possess or consume ethyl alcohol on private property is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 5-2010 § 1).


5.10.250 Evidence of ethyl alcohol.

During any trial for violation of GMC 5.10.210 or 5.10.220, any bottle, can, or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can, or container shall be admissible into evidence, and information contained on any label on such bottle, can, or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can, or other container are composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can, or other container as “beer,” “ale,” “malt beverage,” “fermented malt beverage,” “malt liquor,” “wine,” “champagne,” “whiskey,” “gin,” “vodka,” “tequila,” “schnapps,” “brandy,” “cognac,” “liqueur,” “cordial,” “alcohol,” or “liquor” shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can, or other container was composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. (Code 1997 § 5-1-25).


5.10.260 Weapon offenses.

A.    No person shall discharge any firearm, airgun, BB gun, slingshot, bow, or any toy gun projecting lead or any missiles recklessly or with criminal negligence.

B.    No person shall carry any firearm, whether loaded or not, into any premises licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.

C.    No person shall carry any weapon into any building housing government offices and having a sign posted prohibiting such weapons near the entrance.

D.    It shall not be an offense under subsection (B) or (C) of this section if:

1.    The weapon is brought into a building housing a law enforcement agency for the purpose of turning the item in to that agency or while in the process of leaving the building after claiming an item. In all cases the item will be unloaded, cased or by some other means made safe to handle.

2.    The weapon is being brought into the facility for a scheduled event or activity where the item is allowed and the person responsible for the facility is aware of the event.

3.    The person is legally authorized to carry a concealed handgun and acting in accordance with state law pertaining to permitted carry and the handgun is concealed. 

E.    Nothing in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from carrying a weapon or firearm, or discharging a weapon or firearm, in the lawful performance of his/her duties.

F.    Weapons offenses are misdemeanors. (Ord. 1-2011 § 5; Code 1997 § 5-1-26).


5.10.270 Closure of public parks.

A.    No person shall enter or remain upon a park of the city of Gunnison between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. local time, except when such person is in attendance at an event either sponsored by or expressly permitted, in writing, by the city of Gunnison parks and recreation department.

B.    Violation. Violation of the public park closure is a petty offense.

C.    Upon conviction of an offense of this section a person shall be fined the sum of $100.00. (Code 1997 § 5-1-27).


5.10.271 Unlawful possession of tobacco products by persons under the age of 18.

A.    No person under the age of 18 years shall possess any tobacco product within the city of Gunnison. 

B.    No person under the age of 18 years shall purchase or attempt to purchase any tobacco product within the city of Gunnison.

C.    No person shall knowingly give, sell, or distribute any tobacco product to any person who is under the age of 18 years within the city of Gunnison.

D.    It shall not be an offense under this section if the person under the age of 18 years was acting at the direction of an employee of a governmental agency authorized to enforce or ensure compliance with laws relating to the prohibition of the sale of cigarettes and tobacco products to persons under the age of 18 years.

E.    Violation of any of the provisions of this section is a petty offense. (Ord. 2-2017 § 2; Ord. 13-2013 § 2; Ord. 4-2011 § 2).


5.10.272 Penalties and procedures.

A.    A person receiving a summons for the alleged violation of GMC 5.10.271 shall appear in Gunnison municipal court with a parent or legal guardian on the date set forth on the summons. Should the minor fail to appear with a parent or legal guardian, a summons shall be issued for both the minor and the minor’s parent(s) or legal guardian(s) compelling the attendance in Gunnison municipal court of the minor and at least one of the minor’s parents or legal guardians.

B.    Upon issuance of a first summons and complaint for a violation of GMC 5.10.271, if such person appears before the municipal court accompanied by a parent or guardian, such person, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to participate in and complete a tobacco product education class and to pay the fees associated therewith. If such person, with the express consent of a parent or guardian, refuses to take the tobacco education class, the court shall assess as a penalty an amount equal to the fees charged for such class.

C.    Upon a second conviction, the court shall assess a penalty of $50.00 and/or order the person so convicted to participate in the tobacco product education class a second time.

D.    For a third or more conviction, the court shall assess a penalty in the amount of $100.00. (Ord. 2-2017 § 3; Ord. 13-2013 § 3; Ord. 4-2011 § 3).


5.10.280 Applicability to juveniles.

The ordinances of the city of Gunnison are applicable to juveniles over the age of 14, except that a juvenile may not be incarcerated pre- or post-adjudication. (Code 1997 § 5-1-28).


5.10.290 Penalties.

A.    Upon conviction of an offense set forth in this chapter which is classified as a misdemeanor, a person shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $1,000 for any one offense or imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Upon conviction of an offense set forth in this chapter which is classified as a petty offense, a person shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $100.00 for any one offense.

C.    Upon conviction for any offense set forth in this chapter, in addition to any fine or imprisonment, a person may be required to perform useful public service or such other sanction as deemed appropriate by the court. (Ord. 1-2011 § 6; Code 1997 § 5-1-29).


5.10.300 Surcharges levied on certain offenses.

A.    A surcharge in the sum of $50.00 is hereby levied upon each criminal action resulting in a conviction or in a deferred judgment and sentence of the following sections of this code: GMC 5.10.080, 5.10.090, 5.10.220, 5.10.230, 5.10.240, and 5.10.241. The surcharge shall be paid to the municipal court clerk by the defendant in such action, who shall transmit the sums collected to Safe Ride of Gunnison County, Inc.

B.    The surcharge levied pursuant to this section is separate and distinct from any costs or fines levied or imposed pursuant to this code.

C.    Safe Ride of Gunnison County, Inc., shall submit to the city council of the city of Gunnison, in writing, a financial report setting forth its sources of funds and all expenditures at least once during each calendar year. (Ord. 5-2010 § 2; Ord. 11-1999 §§ 1, 2; Code 1997 § 5-1-30).


Chapter 5.20 TRAFFIC

Sections:

5.20.010    Adoption.

5.20.015    Deletions.

5.20.020    Additions or modifications.

5.20.030    Penalties.

5.20.040    Application.

5.20.050    Validity.

5.20.060    Repeal.

5.20.070    Interpretation.

5.20.080    Certification.


5.20.010 Adoption.

Pursuant to part 2 of article 16 of title 31, C.R.S., and Section 6.6 of the City of Gunnison Municipal Home Rule Charter, there is hereby adopted by reference Articles I and II, inclusive, of the 2010 Edition of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado, promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700, Denver, Colorado 80222. The subject matter of the Model Traffic Code relates primarily to comprehensive traffic control regulations for the city. The purpose of this chapter and the code adopted herein is to provide a system of traffic regulations consistent with state law and generally conforming to similar regulations throughout the state and the nation. Three copies of the Model Traffic Code adopted herein are now filed in the office of the clerk of the city of Gunnison, Colorado, and may be inspected during regular business hours. (Ord. 8-2010 § 1; Ord. 8-2003 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-2-1).


5.20.015 Deletions. 

The 2010 Edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length save and except the following articles and/or sections which are declared to be inapplicable to this municipality and are therefore expressly deleted: 

A.    Part 17, Penalties and Procedure;

B.    Appendix, Part A, Instructions for Adopting the Model Traffic Code by Reference;

C.    Appendix, Part B, Specimen Ordinance for Adopting Model Traffic Code by Reference;

D.    Appendix, Part C, Specimen Notice of Hearing;

E.    Appendix, Part D, Specimen Certification – Posting of Ordinance;

F.    Appendix, Part E, Instructions For Amending Model Traffic Code Previously Adopted by Reference;

G.    Appendix, Part F, Listing of Amendments for Updating Previous Edition of Model Traffic Code Adopted by Reference;

H.    Appendix, Part G, Specimen Certification of Model Traffic Code. (Ord. 8-2010 § 2).


5.20.020 Additions or modifications.

The said adopted code is subject to the following additions or modifications: 

Part 1, Traffic Regulations – Generally, is hereby amended by the addition of Section 118:

118     Use of motorized golf carts.

(1) The operation of motorized golf carts by permit is hereby authorized on streets within the City of Gunnison. Any person operating a motorized golf cart under permit has all the rights and duties applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts. This provision does not authorize use of golf carts on any state highway. Except that golf carts may cross a state highway at a right angle at any cross street, after complying with traffic control devices present and if none present shall yield the right of way to any vehicles or pedestrians on state highway.

(2) Authorization to operate a motorized golf cart on city streets is by permit only. Permits shall be issued by the chief of police or designee. Any person holding a valid, current driver’s license may apply for a permit. All permits shall expire annually, on June 1. The fee for a permit shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 

(3) Each application for a permit to operate a motorized golf cart on the city street shall include:

(a) The name, address, phone and driver’s license number of the applicant;

(b) Proof of inspection, by the Gunnison Police Department, to insure the golf cart has all required equipment;

(c) Proof of current liability insurance;

(d) Such other information as the chief of police or City Council may from time to time require.

(4) The following equipment is required on any motorized golf cart during operation on any city street.

(a) The slow moving vehicle emblem provided for by state statute, properly mounted on the rear of the golf cart pursuant to state regulations;

(b) A rear view mirror, properly mounted on the golf cart so as to reflect to the operator a view of the street for a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet to the rear of the golf cart;

(c) One red safety flag mounted 4 foot from the ground and properly attached to the rear of the golf cart.

(5) It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart on any city street where:

(a) The operator does not have in his possession a valid adult driver’s license;

(b) The operator does not have in his possession a valid, current, and un-revoked permit issued to the operator; 

(c) The motorized golf cart is operated between sunset and sunrise;

(d) The motorized golf cart is being operated during inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other condition, or at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles on the roadway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet;

(e) The motorized golf cart is not equipped with required equipment;

(f) The operator does not have current insurance coverage;

(7) The operator fails to observe all traffic laws and regulations, except when those provisions cannot reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts.

(8) A permit issued under the section may be revoked or modified at any time by the chief of police or designee if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate a motorized golf cart on the city street. 

(9) Any person whose permit to operate a motorized golf cart has been revoked may appeal the revocation to the city manager. Appeals shall be submitted in writing to the city manager within twenty (20) days of the date of revocation.

(10) Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction.

Part 1, Section 109(9), Restricted Use of Snowmobiles, Skis, Toboggans, Coasters, Skates, and Similar Devices, is hereby amended to read as follows: 

(a) Except as provided in subsection b of this section, it shall be lawful for persons to use any street or highway within this municipality for traveling on roller skis, coasters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices. Similar devices includes skis and coasters equipped with a gas or electric, engine manufactured to carry one person in a standing position, having a maximum speed of 15 miles per hour, equipped with a handlebar type steering mechanism and braking system.

(b) It shall be unlawful for persons to use U. S. Highway 50, also known as Tomichi Avenue, and Colorado Highway 135, also known as Main Street, for traveling on roller skis, coasters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices, except while crossing these streets in a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. Roller skis, coasters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices may not be used on any street during the hours of sunset to sunrise or when visibility is limited to less than 500 feet for any reason.

(c) Every person traveling on roller skis, coasters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices upon a roadway where their travel is permitted shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties and penalties applicable to the driver of a vehicle as set forth in this code, except those provisions of this code which, by their very nature, can have no application. Said persons shall also comply with special rules set forth in this article. 

Whenever the word “vehicle” is used in any of the driving rules set forth in this code that are applicable to users of roller skis, coasters, roller skates, skateboards, and other similar devices, such term shall include the aforementioned. 

(d) Every person traveling on roller skis, coasters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices shall obey the instructions of official traffic control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 

(e) Persons traveling on roller skis, coasters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices shall not impede the normal flow of traffic or travel in such a manner as to disrupt the normal flow of traffic. 

(f) Every person traveling on roller skis, coasters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices upon a street or highway shall ride as close to the right side of the street as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 

(g) Persons traveling on roller skis, coasters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices shall not ride more than two abreast except on lanes or parts of roadways set aside for their use. 

(h) No person traveling on roller skis, coasters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle being operated upon the roadway. 

(i) No person shall travel on roller skis, coasters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices on sidewalks or areas designated for pedestrian use. 

(j) No person shall use any street or highway within this municipality for traveling on toboggans or coasting sleds, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use the roadways within this municipality as a sled course for the purpose of coasting on sleds or toboggans.

(k) A snowmobile may be operated on streets and highways under the jurisdiction of this municipality only when such operation is authorized by special ordinance or addition to this code and appropriate notice is given thereof, and then only in the manner and on such streets prescribed by such ordinance consistent with the provisions of State law. 

Part 12, Parking, is amended by the addition of the following: 

Section 1203, Parking Not to Obstruct Traffic or Maintenance.

(1) No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or highway in such a manner or under such conditions as to interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic or proper street or highway maintenance. 

(2) No person shall park any vehicle on any street or highway so as to interfere with scheduled road maintenance. Notice of scheduled road maintenance may be by written or verbal notice to property occupants adjoining street or highway, by posting of temporary signs on affected street, or any combination, 24 hours prior to the start of the maintenance.

(3) Vehicles parked in violation of this section may be towed pursuant to Part 18, Section 1803(2).

(4) Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction.

Part 12, Section 1205, Parking at Curb or Edge of Roadway, is amended by the addition of: 

(3)(a) On those streets which have been approved and signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than at an angle to the curb at the edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings with its right front wheel within twelve (12) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway. 

Part 12, Section 1205, Parking at Curb or Edge of Roadway, is amended by the repeal and reenactment of subsection (4) to read as follows:

(4) No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle for a period of time longer than permitted by official signs.

Part 12, Section 1205, Parking at Curb or Edge of Roadway, is amended by the addition of: 

(5) Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a Class B traffic infraction.

Part 12, Section 1206, Unattended Motor Vehicle, is hereby amended to read as follows: 

1206, Unattended or Idling Motor Vehicles.

(1) No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first removing the key from the ignition or locking the doors, and when standing upon any grade, said person shall effectively set the brake thereon, and turn the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway in such a manner as to prevent the vehicle from rolling onto the traveled way.

(2) The owner or operator of any motorized vehicle shall not cause or permit the vehicle engine to idle for more than five minutes within any sixty-minute period except as authorized by this subsection (2).

(a) When it remains motionless because of highway traffic, an official traffic control device or signal, or at the direction of a law enforcement officer;

(b) When the driver is operating defrosters, heaters, or air conditioners or is installing equipment only to prevent a safety or health emergency, and not for rest periods;

(c) In the case of a law enforcement, emergency, public safety, or military vehicle, or any other vehicle used to respond to an emergency, when it is responding to an emergency or being used for training for an emergency, and not for the convenience of the vehicle operator;

(d) When necessary for required maintenance, servicing, or repair of the vehicle;

(e) During a local, state, or federal inspection verifying that the equipment is in good working order if required for the inspection;

(f) During the operation of power take-off equipment if necessary for operating work-related mechanical or electrical equipment;

(g) In the case of an armored vehicle, when a person is inside the vehicle to guard its contents or during the loading or unloading of the vehicle;

(h) In the case of a passenger bus, when idling for up to five minutes in sixty-minute period to maintain passenger comfort while any non-driver passengers are on board;

(i) In the case of a commercial or delivery vehicle when used to heat or cool the drivers compartment during a rest or sleep period at a fleet trucking terminal, commercial truck stop, state-designated location designed to be a driver’s rest area or other parking area designated by the Chief of Police;

(j) In the case of a commercial or delivery vehicle used to heat or cool the drivers compartment during a rest or sleep period at a location where the vehicle is legally permitted to park and that is at least one thousand feet from residential housing, a school, a daycare facility, a hospital, a senior citizen center, or a medical outpatient facility providing primary, specialty, or respiratory care; or

(k) When idling for up to twenty minutes in any sixty-minute period if the ambient temperature is less than ten degrees.

(3) This section shall apply to all public and private property.

(4) Any person who violates any provision of this section commits a class B traffic infraction.

Part 18, Section 1804(4), Report of abandoned motor vehicles – owner’s opportunity to request hearing: is hereby amended to read as follows: 

(4)(a) If the responsible law enforcement agency does not use an operator to store the motor vehicle, the responsible law enforcement agency, within ten working days after the receipt of the report from the department required in subsection (2) of this section, shall notify by certified mail the owner of record, if ascertained, and any lien holder, if ascertained, of the fact of such report and the claim of any lien under section 42-4-1806. The notice shall contain information that the identified motor vehicle has been reported abandoned to the department, the location of the motor vehicle and the location from where it was towed, and that, unless claimed within thirty calendar days after the date the notice was sent as determined from the postmark on the notice, the motor vehicle is subject to sale.

(b) If the responsible law enforcement agency uses an operator to store the motor vehicle, the responsible law enforcement agency, within ten working days after the receipt of the report from the department required in subsection (2) of this section, shall notify by first-class mail the owner of record, if ascertained, and any lien holder, if ascertained, of the fact of the report and the claim of any lien under section 42-4-1806. The notice shall contain information that the identified motor vehicle has been reported abandoned to the department, the location of the motor vehicle and the location from where it was towed, and that, unless claimed within thirty calendar days after the date the notice was sent as determined from the postmark on the notice, the motor vehicle is subject to sale.

(c) The responsible law enforcement agency shall include in the notices sent pursuant to either paragraph (a) or (b) of this subsection (4) a statement informing the owner of record of the opportunity to request a hearing concerning the legality of the towing of the abandoned motor vehicle, and the responsible law enforcement agency to contact for that purpose.

(d) If an owner or lien holder requests a hearing, the owner or lien holder shall make the request in writing to the responsible law enforcement agency within ten days after the notice was sent, as determined by the postmark. Such hearing, if requested, shall be conducted pursuant to section 24-4-105, C.R.S., if the responsible law enforcement agency is the Colorado state patrol. If a local political subdivision is the responsible law enforcement agency, such hearing shall be conducted pursuant to local hearing procedures. If it is determined at the hearing that the motor vehicle was illegally towed upon request from a law enforcement agency, all towing charges and storage fees assessed against the vehicle shall be paid by such law enforcement agency.

Appendices, Definitions, is amended by the addition of the following: 

(29.1) “Electric personal assistive mobility device” or “EPAMD” means a self-balancing, non-tandem two-wheeled device, designed to transport only one person, that is powered solely by an electric propulsion system producing an average power output of no more than seven hundred fifty watts.

(39.1) “Golf Cart” means a gas or electric powered vehicle having three or four wheels designed and intended to transport golf equipment and people while playing golf and not designed primarily for travel on the public street.

(105.1) “Street” means the entire width of any publicly owned property which has been established for the movement of vehicular traffic. On streets not defined by curbs width shall be determined by existing maintenance and vehicular use.

(Ord. 6-2015 § 1; Ord. 10-2011 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 8-2010 § 2; Ord. 8-2003 § 2; Ord. 2-2003 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-2-2).


5.20.030 Penalties.

The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this chapter: 

A.    It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions adopted in this chapter. 

B.    Violations of any provision of this code that are classified as traffic infraction shall constitute a civil matter punishable by a fine of not less than $15.00 nor more than $100.00.

C.    Every person convicted of a violation of any provision adopted in this chapter which is classified as a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 

D.    If a person receives a penalty assessment notice for a violation under this code and such person pays the fine and surcharge for the violation on or before the date the payment is due, the points assessed for the violation are reduced as provided for in Section 42-2-127(5.5), C.R.S. (Ord. 8-2010 § 3; Ord. 8-2003 § 3; Code 1997 § 5-2-3).


5.20.040 Application.

This chapter shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park, and to every other public way or public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of this municipality, the use of which the municipality has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of Sections 1206(2), 1401, 1402, 1413, and 606 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively, concerning unattended motor vehicles, reckless driving, careless driving, eluding a police officer, and unauthorized devices, shall apply not only to public places and ways, but also throughout this municipality. (Ord. 8-2010 § 4; Ord. 8-2003 § 4; Code 1997 § 5-2-4).


5.20.050 Validity.

If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each part or parts thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one part or parts be declared invalid. (Ord. 8-2010 § 5; Ord. 8-2003 § 5; Code 1997 § 5-2-5).


5.20.060 Repeal.

Existing or parts of ordinances covering the same matters as embraced in this chapter are hereby repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 8-2010 § 6; Ord. 8-2003 § 6; Code 1997 § 5-2-6).


5.20.070 Interpretation.

This chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the state’s uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of this chapter and adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. (Ord. 8-2010 § 7; Ord. 8-2003 § 7; Code 1997 § 5-2-7).


5.20.080 Certification.

The city clerk shall certify to the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter and make not less than three copies of the adopted code available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. (Ord. 8-2010 § 8; Ord. 8-2003 § 9; Code 1997 § 5-2-8).




Chapter 5.30 NUISANCES

Sections:

5.30.010    Definitions.

5.30.020    Nuisances prohibited.

5.30.030    Inspection of properties.

5.30.040    Notice and abatement of nuisances.

5.30.050    Recovery of the expense of abatement.

5.30.060    Protest of notice of abatement.

5.30.070    Emergency abatement.

5.30.080    Enforcement and remedies.


5.30.010 Definitions.

When used in this chapter, the following words shall be interpreted as follows, unless the context indicates otherwise:

A.    “Administrative officer” means the city manager, community development director, building official, fire marshal, member of the police department, neighborhood services officer, city health officer, or their designated representatives.

B.    “Agent” means any person acting on behalf of or in the place of the owner.

C.    “City” means the city of Gunnison, Colorado.

D.    “Inoperative vehicles” means any device which is capable of moving itself, or of being moved, from place to place upon wheels, skids or endless tracks, which by reason of mechanical failure or the absence of any component or part is incapable of being operated as originally intended for a period in excess of 30 days, and shall include all motor vehicles for which registration is required and expired for more than 60 days as required by Colorado Revised Statutes. Does not include devices powered or moved solely by human power.

E.    “Litter” means rubbish, waste material, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, excrement, urine, offal composed of animal matter or organic matter. Litter includes the accumulation of a single item type or combination of item types such as or composed of chemicals, chemical compound, petroleum product or compound, automobile part or accessory, tire, wheel, furniture, appliances, paper, cardboard, lid, bottle, cap, carton, wrapper, box, wooden object, plastic object, clothing, cloth, metal object, rubber object, leather object, building material, paint, or glass, which is not usable for the manufactured purpose or stored in a way to protect the item for its intended purpose. 

F.    “Occupant” means and incudes any person who occupies the whole or a part of a building, premises, or property, whether alone or with others.

G.    “Owner” means the owner of record, as reflected by the records of the office of the county clerk and recorder.

H.    “Public nuisance” is defined to mean any condition or use of property which is dangerous to health, offensive to community and moral standards or is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution of the value of or presents a danger to other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. 

I.    “Visibility” as used in connection with nuisance issues pertains to areas visible at ground level from a neighbor’s property or from a public right-of-way. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-3-1).


5.30.020 Nuisances prohibited.

A.    It is unlawful for any person to create or maintain, or to knowingly allow or permit the creation or maintenance of, any nuisance as described in this chapter within the city.

“Nuisance” includes but is not limited to the following:

1.    To so negligently conduct any business or use any property so as to create such an offensive smell as may taint the air and render it unwholesome or disagreeable to others in the neighborhood;

2.    To throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, any offal or any offensive matter, or the carcass of any animal, any animal or human fecal material, any hazardous substance as defined at Section 29-22-101, C.R.S., or other pollutant, in any watercourse, pond, spring, or well, or on land within the city;

3.    To suffer or permit any cellar, vault, private drain, pool, sewer, or sink upon any premises to become nauseous, foul, offensive, or injurious to the public health;

4.    To allow the growth of vegetation upon any premises or part thereof, or upon the public right-of-way of any street or alley adjacent thereto, when the growth is inconsistent with the current use or development of the property, is overgrown or unsightly in comparison to adjacent properties, or presents a safety risk. Landscaped yards utilizing xeriscape, natural vegetation or landscaping allowed under the city of Gunnison Land Development Code are not considered a nuisance;

5.    To allow the cultivation, growth or other prohibited or regulated actions associated with noxious weeds as defined and regulated by Chapter 5.50 GMC, Undesirable Plant Management;

6.    To throw or deposit or allow the accumulation of litter upon any property within the city, except that composting of yard wastes shall be permitted in compost-holding units which meet the following specifications:

a.    Does not exceed 125 cubic feet in volume;

b.    Shall be constructed of wood, wire, metal, or plastic, excluding plastic bags;

c.    May be a stationary or a rotating unit;

d.    Shall be located in the rear of the property and shall be screened or fenced so that it is not readily visible;

e.    Shall be maintained to minimize odors;

f.    Shall not be allowed to attract animals and pest species as defined in Chapter 5.40 GMC or to become a health or safety hazard;

7.    To deposit or store or allow to be stored any inoperative vehicles on any property within the city. This provision shall not apply to inoperative vehicles stored within a building or to storage of such vehicles on property which is zoned for such use in compliance with the city of Gunnison Land Development Code, nor shall this provision apply to vehicles defined as collector’s items or parts car; provided, that such vehicles are stored in compliance with Colorado Revised Statutes;

8.    To permit or allow any property to become or remain infested with insects, rats, vermin or any pest species as defined in this section. Infestation occurs when the property is inhabited or overrun in numbers or quantities large enough to be harmful, threatening or obnoxious;

9.    To place upholstered furniture which is not manufactured for outdoor use in an outdoor area, exposed to the elements, where such furniture is visible to neighbors and passersby in the public right-of-way, or who, being the owner, lessee, or manager of such place, knowingly permits such placement. Upholstered furniture includes chairs, couches and mattresses. Outdoor setting includes any porch, patio or other unenclosed structure where the furniture is exposed to the elements;

10.    No noise may be produced which is objectionable due to duration, intermittence, frequency, or shrillness where the source of the noise is caused by operating machinery, engines, or other equipment. Sound levels of noise radiating from a property line at a distance of twenty-five feet or more in excess of the db(A) established for the following time periods and zones shall constitute prima facie evidence that such noise is a public nuisance: 

	ZONE	7:00 a.m. to 6:59 p.m.	7:00 p.m. to 6:59 a.m.

	Residential	55db(A)	50db(A)

	Commercial	60db(A)	55db(A)

	Industrial	80db(A)	75db(A)

a.    This section does not apply to:

i.    The operation of aircraft or other activities which are subject to federal law with respect to noise control;

ii.    Construction projects shall be subject to the maximum permissible noise levels specified for industrial zones for the period within which construction is to be completed pursuant to any applicable construction permit issued by proper authority or, if no time limitation is imposed, for a reasonable period of time for completion of project;

iii.    Emergency repairs, emergency maintenance and snow removal;

11.    Anything defined or declared to be a nuisance by any provision of this chapter; city of Gunnison Land Development Code; GMC Title 14, Technical Codes; or statute of the state of Colorado;

12.    Any property defined or declared condemned under the city of Gunnison Land Development Code; GMC Title 14, Technical Codes; or statute of the state of Colorado.

B.    It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or prevent, or attempt to interfere with or prevent, the abatement of any nuisance by an officer or representative of the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Any person, organization, or entity who makes or causes any nuisance to exist shall be deemed the author of the nuisance. Any person who has possession or control of any private property or premises, whether he is the owner of the property or not, where any nuisance exists or is found, shall be deemed the author of the nuisance. Any person who is the owner of the private property or premises, or an agent for the owner of the private property or premises, who, having received prior notice of the existence of such nuisance, shall fail to remove the thing or things or abate the condition described in such notice, shall be deemed the author of the nuisance. Each and every day during which a nuisance continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be prosecutable and punishable as a separate offense. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-3-2).


5.30.030 Inspection of properties.

A.     Inspection Authorized. Any administrative officer shall have the power and authority to inspect and examine any public or private property in the city for the purpose of ascertaining the nature and existence of any nuisance.

B.    Right of Entry – Generally. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever any administrative officer has reasonable cause to believe there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a nuisance hereunder, such administrative officer may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon him.

1.     If building or premises is occupied, the administrative officer shall present proper credentials and request entry. If entry is refused, the administrative officer shall not enter upon such building or premises without issuance of a search warrant.

2.    If building or premises is unoccupied, the administrative officer shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or occupant or other person or persons having charge or control of the building or premises, and upon locating the owner, occupant, or other person or persons, shall present proper credentials and request entry. If entry is refused, the administrative officer shall not enter upon such building or premises without issuance of a search warrant. 

3.    If the owner or occupant or other person or persons having charge or control of the building or premises cannot be contacted, a notice shall be posted on the property, for a period of 24 hours, giving notice of the city’s intent to inspect the property or premises. After the 24-hour period with no response, or if entry is denied, the administrative officer shall not enter upon such building or premises without issuance of a search warrant. 

C.    Search Warrants. The administrative officer is authorized to apply to the municipal court of the city for issuance of a search warrant pursuant to the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. Upon presentation of the search warrant and proper credentials, or possession of the same in the case of an unoccupied building or premises, the administrative officer may then enter into the building or upon the premises using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-3-3).


5.30.040 Notice and abatement of nuisances.

A.    Notice to Abate. An administrative officer of the city, upon the discovery of any nuisance on public or private property in the city, may notify the owner and/or occupant of the property in writing, requiring the owner and/or occupant of the property to remove and abate from the property the thing or things or condition described as a nuisance within the time specified in the notice.

B.    Time Allowed for Abatement. The owner and/or occupant of the property shall be given seven days, from date of service, within which the thing or things or condition described in the notice as a nuisance shall be removed or abated. Such time for abatement of the nuisance may be increased if it appears to the administrative officer, based on the facts and circumstances known, that compliance cannot reasonably be made within seven days, in which case a longer period of time may be given. 

C.    Contents of Notice. The notice to abate issued pursuant to the provisions of this section to the owner and/or occupant of property upon which a nuisance was discovered shall contain the following:

1.    The address or other description of the property upon which the nuisance was discovered;

2.    The name and address of the owner of the property upon which the nuisance was discovered;

3.    The name and address of the occupant of the property upon which the nuisance was discovered, if known, and if different from the owner;

4.    A description of the thing or things or condition deemed to be a nuisance;

5.    The time in which the thing or things or condition are to be removed or abated from the property;

6.    A statement advising the owner and/or occupant that they may protest the determination of the administrative officer with respect to any matters stated in the notice, by filing a written protest pursuant to GMC 5.30.060 with the municipal court within the time allowed for the removal or abatement of the nuisance described; and

7.     A statement that if the owner and/or occupant fails to comply with directions contained in the written notice or to file a written protest thereto in the time allowed, the city may elect to pursue criminal charges, may enter the property, abate the nuisance described therein, and assess the costs thereof to the owner of the property, or may seek any lawful remedies allowed pursuant to GMC 5.30.080.

D.    Service of the Notice. The written notice to abate shall be served by the administrative officer of the city by:

1.    Personally delivering a copy of the notice to the owner of the property described in the notice if the owner also resides at the property; or

2.    Personally delivering a copy of the notice to a nonowner occupant or resident of the property described in the notice and mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner, as reflected in the county real estate records; or

3.    Mailing a copy of the notice by first class mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner of the property described in the notice, as reflected in the county real estate records, if the property is unoccupied, and by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place at the unoccupied property. 

4.    Service of the notice shall be complete upon the date of personal delivery, upon receipt date reflected in return receipt or 10 days after posting property as required herein.

E.    Noncompliance with Notice. If the owner and/or occupant of the property fails or refuses to comply with the directions of the written notice and does not file a written protest to such notice, as provided in GMC 5.30.060, then the administrative officer shall proceed pursuant to GMC 5.30.080, Enforcement and remedies. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-3-4).


5.30.050 Recovery of the expense of abatement.

A.    In the event that the city abates the nuisance pursuant to GMC 5.30.040, the actual costs of the abatement, together with a fee in the amount of $100.00 or 10 percent of the abatement costs, whichever is greater, shall be assessed upon the property from which such nuisance is abated.

B.    The costs assessed shall be paid to the city’s director of finance within 30 days after the director of finance has mailed notice of the assessment of such costs by first class mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property; provided, however, that if the property is occupied by someone other than the owner, notice of the assessment shall be mailed to both the owner and the occupant. The assessment of costs shall be a lien in the amount assessed against such property until paid, and shall have priority over all other liens, except general taxes and prior special assessments.

C.    If any assessment is not paid within 30 days after the date it is mailed, the director of finance is hereby authorized to certify to the county treasurer a list of all delinquent assessments, giving the name of the owner as it appears in the real estate records of the county, the description of the property sufficient to identify the property upon the records of the county treasurer, and the amount of the assessment. The county treasurer, upon receipt of such list, certified in such form as the treasurer may require, is hereby authorized to place those assessments upon the tax rolls for the current year and to collect those assessments in the same manner as other taxes are collected. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-3-5).


5.30.060 Protest of notice of abatement.

A.    The owner, his agent, or the occupant of the property subject to a notice of abatement, within the time stated in such notice for removal of the thing or things or abatement of the condition described therein, may protest the findings of the administrative officer with respect to any matter stated in the notice, by filing a written notice of protest with the municipal court. The municipal court shall deliver a copy of the protest to the city attorney and the administrative officer who issued the notice. 

B.    Municipal court shall schedule and conduct a hearing on the protest at the next available court date, but not less than seven days from the date protest is filed. At the hearing, the protesting party and representatives of the city shall appear in person. Both parties may be represented by legal counsel. The parties shall have the right to present evidence and arguments to confront and cross-examine any witness and to oppose any testimony or statement relied upon by an adverse party. The municipal court may receive and consider any evidence which has probative value commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.

C.    Once the municipal court has scheduled a hearing on the protest, written notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the protesting party and given to the city attorney and administrative officer who signed the notice of abatement. Such notice shall be mailed to the protesting party and given to the city attorney and administrative officer not less than seven days prior to the scheduled hearing.

D.    Upon the filing of a written protest as provided herein, the period of time for removal of the thing or things or abatement of the condition described in the original notice of abatement shall be extended until final disposition of the protest by the municipal court, plus the amount of time granted in the original notice, or as otherwise ordered by the municipal court. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-3-6).


5.30.070 Emergency abatement.

Whenever an emergency situation exists in relation to the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, an administrative officer, upon presentation of proper credentials, in the case of an occupied building or property, or possession of the credentials in the case of an unoccupied building or property, may enter into any building or upon any property within the jurisdiction of the city. For purposes of this section, an “emergency situation” includes any situation where there is imminent danger of loss of, or injury or damage to, life, limb, or property. The administrative officer may take such action as is necessary to remove the thing or things or abate the condition which creates such emergency. The administrative officer may proceed pursuant to GMC 5.30.080, Enforcement and remedies, without compliance with the time and warrant restraints provided in GMC 5.30.030 and 5.30.040. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-3-7).


5.30.080 Enforcement and remedies.

A.    In addition to any other remedies that may be available to the city, including the right to maintain an action in any court of record for the prevention, restraining, abatement, or enjoining of any public nuisance, and in addition to any other procedural remedy which may be permitted by this code, the city may enforce the terms of this chapter by any lawful means.

B.    Any violation of GMC 5.30.020 is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 9-2016 § 1; Ord. 19-1997 §§ 4, 5; Code 1997 § 5-3-8).


Chapter 5.40 ANIMALS

Sections:

5.40.010    Definitions.

5.40.020    Licensing.

5.40.030    Disease control.

5.40.040    Animal treatment.

5.40.050    Animal control and restraint.

5.40.060    Animal nuisance abatement.

5.40.070    Animal shelter.

5.40.080    Enforcement and penalties.


5.40.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined as provided:

A.    “Animal” means every nonhuman species of the animal kingdom, both domestic and wild.

B.    “Animal-at-large” means any animal off the premises of the owner and not under the direct control of a person capable of controlling the animal.

C.    “Animal control officer” means any person designated by the municipal government as a law enforcement officer for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.

D.    “Animal shelter” means any facility operated by a humane society, nonprofit organization, or government agency or its authorized agents, for the purpose of impounding animals under the authority of this chapter or state law for care, confinement, return to owner, adoption, or euthanasia.

E.    “Bite” means to be seized by an animal with the teeth or jaws so that a person or animal has been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced.

F.    Breeder.

1.    “Professional” means any person who breeds animals for profit or who produces more than two litters of animals in any one calendar year.

2.    “Hobbyist” means any person who breeds animals as a hobby, producing not more than two litters in any one calendar year.

G.    “Cat” means any domesticated member of the animal species Felis catus.

H.    “Commercial animal establishment” means any pet shop, grooming shop, guard dog training facility, animal auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition, boarding or breeding kennel, or other establishment which handles live animals for profit except commercial ranching operations.

I.    “Control” means an animal must be on a leash, suitable for the activity involved in, controlled by a person physically competent to control the animal; or within the property limits of its owner or harbored or upon the premises of another person with the consent of that person.

J.    “Dangerous dog” means any dog that:

1.    Inflicts bodily or serious bodily injury upon or causes the death of a person or domestic animal; or

2.    Demonstrates tendencies that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the dog may inflict bodily or serious bodily injury upon or cause the death of any person or domestic animal; or

3.    Engages in or is trained for animal fighting as described and prohibited in Section 18-9-204, C.R.S.

K.    “Dog” means any member of the animal species Canis familiaris or a domesticated animal related to the fox, wolf, coyote, or jackal which is used as a pet or service animal.

L.    “Domestic animal” includes: dogs, cats, domesticated sheep, horses, cattle, goats, swine, fowl, ducks, geese, turkeys, confined domestic hares and rabbits, pheasants, and other birds; and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement, including small, harmless pet animals, such as species of aquarium fish, cage birds, and certain rodents, such as mice, hamsters, and guinea pigs.

M.    “Dwelling unit” means any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation for not more than one family.

N.    “Euthanasia” means a death brought about by any method which produces rapid loss of consciousness resulting in a painless death.

O.    “Feral cat” is defined as a cat born and raised in the wild, or who has been abandoned or lost and turned to wild ways in order to survive.

P.    “Kennel or cattery” means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats.

Q.    “Licensing authority” means the municipal governing body or anybody designated by the municipal governing body to have authority to promulgate rules pursuant to this chapter and to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

R.    “Owner” means any person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping, harboring, possessing, or having custody or control of one or more animals. “Harboring” an animal includes providing food or shelter for three consecutive days or more.

S.    “Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust, estate, or other legal entity.

T.    “Pest species” means all animals commonly known as starlings, rock pigeons, skunks, prairie dogs, black and Norway rats, common house mice, and all insects or spiders generally considered pests.

U.    “Pet” means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility, especially any animal of a species that has been bred and raised to live in or about the habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter.

V.    “Pet shop” means any person, partnership, or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise that buys, sells, or boards any species of animal.

W.    “Vicious animal” means any animal that, without provocation, bites or attacks humans or other animals; approaches any person or other animal in a vicious or terrorizing manner or in apparent attitude of attack, whether or not the attack is consummated or is capable of being consummated; or has acted in a manner that causes or should cause its owner to know that it is potentially vicious.

X.    “Wild animal” means any animal, including those born or raised in captivity, except for human beings and domestic animals. (Ord. 9-2014 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-4-1).


5.40.020 Licensing.

A.    Licensing.

1.    License Requirement. Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having custody of any dog or cat over six months of age within this municipality must obtain a license as herein provided.

2.    Application. Written application for licenses, which shall include name and address of applicant, description of the animal, the appropriate fee, and rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian or anti-rabies clinic, shall be made to the licensing authority.

3.    License Period. If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs and cats shall be valid for a period of one year. Such license will be renewed annually. The annual licensing period shall begin on January 1st.

    A license issued prior to June 1, 2016, will expire May 31, 2016, with a license issued after June 1, 2016, having the costs prorated for the remainder of the calendar year 2016 as per the city fee schedule.

4.    Circumstances Requiring Application. Applications for licenses must be made within 30 days after obtaining a dog or cat six months of age or older, or when a cat or dog in one’s possession becomes six months of age. This requirement does not apply to a nonresident keeping a dog or cat within the municipality for 90 days or less.

5.    Exceptions. License fees shall not be required for certified governmental police dogs or service animals. They shall be licensed for identification purposes.

6.    Additional Regulations. The licensing authority may promulgate other regulations governing the issuance of licenses. Such regulations may include requirements for human care of animals and other requirements consistent with this chapter and other applicable law. The licensing authority may amend such regulations from time to time as is deemed desirable for the preservation of the public health and welfare and to prevent animal cruelty.

7.    Tags. Upon acceptance of the license application, fee, and agreement to follow all applicable regulations, the licensing authority shall issue a durable tag, stamped with an identifying number and the year of issuance. Tags should be designed so that they may be conveniently fastened or riveted to the animal’s collar or harness. Dogs and cats must wear the identification tags issued for them, and not that of any other, at all times when off their owners’ premises. The licensing authority shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to the public at all times.

8.    Fee Schedule. Licensing fees shall be set by city council and recorded by resolution.

9.    Duplicate Licenses. A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a replacement fee, set by city council and recorded by resolution.

10.    License Limitation. No person may use any license for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued. (Ord. 5-2016 § 1; Ord. 9-2014 § 1; Ord. 7-2011 §§ 1, 2; Code 1997 § 5-4-2).


5.40.030 Disease control.

A.    Diseased Animals. No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of human or animal may be affected.

B.    Rabies Vaccination – Dogs and Cats. It shall be the duty of every owner of a dog or cat over six months of age harbored in the municipality to have such a dog or cat vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian or animal health clinic. The owner of such dog or cat shall present a copy of the vaccination certificate with the dog or cat license application required by GMC 5.40.020(A) verifying a current vaccination administered as authorized by the Department of Health.

C.    Rabies Vaccination Exemption. If a veterinarian licensed by the state issues a certificate that inoculation would be harmful to a specific dog or cat, and that failure to inoculate such animal shall not create a danger for humans or other animals, that dog or cat shall be exempt from the inoculation prescribed by this chapter.

D.    Report of Animal Bites.

1.    Any owner whose animal bites a person shall immediately notify the animal control officer or police department of the municipality.

2.    It shall be the duty of every medical licensee practicing in the municipality to report to the animal control officer or the police department the name and address of any person treated for bites or wounds inflicted by an animal, together with all available information necessary for rabies control.

a.    Any licensee who, in good faith, makes a report pursuant to this section shall have immunity from any liability, civil or criminal, that might otherwise be incurred or imposed with respect to the making of such report, and shall have the same immunity with respect to participation in any judicial proceeding resulting from such report.

3.    It shall be the duty of every veterinarian practicing in the municipality to report to the animal control officer or the police department the name and address of the owner of any animal treated for bites or wounds inflicted by any other animal, together with all available information necessary for rabies control.

E.    Quarantine of Animals Suspected of Having Rabies. Animals suspected of having rabies or having bitten any person or animal and having an uncertain vaccination status shall be impounded in solitary confinement and kept under observation for a period of 10 days. An attempt shall be made by the animal control officer to discover whether the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. If it is found that the animal has not been effectively vaccinated or there is any doubt whether the animal has in fact been vaccinated, then it shall be vaccinated on the last day of the observation period. The municipality may cause any animal which has rabies to be destroyed humanely and an autopsy performed. All expenses in connection with the provisions of this subsection shall be borne by the owner of the animal.

F.    Killing of Certain Animals Which Cannot Be Safely Captured or Impounded. If any vicious or dangerous animal suspected of or having rabies, found at large, cannot be safely taken up and impounded, the animal may be euthanized by a police officer. (Ord. 9-2014 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-4-3).


5.40.040 Animal treatment.

A.    Cruelty to Animals.

1.    Infliction of Pain or Death. No person shall knowingly, intentionally, or maliciously kill or injure or inflict pain or suffering on any animal. No person shall permit, by neglect or inaction, the death or injury or infliction of pain or suffering on any animal. No person shall beat, cruelly treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse or kill an animal or cause, instigate, or permit any fight between animals or between animals and humans, or attend such fights.

2.    Proper Food and Shelter. No owner or person with custody of an animal for more than 12 consecutive hours shall fail to provide the animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, water in sufficient quantities, proper air, shade or shelter space, protection from the weather, veterinary care as needed to maintain health and prevent suffering, and other humane care and treatment.

a.    “Shade” shall mean protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of June through September.

b.    “Shelter” shall mean a moisture-proof structure of suitable size to accommodate the animal and allow retention of body heat, made of durable material with a solid floor raised at least two inches from the ground. Such structure shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness.

c.    All pens, yards, or runs, or other structures wherein any animal is kept shall be of such construction so as to be easily cleaned and shall be maintained in good repair. Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall be securely constructed, adequate for the purpose, and kept in good repair, in compliance with all ordinances of the municipality.

d.    Agricultural operations involving large animals are exempt from shade and shelter requirements.

3.    Abandonment. No person shall abandon any animal which they own or is in their custody. In this context, “abandon” means to leave the animal unattended for more than 48 consecutive hours or without food, water, or shelter for more than 12 hours.

4.    Poisoning. No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that a reasonable person would know or should know that such substance would probably cause animals to be attracted thereto, eat thereof, and be poisoned thereby; however, this subsection does not make unlawful the poisoning of rats or mice with commercial rat poison mixed with vegetable substances.

5.    Sale of Chickens, Ducks, and Rabbits. Chickens, ducks, or rabbits younger than eight weeks of age may not be sold in quantities of fewer than 25 to a single purchaser.

6.    Animals as Prizes. No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game, or other competition, or as an inducement to enter any place of amusement, or as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.

7.    Confinement in Vehicles. No person shall confine an animal within a parked, closed vehicle without allowing cross-ventilation. Under no circumstances shall a person confine any animal in any parked, closed vehicle for more than 30 minutes, or where the temperature in the vehicle exceeds 90 degrees Fahrenheit. Any animal control or police officer observing an animal kept in violation of this section may enter the vehicle and impound the animal. In addition to all other defenses and immunities provided by law, any such officer making entry for the purpose of this section is immune from suit or liability, criminal or civil, for, caused by, or arising out of such entry.

8.    Protective Custody.

a.    Any animal found receiving inhumane treatment, as described in this section, may be removed and impounded at the expense of the owner.

b.    Any animal whose life reasonably appears to be endangered may be so removed and impounded, whether or not in the presence of its owner.

9.    Exceptions to This Section.

a.    Nothing in this subsection (A) shall be deemed to prohibit any action by a licensed veterinarian done in accordance with accepted standards of veterinary medicine.

b.    Nothing in this subsection (A) shall be interpreted as prohibiting any act done in self-defense or to defend another person.

c.    Nothing in this subsection (A) prohibits any conduct authorized or permitted under title 33, C.R.S.

d.    It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge brought under this section involving injury or death to a dog that the dog was found running, worrying, or injuring sheep, cattle, other livestock or wildlife.

B.    Commercial Animal Establishments – Other Domestic Animal Regulations.

1.    Generally. All commercial animal establishments shall meet the following conditions:

a.    Animal housing facilities shall be provided for the animals and shall be structurally sound, constructed of nontoxic materials, maintained in good repair, and designed so as to protect the animals from injury and restrict the entrance of other animals. Each animal shall be provided with adequate floor space to allow it, according to species and breed, to breathe and turn about freely and to easily eat, eliminate wastes, stand, sit, and lie in a comfortable, normal position and sanitary environment.

b.    Water shall be supplied at sufficient pressure and quantity to clean housing facilities and enclosures of debris and excreta.

c.    Adequate food and bedding shall be provided and stored in facilities which provide protection against infestation or contamination by insects or rodents. Refrigeration shall be provided for the protection of perishable foods.

d.    Provision shall be made for the removal and disposal of animal and food wastes, bedding, dead animals, and debris. Disposal facilities shall be so provided and operated as to minimize vermin infestation, odors, and disease.

e.    Each animal shall be observed daily. Sick, diseased, or injured animals shall be separated from those appearing healthy and normal. Sick, diseased, or injured animals shall be removed from display and sale and kept in isolation quarters. Ventilation of quarters for sick or diseased animals shall be arranged to avoid contamination of healthy animals.

f.    An employee, keeper, or owner shall make provision to feed, water, and provide other necessary care for animals on days the store or establishment is closed.

g.    No person shall knowingly misrepresent an animal to a consumer in any way. No person shall knowingly sell a sick or injured animal. Adequate care and feeding instructions shall be given, in writing, to each animal purchaser.

h.    Animals which are caged, closely confined, or restrained shall be permitted to exercise daily for an appropriate length of time as determined by their size, age, and species, in an area suitable for that purpose.

i.    Facilities shall be clean and sanitary at all times.

2.    Domestic Animals.

a.    It shall be unlawful to maintain any dog house or poultry or animal yard within 25 feet of any building used for residential purposes by anyone other than the one maintaining such dog house, poultry, or animal yard, or his or her immediate family, or within 25 feet of any public way other than an alley, or within 100 feet of any church or school building.

b.    For the purpose of this chapter, the term “poultry or animal yard” shall include every enclosure, shed, or structure used to house one or more live fowl (included in the term “fowl” are chickens, ducks, geese, and other poultry) or one or more cattle, horses, sheep, goats, or other domestic animals.

c.    Every person maintaining a poultry or animal yard shall keep the same clean and sanitary and free from all refuse.

3.    Performing Animal Exhibits.

a.    No person is permitted to exhibit any animal performance in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a manner which will cause or probably cause physical injury, pain, suffering, or irritation to any such animal.

b.    All equipment used on any performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition.

C.    Animals Injured by Motor Vehicles. Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and shall immediately report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency.

D.    Wildlife Sanctuary.

1.    The entire area within the corporate limits of the municipality is a wildlife sanctuary for the refuge of all wildlife, and all persons within the municipality are urged to protect said wildlife and encourage its propagation. “Wildlife,” as used in this subsection, includes all native or naturalized wild animals except pest species.

2.    No person shall at any time within the corporate limits of this municipality frighten, shoot at, wound, kill, capture, ensnare, trap, net, poison, or in any other manner kill, injure, or molest any wildlife or injure the nest, den, eggs, or young of such animals. All municipal, state, and federal authorities possessing wildlife control jurisdiction authorized to kill or capture any wild animal are exempted from this provision. (Ord. 9-2014 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-4-4).


5.40.050 Animal control and restraint.

A.    Running at Large.

1.    Generally. No person shall suffer or permit any domestic animal of which he or she is the owner, caretaker, or custodian to run at large within the municipality. Any such animal shall be deemed to be running at large when it shall be off the premises owned or rented by its owner and not under the control of the owner or an agent or employee of the owner. Any such animal may be impounded by the municipality.

a.    Control as defined by ordinance requires the use of a leash being held by a person capable of controlling the animal. The leash requirement is waived for animals typically moved by herding provided the owner or person in control is present and engaged in moving the animal(s) from one location to another.

2.    Public Places. No domestic animal shall be permitted in any public place, unless under the control of its owner. “Public places” include, but are not limited to, public property, common areas of private property, parking lots, churches, cemeteries, parks, schools, and swimming areas.

B.    Dangerous Animals.

1.    Dangerous Dog.

a.    Ownership of a Dangerous Dog Prohibited. A person commits ownership of a dangerous dog if such person owns, possesses, harbors, keeps, has a financial or property interest in, or has custody or control over a dangerous dog.

b.    The animal control officer, neighborhood services officer, or any police officer may impound any animal which is reasonably believed to be a dangerous dog.

i.    A dog may be released to the owner, pending court procedures, provided the animal is not exhibiting overtly aggressive or dangerous behavior, is not exhibiting any symptoms of disease, the owner can assure that the dog will remain under the owner’s control, and that such control will be sufficient to prevent a reoccurrence of the reason for initial impoundment, that the owner will present the dog for inspection on request of the animal control officer, and that the owner will report any change in the animal’s health to the animal control officer until the case is resolved.

ii.    An owner may request the animal be housed in a facility licensed to board and care for animals, at the owner’s expense.

c.    An affirmative defense to the violation of this subsection shall be:

i.    That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury to or the death of a domestic animal, the domestic animal was at large, was astray, and entered upon the property of the owner and that the attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such property;

ii.    That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury to or the death of a domestic animal, said animal was biting or otherwise attacking the dangerous dog or its owner;

iii.    That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury to or the death of a person, the victim of the attack was committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense, other than a petty offense, against the dog’s owner, and the attack did not occur on the owner’s property;

iv.    That, at the time of the attack by the dangerous dog which causes injury to or the death of a person, the victim of the attack was committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense, other than a petty offense, against a person on the owner’s property or the property itself and the attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such property; or

v.    That the person who was the victim of the attack by the dangerous dog tormented, provoked, abused, or inflicted injury upon the dog in such an extreme manner which resulted in the attack.

d.    The affirmative defenses set forth in subsection (B)(1)(c) of this section shall not apply to any dog that has engaged in or been trained for animal fighting as said term is described in Section 18-9-204, C.R.S.

e.    Identification of Dog upon Conviction. At the owner’s expense, permanently identify the dangerous dog through the implantation of a microchip by a licensed veterinarian or a licensed shelter. A veterinarian or licensed shelter that implants a microchip in a dangerous dog shall report the microchipping information to the Colorado Department of Agriculture within 10 days after implantation of the microchip, pursuant to Section 35-42-115(2), C.R.S.

f.    Condition of Ownership upon Conviction. The court as part of sentencing may establish conditions to be met by the owner for continued ownership.

2.    Vicious Animals.

a.    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any vicious animal within the municipality.

b.    The animal control officer, neighborhood services officer, or any police officer may impound any animal which is reasonably believed to be vicious.

i.    An animal may be released to the owner, pending court procedures, provided the animal is not exhibiting overtly aggressive or dangerous behavior, is not exhibiting any symptoms of disease, the owner can assure that the animal will remain under the owner’s control and that such control will be sufficient to prevent a reoccurrence of the reason for initial impoundment, that the owner will present the animal for inspection on request of the animal control officer, and that the owner will report any change in the animal’s health to the animal control officer until the case is resolved.

ii.    An owner may request the animal be housed in a facility licensed to board and care for animals, at the owner’s expense.

c.    It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section that the actual or intended victim of any attack has made an unlawful entry into the dwelling of the animal’s owner or is threatening or attacking an owner of the animal.

3.    Wild and Dangerous Animals.

a.    Unlawful to Own or Possess. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, harbor, sell, or in any other manner traffic in any wild and vicious animals, including, but not limited to, the following:

i.    All poisonous snakes and other poisonous reptiles; and all nonpoisonous snakes with a length greater than six feet;

ii.    All species of primates;

iii.    All species of canine, feline, bear, and other carnivorous animals other than dogs and cats, as defined within this chapter.

b.    Exceptions. The provisions of subsection (B) of this section shall not be applicable to any bona fide zoological park, wildlife sanctuary, research facility or any circus licensed by the city.

4.    Costs to Be Paid by Responsible Persons. Any reasonable costs incurred by the municipality in seizing, impounding, and confining any dangerous, wild, or vicious animal shall be charged against the owner of such animal. Such charge shall be in addition to any other fine or penalty provided for violating this chapter.

5.    Destruction of Animal Too Dangerous to Capture. Any dangerous animal subject to impoundment under the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, or any other animal which because of its disposition or diseased condition is subject to impoundment and is deemed too dangerous to apprehend, may be destroyed by a police officer.

C.    Public Parks.

1.    No person shall appear with an animal in those portions of the public parks of the city of Gunnison which are enclosed by fencing and are posted with signs prohibiting dogs or other animals from being brought upon the premises. This subsection shall not apply to service dogs.

2.    The city may establish public areas to be utilized by the public for the exercising, training and enjoyment of their animals. Such area will be clearly marked and animals may be off leash, when inside the designated area.

a.    Use of public areas for this purpose will be at the user’s own risk.

b.    The official rules or signs posted for users of the area will be followed.

3.    The city maintains parks and open spaces for recreational enjoyment. These areas are considered public areas or public ways and this chapter applies to all areas of a public park or open space. (Ord. 1-2015 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 9-2014 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-4-5).


5.40.060 Animal nuisance abatement.

A.    Restrictions.

1.    Generally. No animal owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his or her animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. A “public nuisance” includes any of the occurrences listed in this section as well as any other occurrence determined by the governing body or a court of competent jurisdiction or law.

2.    Noise. No animal owner shall permit any animal to cause annoyance, alarm, or noise disturbance for more than 10 minutes at any time of the day or night, by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying, or other like sounds which can be heard beyond the boundary of the owner’s property.

a.    This section does not apply if the cause of the noise is the result of a permitted or conditional use within the city of Gunnison.

3.    Property Damage. It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow an animal to injure or destroy any real or personal property of any description belonging to another. A judge may, in addition to any other penalty, order the defendant to make restitution to the party injured.

4.    Excessive Number of Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons in any dwelling unit to keep more than two dogs or two cats or a total of three dogs and cats within the municipality, with the exception that a litter of cats or dogs, or a portion of any such litter, may be kept for a period of time not exceeding three months from birth. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any commercial animal establishment or licensed breeder.

5.    Excrement. No person shall appear with an animal upon the public ways, within public places, or upon the property of another, absent that person’s consent, without some means for the removal of excrement; nor shall any person fail to remove any excrement deposited by such animal. This subsection shall not apply to a blind person while walking a guide dog.

6.    Females in Heat. All female animals in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure or upon a leash in such manner that the animal cannot come into contact with a male animal except for planned breeding.

7.    Feral Cats. Any property owner who allows or harbors a feral cat colony is responsible for the cats associated with that colony.

B.    Procedures.

1.    Hearing and Impoundment. Any person owning or having in his or her possession or under his or her control any animal constituting a nuisance in violation of this section may be summoned before a court of competent jurisdiction to show cause why such animal should not be confined, disposed of, or removed, or the nuisance otherwise abated. Upon hearing and a finding that the animal constitutes a public nuisance in violation of this section, the court shall order the animal in question either to be confined, to be disposed of, or to be removed, or such other relief as the court deems appropriate.

2.    Cost of Impoundment. Any person who owns any animal that has been adjudged a nuisance pursuant to this section shall be responsible for the costs of disposal, removal, or impoundment. (Ord. 9-2014 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-4-6).


5.40.070 Animal shelter.

A.    Animal Shelter.

1.    Establishment and Functioning. The city of Gunnison, under the Gunnison police department, may establish an animal shelter or by contract utilize a licensed pet care facility for the housing of pet animals impounded or held in conformance to municipal ordinance or state statute. Any shelter established by the city of Gunnison or through contract shall:

a.    Comply with Colorado Department of Agriculture license requirements.

B.    Operations.

1.    All animals authorized under this chapter to be impounded shall be captured by or turned over to either a police or an animal control officer and impounded in an approved animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner.

2.    Impounded animals without owner identification shall be kept for not fewer than five days, during which time the description of the animal will be made available to the public at minimum by posting on the city of Gunnison official notification board, electronic posting and public posting at the shelter.

a.    Pet animals which in the opinion of the animal control officer and their supervisor are deemed to be dangerous and no owner has been identified after three days become the property of the city of Gunnison and may be adopted or euthanized.

b.    Pet animals, which in the opinion of a veterinarian, are experiencing extreme pain or suffering, may be disposed of immediately through euthanasia after reasonable efforts to contact the owner.

c.    Feral cats which are unclaimed or from property where the owner has declined ownership become the property of the city of Gunnison immediately upon impound and may be adopted or euthanized.

3.    If, by a license tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer or impounding police officer shall immediately notify the owner. The five-day holding period will begin once proof of notification has been made; if notification cannot be made, the animal will be held for 10 days.

4.    An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay all fees set by city council and recorded by resolution. Fees assessed shall be based on initial pick-up as well as a daily fee to cover expenses associated with housing and care. Fees will be in addition to any veterinary expenses incurred or fines which may be levied by the court. Council may also choose to set higher fees for repeat violations.

5.    Any animal not reclaimed by its owner after notification is made or attempted as required in subsections (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this section shall become the property of the municipality and shall be made eligible for adoption in a suitable home or subject to humane euthanasia.

6.    The police department shall keep complete and accurate records pertaining to the veterinary treatment and disposition of all animals impounded or picked up by the police department.

7.    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove an animal from the municipal owned or contracted animal shelter without first reclaiming the animal pursuant to the provisions of this section, or to interfere with an employee or volunteer of a contracted facility, animal control officer, neighborhood services officer, or a police officer while they are attempting to impound an animal.

8.    Veterinarian services, including treatment, medication and vaccinations, provided to injured or sick animals while in impound will be at the owner’s expense.

C.    Adoption. No unclaimed animal shall be released for adoption without written agreement from the adopter guaranteeing that such animal will be sterilized on or before a specified date. (Ord. 9-2014 § 1; Code 1997 § 5-4-7).


5.40.080 Enforcement and penalties.

A.    Enforcement – General Procedures. Whenever there is any violation of any provisions of this chapter, the animal control officer, or any police officer, finding such violation may, except as otherwise provided herein, issue a summons and complaint or citation to the owner of or person responsible for the animal to appear in municipal court. Any hearing on the summons and complaint or citation shall be held no sooner than five days after the notice without the consent of the person to whom the summons and complaint or citation was issued.

B.    Penalties.

1.    Nuisance and Animal-at-Large Violations. Any person found guilty of permitting an animal to be at large, as defined in GMC 5.40.050(A), or a nuisance, as defined in GMC 5.40.060, shall be fined:

a.    Upon presentation to the court of sufficient evidence the animal has been sterilized:

i.    Not less than $15.00 nor more than the fine and sentence provisions allowed in GMC Title 4 on conviction for the first offense;

ii.    Not less than $25.00 nor more than the fine and sentence provisions allowed in GMC Title 4 on conviction for the second offense within a 12-consecutive-month period;

iii.    Not less than $50.00 nor more than the fine and sentence provisions allowed in GMC Title 4 on conviction for all offenses subsequent to the second within a 12-consecutive-month period; in addition to or in lieu of the foregoing, the defendant may be ordered to remove such animal permanently from the municipality within 24 hours. Refusal or failure to comply may result in impoundment and disposal of the animal; or

b.    When no sufficient evidence is presented to the court that the animal has been sterilized:

i.    Not less than $30.00 nor more than the fine and sentence provisions allowed in GMC Title 4 on conviction for the first offense;

ii.    Not less than $50.00 nor more than the fine and sentence provisions allowed in GMC Title 4 on conviction for the second offense within a 12-consecutive-month period;

iii.    Not less than $100.00 nor more than the fine and sentence provisions allowed in GMC Title 4 on conviction for the third offense within a 12-consecutive-month period; in addition to or in lieu of either of the foregoing, the defendant may be ordered to remove such animal permanently from the municipality within 24 hours. Refusal or failure to comply may result in the impoundment and disposal of the animal.

2.    Dangerous Dog or Vicious Animal Violations. Any person found guilty of keeping or maintaining a dangerous dog or vicious animal as defined by GMC 5.40.050(B)(1) or (B)(2) may be:

a.    Fined not less than $25.00 nor more than the fine and sentence provisions allowed in GMC Title 4; and

b.    Ordered to have such animal destroyed within such period of time as ordered by the court.

3.    In addition to any other penalties set forth in this section, the court may impose additional terms or conditions as the court deems appropriate.

4.    Any violation of this chapter is considered a misdemeanor violation and punishable in accordance with GMC Title 4 and subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section. (Ord. 9-2014 § 1; Ord. 1-2011 § 7; Ord. 19-1997 § 6; Code 1997 § 5-4-8).


Chapter 5.50 UNDESIRABLE PLANT MANAGEMENT

Sections:

5.50.010    Definitions.

5.50.020    Duty to manage undesirable plants – Landowner’s responsibility.

5.50.030    Local priority weed list.

5.50.040    Designation of additional undesirable plants.

5.50.050    Review of the annual city of Gunnison weed management plan.

5.50.060    Importation and cultivation.

5.50.070    Administering agency.

5.50.080    Weed advisory board.

5.50.090    Identification and inspection of noxious weeds – Methods of identification.

5.50.100    Notice of presence of noxious weeds – Notice letter.

5.50.110    Duty to consult.

5.50.120    Eradication and management of weeds – Landowner, occupant or public agency response.

5.50.130    Enforcement – Direct action by city to manage weeds.

5.50.140    Restrictions.

5.50.150    Assessment of costs for treatment and eradication of noxious weeds – Private lands.

5.50.160    Recoverable costs/method of collection – Management.

5.50.170    Recoverable costs/method of collection – Eradication of List A species.

5.50.180    Landowner or occupant protest.

5.50.190    Assessment of costs – Hearing.

5.50.200    Limitations.

5.50.210    Recoverable costs/method of collection – Public lands.

5.50.220    Scheduling and hearing.

5.50.230    Miscellaneous – Additional provisions.

5.50.240    Cooperation with federal and state agencies.

5.50.250    Public nuisance – Abatement.


5.50.010 Definitions.

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

A.    “City council” means the city council of the city of Gunnison, Colorado.

B.    “Alien plant” means a plant species which is not indigenous to the state of Colorado.

C.    “Colorado Noxious Weed Act” means the provisions contained in Section 35-5.5-101, C.R.S., et seq.

D.     “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of the Colorado Department of Agriculture or designee.

E.     “Department” means the Colorado Department of Agriculture.

F.    “Federal agency” means each agency, bureau or department of the federal government responsible for administering or managing federal land.

G.    “Integrated management” means the planning and implementation of a coordinated program utilizing a variety of methods for management of noxious weeds, the purpose of which is to achieve specified management objectives and promote desirable plant communities. Such methods may include, but are not limited to, education, preventive measures, good stewardship, and the following integrated management techniques:

1.    Biological management, which means the use of an organism to disrupt the growth of noxious weeds.

2.    Chemical management, which means the use of herbicides or plant growth regulators to disrupt the growth of noxious weeds.

3.    Cultural management, which means methodologies or management practices that favor the growth of desirable plants over noxious weeds, including maintaining an optimum fertility and plant moisture status in an area, planting at optimum density and spatial arrangement in an area, and planting species most suited to an area.

4.    Mechanical management, which means methodologies or management practices that physically disrupt plant growth, including tilling, mowing, burning, flooding, mulching, hand-pulling, hoeing, and grazing.

H.    “Landowner” means any owner of record of state, county, municipal, or private land and includes an owner of any easement, right-of-way or estate in the land.

I.    “Local noxious weed” means any alien plant of local importance that has been declared a noxious weed by the weed advisory board.

J.    “Management” means any activity that prevents a plant from establishing, reproducing, or dispersing itself.

K.    “Management objective” means the specific, desired result of integrated management efforts and includes:

1.    Eradication, which means reducing the reproductive success of a noxious weed species or specified noxious weed population in largely uninfested regions to zero and permanently eliminating the species or population within a specified period of time. Once all specified weed populations are eliminated or prevented from reproducing, intensive efforts continue until the existing seed bank is exhausted.

2.    Containment, which means maintaining an intensively managed buffer zone that separates infested regions, where suppression activities prevail, from largely uninfested regions, where eradication activities prevail.

3.    Suppression, which means reducing the vigor of noxious weed populations within an infested region, decreasing the propensity of noxious weed species to spread to surrounding lands, and mitigating the negative effects of noxious weed populations on infested lands. Suppression efforts may employ a wide variety of integrated management techniques. 

4.    Restoration, which means the removal of noxious weed species and reestablishment of desirable plant communities on lands of significant environmental or agricultural value in order to help restore or maintain said value.

L.    “Management plan” means the city of Gunnison weed management and enforcement plan as developed by the weed advisory board and adopted by the city council.

M.    “Native plant” means a plant species which is indigenous to the state of Colorado.

N.    “Noxious weed” means an alien plant or parts of an alien plant that have been designated by rule by the Commissioner or the Department as being noxious or any plant that has been declared a local noxious weed by the weed advisory board, and which meets one or more of the following criteria:

1.    It aggressively invades or is detrimental to economic crops or native plant communities;

2.    It is poisonous to livestock;

3.    It is a carrier of detrimental insects, diseases or parasites; or

4.    The direct or indirect effect of the presence of this plant is detrimental to the environmentally sound management of natural or agricultural ecosystems.

O.    “Person or occupant” means an individual, partnership, corporation, association or federal, state or local government or agency thereof owning, occupying or controlling any land, easement or right-of-way, including any city, county, state or federally owned and controlled highway, drainage or irrigation ditch, spoil bank, borrow pit, gas and oil pipeline, high voltage electrical transmission line, or right-of-way for a canal or lateral.

P.    “Plant growth regulator” means a substance used for controlling or modifying plant growth processes without appreciable phototoxic effect at the dosage applied.

Q.    “State noxious weed” means any noxious weed identified by the Commissioner or the Department by rule pursuant to the terms and provisions of the Colorado Noxious Weed Act. Such weeds may be referred to herein as “State A List,” “State B List” or “State C List” weeds depending upon their designation as such by the Commissioner pursuant to the terms of Section 35-5.5-108, C.R.S.

1.     A List weeds shall mean all populations of noxious weeds in the city of Gunnison that are designated for eradication, either by the Commissioner pursuant to the terms of Section 35-5.5-108, C.R.S., or by local designation by the weed advisory board.

2.    B List weeds shall mean all populations of noxious weeds in the city of Gunnison that are designated for required management, either by the Commissioner pursuant to the terms of Section 35-5.5-108, C.R.S., or by local designation by the weed advisory board.

3.    C List weeds shall mean all populations of noxious weeds in the city of Gunnison that are designated for recommended management, either by the Commissioner pursuant to the terms of Section 35-5.5-108, C.R.S., or by local designation by the weed advisory board.

R.    “Undesirable plant” means a noxious plant species that is designated as undesirable by this chapter, the Commissioner or by the weed advisory board.

S.     “Undesirable plant management” means the planning and implementation of an integrated program to manage undesirable plant species.

T.     “Weed” means any undesirable plant.

U.     “Weed advisory board” means the individuals appointed by the city council of the city of Gunnison to advise on matters of noxious weed program direction.

V.    “Weed office” means the city of Gunnison weed office. The Gunnison police department shall serve as the weed office. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.020 Duty to manage undesirable plants – Landowner’s responsibility.

It is the duty of all persons to use integrated methods to manage and prevent the spread of all noxious weeds if the plants are likely to be ecologically destructive or aesthetically or materially damaging to neighboring lands. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.030 Local priority weed list.

The city council, after consultation with the weed advisory board, may elevate the status of any State B List noxious weed or State C List noxious weed that is located within the city of Gunnison from the State B or C Lists to that of an A or B List weed as deemed necessary. The city council, after consultation with the weed advisory board, may also at any time apply to the Commissioner for a waiver of compliance with an eradication designation set forth by the Commissioner for any particular State A List noxious weed or State B List noxious weed designated for eradication in the city of Gunnison, pursuant to the terms of Section 35-5.5-108.5(3)(c), C.R.S. If such a waiver is approved, the noxious weed in question shall be reclassified as either a B or C List weed as may be determined by the city council. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.040 Designation of additional undesirable plants.

The city council may designate additional undesirable plants or weeds not otherwise designated as state noxious weeds for eradication or management within the city of Gunnison pursuant to the terms of Section 35-5.5-108(3), C.R.S., after a public hearing with 30 days prior notice to the public. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.050 Review of the annual city of Gunnison weed management plan.

The weed advisory board has, pursuant to the direction of the city council, originally developed the management plan, and will review such management plan on an annual basis for any desirable changes or adjustments to such plan and shall report to the city council on such basis with any recommended changes or adjustments. As part of such review, the weed advisory board will review the list of noxious weeds to consider additional weeds and to prioritize control efforts. The management plan must be renewed and approved by the city council not less than once every three years, but nothing shall prevent the city council from approving any interim changes or adjustments to the management plan in any interim years. The weed office shall maintain the management plan and the priority weed list and make them available to the general public. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.060 Importation and cultivation.

Persons are prohibited from importing seeds, propagative plant parts or live plants and cultivating any noxious weed within the city of Gunnison, and any such person doing so shall be fully prosecutable pursuant to the terms of Section 35-5.5-104.5, C.R.S. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.070 Administering agency.

The city council shall provide for the administration and enforcement of the management plan authorized by this chapter through the use of agents, delegates or employees, and may hire additional staff or provide for the performance of all or part of the management plan through outside contract. The primary duty and responsibility of administering the management plan is hereby delegated to the weed office, and the weed office shall be the city council’s primary agent in enforcement and administration thereof. Any agent, delegate, employee, staff or contractor applying or recommending the use of chemical control methods shall be licensed by the department for such application or recommendation. Costs associated with administering or enforcing the management plan shall be paid from the general fund of the city. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.080 Weed advisory board.

The city council has appointed the weed advisory board from landowners, other interested individuals living in the vicinity of the city, and the weed advisory board shall have all of the authority and powers set forth herein as well as all of the authority and powers set forth in Section 35-5.5-107, C.R.S. The city council shall be entitled to appoint ex officio members, as in their sole discretion they shall determine. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.090 Identification and inspection of noxious weeds – Methods of identification.

A.    Private and Public Lands.

1.    The weed office, acting as agent, delegate, or staff of the city council, shall have the right to enter upon any premises, lands, or places, whether public or private, during reasonable business hours for the purpose of inspecting for the existence of noxious weed infestations, when at least one of the following has occurred:

a.    The landowner or occupant has requested an inspection;

b.    A neighboring landowner or occupant has reported a suspected noxious weed infestation and requested an inspection;

c.    An authorized agent of the city council has made a visual inspection from a public right-of-way or area and has reason to believe that a noxious weed infestation exists; or

d.    A weed office agent has inspected a current aerial satellite map of the property and determined there is reason to believe that a noxious weed infestation exists.

B.    Where entry onto private premises is required to investigate the existence of noxious weeds, on-site inspections may be scheduled at any reasonable time upon the landowner’s or occupant’s consent. No entry onto such lands shall be permitted unless one of the following occurs: (1) verbal permission to inspect the property is granted by the landowner or occupant of said property, or (2) such landowner or occupant is notified of such pending inspection by certified mail at least 10 days prior to such inspection. If after notification landowner or occupant fails to respond within 10 days to the request to inspect the premises or otherwise denies access to the inspector, the inspector may seek an inspection warrant issued by the city of Gunnison municipal court having jurisdiction over the land pursuant to the provisions of Section 35-5.5-109(2)(b) or 35-5.5-108.5(5)(b)(I), C.R.S. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.100 Notice of presence of noxious weeds – Notice letter.   

A.    Private Lands.

1.    Upon a discovery of the presence of noxious weeds on private premises, the weed office, acting as agent, delegate, or staff of the city council has the authority to notify the landowner or occupant of the presence of noxious weeds. The notice from the weed office includes the following:

a.    The property inspection date;

b.    The landowner and/or occupant of record;

c.    The property tax ID number or legal description of the property, and/or aerial map;

d.    The noxious weeds to be managed;

e.    If the noxious weeds are weeds designated for eradication pursuant to designation as List A weeds, identification of eradication as the required management objective;

f.    Advisement to the landowner or occupant to commence either eradication of the noxious weeds within five days or management of the noxious weeds within 10 days after receipt of notice or submit an acceptable plan and schedule for the completion of the plan for compliance;

g.    Identification of the integrated weed management techniques presented by the Commissioner for eradication or the best available control methods of integrated management;

h.    The options of notice compliance;

i.    The consequences for noncompliance with the notice, an offer of weed office consultation in management plan development, and notice of landowner’s and/or occupant’s right to request a hearing before the arbitration panel;

j.    Statement that weed office will seek an inspection warrant (right of entry) from the city of Gunnison municipal court having jurisdiction over the land, to enter property and manage identified noxious weeds unless landowner and/or occupant complies with notice, submits an acceptable plan and schedule for completion of the plan or submits a written request for a hearing before the arbitration panel within 10 days.

B.    Public Lands.

1.    The weed office, acting as agent, delegate, or staff of the city council, may give notice to any state board, department, or agency that administers or supervises state lands within the city of Gunnison to manage noxious weeds on its land and naming them.

2.    Such notice shall specify the best available method(s) of integrated management and will include the same information as itemized in subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.110 Duty to consult.

Where possible, the weed office shall consult with the affected landowner, occupant, state board, department or agency in the development of a plan for the management of noxious weeds on the premises or lands. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.120 Eradication and management of weeds – Landowner, occupant or public agency response.

A.    A landowner, occupant or state board, department or agency receiving notification of the presence of noxious weeds pursuant to GMC 5.50.100 shall respond within a reasonable time after receipt thereof, but in no event to exceed five days if eradication is ordered and 10 days if management is ordered, by any of the following:

1.    Complying with the terms of the notification.

2.    Acknowledging the terms of the notification and submitting an acceptable plan and schedule for the completion of the plan for compliance.

3.    If only management is ordered, requesting an arbitration panel to determine the final management plan. The panel shall be selected by the city council, through its delegates, agents, and employees, and shall include:

a.    A weed management specialist or weed scientist;

b.    A landowner of similar land in city of Gunnison; and

c.    A third member chosen by agreement of the first two panel members;

d.    The landowner or occupant is entitled to challenge any one member of the panel, and the city council, through its delegates, agents and employees, shall name a new panel member from the same category.

Costs for the arbitration panel shall be paid by the requesting landowner or occupant. The decision of the arbitration panel shall be final. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.130 Enforcement – Direct action by city to manage weeds.

In the event that the landowner, occupant or state board, department or agency fails to comply with any notice to eradicate or manage the identified weeds or implement the plan developed by the arbitration panel, the weed office shall provide for and compel the eradication or management of such weeds in any manner deemed necessary by the weed office and in compliance with the provisions of Section 35-5-108.5, 35-5.5-109(5) or 35-5-110(3), C.R.S. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.140 Restrictions.

No eradication or management of noxious weeds on private property shall occur without applying the same or greater management measures to any land or rights-of-way owned by the city or administered by the city council that are adjacent to the private property. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.150 Assessment of costs for treatment and eradication of noxious weeds – Private lands.

If the city council, or its agents and employees, provide for and/or compel the management or eradication of noxious weeds on private lands, the city council is entitled to recover certain costs. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.160 Recoverable costs/method of collection – Management.

A.    If the city council compels and provides for the management of noxious weeds pursuant to the provisions of Section 35-5-109, C.R.S, the city council is entitled to assess the whole cost thereof, including up to 20 percent for inspection and other incidental costs in connection therewith, upon the lot or tract of land where the noxious weeds are located.

B.    Such assessment shall be a lien against each lot or tract of land until paid and shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments.

C.    Such assessment may be certified to the Gunnison County treasurer for the collection of taxes.

D.    Any funds collected shall be deposited in the city’s weed fund or any similar fund. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.170 Recoverable costs/method of collection – Eradication of List A species.

A.    If the city council compels and provides for the eradication of noxious weeds pursuant to their classification as List A weeds, the city council is entitled to assess the whole cost of eradicating such weeds, including up to 100 percent of inspection, eradication and other incidental costs in connection therewith, upon the lot or tract of land where the noxious weeds are located.

B.    Such assessment shall be a lien against each lot or tract of land until paid and shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments.

C.    Such assessment may be certified to the Gunnison County treasurer for the collection of taxes.

D.    Any funds collected shall be deposited in the city’s weed fund or any similar fund. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.180 Landowner or occupant protest.

A.    The weed office shall send a “payment notice/potential lien assessment” letter by certified and regular mail to the landowner or occupant prior to any assessment on landowner’s or occupant’s property.

B.    Landowner or occupant shall be given 30 days from the date on the payment notice/potential lien assessment letter to respond.

1.    In the event landowner or occupant fails to respond to the letter within the prescribed 30 days, the weed office shall assess a lien on landowner’s or occupant’s property and may certify such lien to the Gunnison County treasurer.

2.    If the landowner or occupant responds within the prescribed 30 days and disputes the amount of the assessment, he or she is entitled to be heard before the city of Gunnison weed advisory board as to his or her concerns. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.190 Assessment of costs – Hearing.

A.    The landowner or occupant, or an attorney on his or her behalf, will be allowed to present testimony to the weed advisory board as to why they should not assess a lien on landowner ‘sor occupant’s property for the costs outlined in the payment notice/potential lien assessment letter.

B.    A member of the weed office will need to be present at the hearing to provide evidence favoring the imposition of a lien on landowner’s or occupant’s property.

C.    The weed office must show that prior to compelling the management of noxious weeds on landowner and/or occupant’s property the weed office applied the same or greater management measures to any land or rights-of-way owned by the city or administered by the city council that are adjacent to the private property pursuant to GMC 5.50.140.

D.    The weed office must show that the level of management called for in the notice or the management plan developed by the arbitration panel has been successfully achieved pursuant to GMC 5.50.200.

E.    The weed advisory board may either grant or deny the lien assessment or continue the matter to a subsequent date certain.

F.    If the weed advisory board grants the lien assessment, the resolution for certification of assessed costs as granted by the city council is filed with the county treasurer’s office. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.200 Limitations.

The weed advisory board shall not assess the cost of providing for or compelling the management of noxious weeds on private property until the level of management called for in the notice or the management plan developed by the arbitration panel has been completed. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.210 Recoverable costs/method of collection – Public lands.

A.    Any expenses incurred by the city council in the undertaking of the eradication or management of noxious weeds on public lands shall be a proper charge against such state board, department, or agency that has jurisdiction over the lands.

B.    An agreement for the reimbursement of such expenses shall be reached within two weeks after the date such an expense is submitted to such state board, department or agency, such agreement to be set forth in writing.

C.    If an agreement is not reached or the charge is not immediately paid, such charge shall be submitted to the controller, who shall treat such amount as an encumbrance on the budget of the state board, department or agency involved or such charge may be recovered in any court with jurisdiction over such lands. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.220  Scheduling and hearing.

The state board, department, or agency owning or occupying said public lands is afforded the same scheduling and hearing protections as provided to landowners or occupants of private lands under GMC 5.50.180 and 5.50.190. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.230 Miscellaneous – Additional provisions.

A.    The city council, through its delegates, agents, and employees, shall have the right to enter upon any premises, lands or places, whether public or private, during reasonable business hours for the purposes of ensuring compliance with any of the above requirements concerning noxious weed management and any other local requirements.

B.    No agent, employee, or delegate of the city council shall have a civil cause of action against a landowner or occupant for personal injury or property damage incurred while on public or private land for purposes consistent with the above requirements except when the landowner or occupant willfully or deliberately caused such damages.

C.     It shall be the duty of the city council to confirm that all public roads, public highways, public rights-of-way, and any easements appurtenant thereto, under its jurisdiction, are in compliance with Section 35-5.5-101, C.R.S., et seq., and any violations thereof shall be the financial responsibility of the appropriate local governing body or state board, department, or agency. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.240 Cooperation with federal and state agencies.

The city council may enter into cooperative agreements with federal, county and state agencies for the integrated management of undesirable plants within their respective territorial jurisdictions. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


5.50.250 Public nuisance – Abatement.

All undesirable plants at any and all stages thereof, their carriers, and any and all premises, plants and things infested or exposed to infestation may be declared to be a public nuisance by the city council. Once declared, such nuisances shall be subject to all laws and remedies relating to the prevention and abatement of nuisances. The city council, in a summary manner or otherwise, may take such action, including removal and destruction, with reference to such nuisance as in its discretion appears necessary. The remedies of this section shall be in addition to all other remedies provided by law. (Ord. 10-2016 § 1).


Title 6 (Reserved)


Title 7 (Reserved)


Title 8 BUSINESS REGULATION

Chapters:

8.10    Bill Posting and Handbills

8.20    Repealed

8.30    Transient Merchants

8.40    City Liquor License Application Fees

8.50    Marijuana Business Licensing Regulations


Chapter 8.10 BILL POSTING AND HANDBILLS

Sections:

8.10.010    License required.

8.10.020    License fee – Exception.

8.10.030    Bond.


8.10.010 License required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to paint advertising signs, tack cards, tin or board signs, or post any posters or distribute circulars, dodgers, samples or other bills or devices used to advertise patent medicines, patent articles, tobacco, shows, sales or for any other purpose for which advertising signs or circulars are calculated to attract the attention of the public without first having obtained a license from the city to do so. (Code 1997 § 8-1-1).


8.10.020 License fee – Exception.

Any person who posts bills or distributes handbills shall pay a license fee to the city of $10.00 per annum payable semiannually; provided, that it shall not be necessary for any resident, merchant or manufacturer to obtain a license for the purpose of distributing or posting his own advertisements on billboards owned or used by him for that purpose, or for distributing handbills for any charitable purpose; provided further, that it shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any posters or handbills upon any of the streets of the city. (Code 1997 § 8-1-2).


8.10.030 Bond.

No license for bill posting, distributing or advertising shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall have executed bond to the city, with two or more sureties, residents of the city, in the penal sum of $100.00 conditioned that he will in all respects comply with the provisions and requirements of this chapter, such bond to be approved by the manager. (Code 1997 § 8-1-3).


Chapter 8.20 SIDEWALK VENDORS

(Repealed by 4-2016)


Chapter 8.30 TRANSIENT MERCHANTS

Sections:

8.30.010    Definitions.

8.30.020    License required – Application.

8.30.030    Issuance of license.

8.30.040    Transferability of licenses.

8.30.050    Obstruction of traffic prohibited.

8.30.060    Local sponsor.

8.30.070    Revocation of license.

8.30.080    Appeals.

8.30.090    Penalties.


8.30.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless in conflict with the context or plain meaning:

A.    “Local sponsor” means a merchant who has paid city sales taxes without delinquency for the previous year with a permanent place of business within the city, a local government, or a Gunnison County nonprofit organization, civic organization or church.

B.    “Permanent place of business” means the permanent place of business where business is regularly kept open for the purpose of said business. Every business not conducted at a permanent place of business as defined herein, for the purpose of this chapter, is termed a “transient merchant,” whether the person conducting such transient business is or is not a resident of the county of Gunnison.

C.    “Transient merchant” means any person who travels within the city or has a temporary location for the conduct of his or her business, who engages in the business of selling tangible personal property, who does not have a permanent place of business in Gunnison County and who, in furtherance of said purpose, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, trailer, tent, hotel, motel, or lodginghouse room, apartment, shop, street, alley, or other place within the city, for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares, services, and merchandise.

    A Gunnison County nonprofit organization, civic organization, or church which engages only in occasional sales or fundraising drives shall not be considered a transient merchant. A person participating in an event sponsored by a local government, a Gunnison County nonprofit organization, civic organization, or church which involves multiple vendors shall not be considered a transient merchant. A person engaged in the business of selling and delivering tangible personal property directly to residents of the city who usually employs a vehicle for such deliveries over a regularly established route and ordinarily sells from orders previously placed from such residents or regularly delivered on a schedule shall not be considered a transient merchant. (Ord. 11-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 8-3-1).


8.30.020 License required – Application.

It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to engage in any such business within the city without first obtaining a license from the city and a local sponsor in accordance with this chapter and as provided in GMC 8.30.060.

A.    A license application shall be filed with the city on forms furnished by the city, and shall provide the following information:

1.    The name and address of the applicant and each employee or agent thereof, who will engage in business within the city.

2.    A description of the nature of this business and goods or services offered, and the locations within the city of Gunnison upon which business will be conducted.

3.    Written evidence of authorization to use location.

4.    Name and address of local sponsor (see GMC 8.30.060). 

B.    Accompanying the application shall be a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $50.00. 

C.    Accompanying the application shall be cash or a surety bond in the amount of $1,000 conditioned upon:

1.    Compliance with all ordinances, including but not limited to the land development code of the city and statutes of the state of Colorado, including payment of all city, county, and state taxes and fees; and

2.    Payment of any judgment rendered in favor of a resident of the city against the applicant or any of his/her agents or employees shall be submitted with the application. Such bond shall remain in effect for a minimum period of nine months beyond the expiration date of the transient merchant license issued to the applicant.

3.    Applicants who reside in the state of Colorado and are selling produce grown in the state of Colorado are exempt from the requirements of this subsection (C). 

    Said bond shall be a corporate surety bond issued by a company licensed to do business in Colorado and approved by the city clerk.

D.    Also submitted with the application shall be a form appointing the city clerk as the true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of process for and on behalf of the applicant, and each of his/her agents or employees, upon a form to be provided by the city. If any process is served upon the city clerk, the city shall send a copy of such process to the applicant at the address listed on the application by registered or certified mail.

E.    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to any person engaged in distribution of information in the exercise of such person’s First Amendment rights under the United States Constitution. (Ord. 4-2010 § 1; Ord. 11-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 8-3-2).


8.30.030 Issuance of license.

A.    Following receipt of a properly completed application accompanied by cash or a surety bond, appointment of agent for service of process, the application fee, a copy of current Colorado sales tax license, and a copy of current city sales tax license, the city shall issue the transient merchant’s license for a term of 90 days.

B.    The license shall state the expiration date and describe the goods or services to be offered. The license shall contain a notice to customers that $1,000 cash or surety bond has been filed with the city, conditioned on compliance with all city ordinances and state laws, and the payment of any judgment rendered against the applicant in favor of a resident of the city will be paid, and that the Gunnison city clerk is the licensee’s agent for service of process.

C.    The applicant shall post a copy of the transient merchant license in a conspicuous place at his/her place of business and produce it upon request to any customer, any police officer, or other agent or employee of the city.

D.    For a business with more than one location, a separate transient merchant license is required for each place of business. (Ord. 11-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 8-3-3).


8.30.040 Transferability of licenses.

No license issued under this chapter may be transferred or assigned, and no license is valid for any person other than the person named thereon. (Ord. 11-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 8-3-4).


8.30.050 Obstruction of traffic prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any licensee to conduct business at any location, private or public, in such a manner as to hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to transact business on city rights-of-way. (Ord. 11-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 8-3-5).


8.30.060 Local sponsor.

A transient merchant is required to be sponsored by a local sponsor.

The local sponsor shall file, on forms provided by the city, an application with the city in which the local sponsor shall take responsibility for the business-related acts of the transient merchant, and each agent or employee thereof, and shall guarantee payment of all city, county, and state taxes due or judgment rendered against the transient merchant as a result of the business, and shall act as the transient merchant’s agent for service of process and handling of warranty and customer complaints. The local sponsor shall also be liable for any zoning violations.

After approval of the sponsorship by the city, the transient merchant may conduct the business described thereon. The applicant and each agent or employee shall carry a copy of the approved letter and produce it upon request to any employee or agent of the city or any customer. A copy shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the transient merchant’s place of business. (Ord. 11-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 8-3-6).


8.30.070 Revocation of license.

A.    The license issued hereunder may be revoked by the city clerk following notice and hearing on account of any material misstatement contained in the application, any violation of this chapter, any violation of city ordinances, and regulations applicable to the business activity of the applicant.

B.    Notice of hearing shall be either served upon the applicant in accordance with the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure or mailed, postage prepaid, to the applicant at the address set forth in the application for license.

C.    No license shall be issued to any applicant, or agent or employee thereof, for whom a license has been revoked, until at least one year has elapsed since revocation. (Ord. 11-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 8-3-7).


8.30.080 Appeals.

In the event any applicant believes that the requirements of this chapter constitute an undue burden upon interstate commerce, he/she may apply in writing to the city council, in which event a hearing shall be held before the council to consider the matter. The applicant may appear and present such evidence as he/she may desire at the hearing. Following the hearing, the council shall determine a license fee which is fair and reasonable and does not constitute a burden on interstate commerce. (Ord. 11-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 8-3-8).


8.30.090 Penalties.

Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000, or imprisonment for a period of 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment for each offense. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 11-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 8-3-9).


Chapter 8.40 CITY LIQUOR LICENSE APPLICATION FEES

Sections:

8.40.010    Application fees required.

8.40.020    Review of application.

8.40.030    Alcoholic beverage tastings license.


8.40.010 Application fees required.

Each application for a license or other action filed with the city of Gunnison pursuant to the Colorado Beer Code and Colorado Liquor Code shall be accompanied by an application fee, payable to the city of Gunnison, in addition to any fees due to the state of Colorado, in accordance with the following schedule:

Liquor License Application Fees  

	License Fees

	New license application	$500.00

	Annual renewal application	50.00

	Hotel and restaurant (+/- optional premises)	75.00

	Retail liquor store (malt, vinous and spirituous)	22.50

	Drugstore	22.50

	Beer and wine (malt and vinous)	48.75

	Tavern license (malt, vinous and spirituous)	75.00

	Club license (malt, vinous and spirituous)	41.25

	3.2 percent beer	3.75

	Arts	41.25

	Bed and breakfast	25.00

	Brew pub	75.00

	Optional premises	75.00

	Concurrent review	500.00

	Racetrack	75.00

	Mini bar permit	325.00

	Alcoholic beverage tastings license	0.00

	Other Fees

	Transfer of ownership	$500.00

	Manager registration	75.00

	Special events permit (liquor)	50.00

	Special events permit (3.2 percent beer)	50.00

	Change of location	500.00

	Corporation/LLCO change (per person) (may be charged for background check investigation by local or state – not both)	100.00

	Late renewal application	500.00

	Change of trade name/corporate name	0.00

	Modification of premises	0.00

	Expansion (add optional premises – each permit)	0.00

	Duplicate license	0.00

	Temporary permit	100.00

(Ord. 11-2011 § 1; Ord. 15-2006 § 1; Ord. 3-1999 § 2; Code 1997 § 8-4-1).


8.40.020 Review of application.

The city clerk of the city of Gunnison is hereby specifically delegated the authority to review and approve the following types of procedures pursuant to the Colorado Liquor Code and Colorado Beer Code:

A.    The renewal of an existing license;

B.    The granting of a special events permit;

C.    The registration of a manager;

D.    Changes in corporate structure;

E.    Transfers of ownership;

F.    Granting of a temporary permit;

G.    Changes of trade name or corporate name; and

H.    Alcoholic beverage tastings license.

Upon receipt of an application for any of the foregoing procedures by the city clerk, the city clerk may request from the police department and/or any other city department that may have information concerning the information, a report concerning the matter applied for in the application. It shall be the affirmative duty of the police department to notify the city clerk of any violations that involve establishments holding a liquor or beer license.

If upon review of the application the city clerk determines that the application is complete and that there is no matter raised by the application or any report obtained in connection therewith that should be referred to the city council for decision, the city clerk may administratively approve the application. Whenever, in the sole determination of the city clerk, an application should be referred to the city council for decision, she shall make such referral, in which case the decision shall be made by the city council. (Ord. 15-2006 § 2; Ord. 3-1999 § 1).


8.40.030 Alcoholic beverage tastings license.

A.    Tastings may be conducted by retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee in accordance with this section and pursuant to Section 44-3-301, C.R.S., as the term “tastings” is defined in said Section 44-3-301, C.R.S. 

B.    A retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee may conduct tastings only pursuant to a valid alcoholic beverage tastings license. 

C.    A retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee who wishes to conduct tastings shall submit an application to the city of Gunnison on forms supplied by the city of Gunnison.

D.    If the applicant demonstrates that it is able to conduct the tastings without violating the provisions of this section or Section 44-3-301(10), C.R.S., the city clerk shall issue such license.

E.    An alcoholic beverage tastings license shall be valid for one year and shall run concurrently with the retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore license of the holder of the alcohol beverage tastings license; provided, however, that the first alcoholic beverage tastings license issued to a retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee shall be valid only until the expiration of the then-current retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore license.

F.    Tastings conducted by the holder of an alcoholic beverage tastings license shall be subject to all the limitations and requirements set forth in Section 44-3-301(10), C.R.S., as amended from time to time, and in addition thereto shall be subject to the following limitations:

1.    A written notice to the city clerk of the city of Gunnison must be provided at least 72 hours before a licensee is allowed to conduct a tasting. The notice shall include the name of the liquor-licensed premises, the person who is submitting the notice, the name of the person conducting the tasting, and shall indicate the date and time the tasting is to take place.

2.    Upon the request of any peace officer or liquor enforcement officer, the holder of an alcoholic beverage tastings license shall provide proof the tastings are to be conducted only by a person who has completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the Liquor Enforcement Division of the Department of Revenue of the state of Colorado and who is either the retail liquor store licensee or a liquor-licensed drugstore licensee, or an employee of such licensee.

3.    Licensee shall keep a written record on the licensed premises for each tasting held by that licensee containing the date and time of the tasting and the name of the server. Such written record shall be available upon request for inspection by any peace officer, the city of Gunnison, or Liquor Enforcement Division Officer. (Ord. 12-2018 § 1; Ord. 15-2006 § 3).


Chapter 8.50 MARIJUANA BUSINESS LICENSING REGULATIONS

Sections:

8.50.010    License required.

8.50.020    Application and license fee required.

8.50.030    Application for license.

8.50.040    License application processing and procedure.

8.50.050    Findings of fact.

8.50.060    Modification or alteration to premises following issuance of license.

8.50.070    License renewal.

8.50.080    Transfer of location of license.

8.50.090    Transfer of ownership.

8.50.100    License suspension or revocation.


8.50.010 License required.

No person shall operate any marijuana establishment within the city of Gunnison without a license from the state of Colorado and the city of Gunnison. The city may issue a license, or licenses as appropriate, from any of the following classes: medical marijuana center, optional premises cultivation operation, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing, retail marijuana store, retail marijuana cultivation facility, retail marijuana products manufacturing facility, retail marijuana testing facility. Dual operations are allowed within the city. No person, or entity in which the same person has an interest, may obtain more than one license for each class of marijuana establishment. (Ord. 5-2015 § 4).


8.50.020 Application and license fee required.

An applicant shall pay the city application fee and license fee appropriate to the license sought when the city application is filed. City council shall set these fees by resolution. The application fee paid by an applicant to the city is in addition to the application fee paid to the state of Colorado, one-half of which is then remitted to the city. If an application is later withdrawn, the city shall refund the license fee paid by the applicant. Application fees are nonrefundable. (Ord. 1-2018 § 1; Ord. 17-2015 § 1; Ord. 5-2015 § 4).


8.50.030 Application for license.

A.    General Application Requirements. All applications for licenses authorized pursuant to Sections 44-11-301 and 44-12-301, C.R.S., shall be made on forms approved by the state of Colorado.

B.    City-Specific Application Requirements. In addition to the application requirements contained in subsection (A) of this section, the city requires the following to be included in all applications submitted to the city and the state licensing authority:

1.    Results of local background check performed by the city of Gunnison police department for all persons to be involved in the business, including proposed licensee, owner(s), business managers, or financier(s);

2.    Consent/acknowledgment in writing from the landlord and/or property owner if applicable, acknowledging that the premises will be operated as a marijuana establishment and consenting thereto;

3.    An approved site development application and/or conditional use permit as applicable;

4.    Approval from the community development department that the intended site, buildings and facilities meet necessary local regulations as well as industry-specific regulations, or any conditions necessary to make the site compliant. A pre-application conference with the community development department staff and review of the proposed site is optional, but is highly recommended, in order to assist in obtaining necessary approvals under this section. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1; Ord. 5-2015 § 4).


8.50.040 License application processing and procedure.

A.    Medical Marijuana Establishment.

1.    Public Hearing – City Council. Upon receipt of a complete application and the fees required for a local license, the city shall set a public hearing on the application to be held not less than 30 days after the receipt by city council of the application. Notice of such hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 44-11-302, C.R.S. The public hearing shall be conducted in the following format:

a.    Call to order.

b.    Record of attendance.

c.    Applicant identification.

d.    Report from city clerk/city attorney.

e.    Determination of the neighborhood within city limits.

f.    Applicant’s testimony.

g.    Testimony in favor.

h.    Testimony in opposition.

i.    Close public hearing.

2.    No action shall be taken by city council following the public hearing.

3.    Following receipt of proof by the state local licensing authority of conditional licensing of the applicant by the state licensing authority, the city shall proceed to make findings of fact and approve or deny the application as set forth in GMC 8.50.050.

B.    Retail Marijuana Establishment.

1.    If the state licensing authority receives an application for original licensing for any retail marijuana establishment, the state licensing authority shall provide, within seven days, a copy of the application to the city, and the city shall determine whether the application complies with the city’s time, place, and manner restrictions regarding retail marijuana businesses. All city-specific application requirements contained in GMC 8.50.030(B)(1) through (4) must be included in the application and must be completed in order for the city to inform the state licensing authority whether the application complies with such local restrictions as required by Section 44-12-301, C.R.S. The city clerk as the local licensing authority shall provide such determination to the state licensing authority.

2.    Public Hearing. If the applicant receives conditional state licensure from the state licensing authority, the city shall set a public hearing before the city council on the application to be held following public notice as set forth in Section 44-12-302, C.R.S. The public hearing shall be conducted in the following format:

a.    Call to order.

b.    Record of attendance.

c.    Applicant identification.

d.    Report from city clerk/city attorney.

e.    Determination of the neighborhood within city limits.

f.    Applicant’s testimony.

g.    Testimony in favor.

h.    Testimony in opposition.

i.    Close public hearing.

3.    Council Action Following Hearing. The city council may take action on the application following the public hearing, either on the same day as the public hearing, or at such regular session as determined by council. The city council shall make findings of fact and approve or deny the application as set forth in GMC 8.50.050. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1; Ord. 5-2015 § 4).


8.50.050 Findings of fact.

The city council shall make written findings approving, approving with conditions, or denying an application for a marijuana establishment within the city. In order to approve an application, the council must make at least the following findings:

A.    The application complies with all relevant provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Section 44-11-101 et seq., C.R.S., as amended, or the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, Section 44-12-101 et seq., C.R.S., as amended, as applicable.

B.    That the application is complete and complies with the city application requirements.

C.    That the applicant has received conditional licensing from the state licensing authority.

D.    That the applicant has paid the application and license fees established by the city.

E.    That the application complies with all relevant provisions of the city of Gunnison land development code.

F.    That all testimony both in favor of or in opposition to issuance of the license sought has been considered.

G.    That the council has considered the needs and desires of the neighborhood in which the licensed premises will be located.

H.    That the local background check performed by the city of Gunnison police department does not establish any concern regarding the applicant’s ability to operate the marijuana establishment.

I.    That consent/acknowledgment in writing has been received from the landlord and/or property owner as applicable, acknowledging that the premises will be operated as a marijuana establishment and consenting thereto.

Any conditions of approval of the application shall be set forth in writing. A city license will not be issued until conditions of approval have been met. Any denial of an application shall be accompanied by written findings. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1; Ord. 5-2015 § 4).


8.50.060 Modification or alteration to premises following issuance of license.

In addition to receiving approval in advance from the state licensing authority, approval from the community development department, the building department and the fire department must be obtained prior to any modification or alteration of the premises following initial licensure of the premises. Modifications or alterations requiring approval are those that materially or substantially alter the licensed premises or the usage of the licensed premises from the plans originally approved. A determination of the community development department should be sought as to whether any change is material or substantial prior to any modification or alteration being made. If deemed necessary by the community development department, approval from a state-licensed engineer, that any proposed modifications are in compliance with all ICC codes, may be required. The city council shall set the fee for review of premises modifications by resolution. (Ord. 5-2015 § 4).


8.50.070 License renewal.

Licenses are valid for one year.

License renewal applications shall be processed pursuant to Section 44-11-311, C.R.S., for medical marijuana establishments and pursuant to Section 44-12-310, C.R.S., for retail marijuana establishments. No renewal of a license shall be approved by the city until the license renewal fee set by city council by resolution is paid, until results of a local background check are provided by the city of Gunnison police department, and until confirmation is received from the community development department, building department, and fire department that the licensed premises continue to meet the necessary regulations required for licensure. License renewal may be approved by the city clerk as the local licensing authority.

The city may revoke or elect not to renew any license if it determines that the licensed premises have been inactive, without good cause, for at least one year. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1; Ord. 5-2015 § 4).


8.50.080 Transfer of location of license.

A license for a marijuana establishment may be transferred to another location within the city pursuant to Section 44-11-310, C.R.S., for medical marijuana establishments, and pursuant to Section 44-12-309, C.R.S., for retail marijuana establishments. An application to transfer the location of a license must be accompanied by the transfer of license location fee set by city council by resolution. In addition, the applicant must comply with GMC 8.50.030(B)(1) through (4), except that no application fee is required, and will be subject to any reasonable restrictions that exist or may be placed upon the new location by city council. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1; Ord. 1-2018 § 2; Ord. 5-2015 § 4).


8.50.090 Transfer of ownership.

A marijuana establishment license may be transferred to a new owner pursuant to Section 44-11-309, C.R.S., for medical marijuana establishments, and pursuant to Section 44-12-308, C.R.S., for retail marijuana establishments. An application to transfer ownership must be accompanied by the transfer of ownership fee set by city council by resolution. In addition, the applicant must comply with GMC 8.50.030(B)(1), except that no application fee is required, and shall be subject to the procedures for licensure set forth in GMC 8.50.040. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1; Ord. 1-2018 § 3; Ord. 5-2015 § 4).


8.50.100 License suspension or revocation.

The city may suspend or revoke a license in accordance with the provisions of Section 44-11-601, C.R.S., for medical marijuana establishments, and Section 44-12-601, C.R.S., for retail marijuana establishments.

A.    A marijuana establishment license may be suspended or revoked by the city for any of the following violations:

1.    Conviction of the business, a licensee, or any owner, business manager, or financier of any violation of this chapter or any other law, rule or regulation applicable to the use of marijuana or operation of a marijuana establishment;

2.    Misrepresentation or omission of any material fact, or false or misleading information, on the application or any amendment thereto, or any other information provided to the city related to the marijuana establishment;

3.    Violation of any law which, occurring prior to submittal of the application, could have been cause for denial of the license application;

4.    Distribution of marijuana, including, without limitation, delivering or transporting marijuana in violation of this chapter or any other applicable law, rule or regulation;

5.    Operation of a marijuana establishment in violation of the specifications of the license application, any conditions of approval by the city;

6.    Failure to comply with all applicable kitchen-related health and safety standards of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment regulations as set forth in Code of Colorado Regulations;

7.    Failure to comply with the operation procedures and food service protection provisions of the marijuana product manufacturing facilities standards of the Colorado Department of Permanent Rules Related to Retail Marijuana Code;

8.    Disposal of organic toxic pollutants, hazardous substances, and toxic pollutants in violation of procedures established by city, state and federal regulations;

9.    Modification of the premises without prior approval pursuant to GMC 8.50.060;

10.    Failure to maintain, or provide to the city upon request, any books, recordings, reports, or other records required by this chapter;

11.    Failure to properly notify the city and to complete necessary forms for changes in financial interest, business managers, financier, agent, or change of address;

12.    Failure to comply with all relevant provisions of the city of Gunnison land development code;

13.    Temporary or permanent closure, or other sanction of the establishment, by the city, or other governmental entity with jurisdiction, for failure to comply with health and safety provisions of this chapter or otherwise applicable to the establishment or any other applicable law;

14.    Revocation or suspension of another marijuana establishment’s license or any other license issued by the city, the state of Colorado, or any other jurisdiction, held by a licensee of the marijuana establishment;

15.    Failure to maintain the proper occupational licenses and registrations issued by the state of Colorado for owners, managers, operators, employees, contractors, and other support staff employed by, working in, or having access to restricted areas of the licensed premises of a marijuana establishment;

16.    Failure to correct any violation of any law, or comply with any order to correct a violation of any law within the time stated in the notice and order; and

17.    Suspension or revocation of a license by the state of Colorado.

B.    In the event an establishment, licensee, owner, business manager, or financier is charged with violation of any law, upon which a final judgment would be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license, the city may suspend the license pending resolution of the alleged violation.

C.    If the city revokes or suspends a license, the establishment may not move any marijuana from the premises except under supervision of the city of Gunnison police department or the state licensing authority.

D.    In determining whether a license should be suspended or revoked, and in determining what conditions should be imposed in the event of a suspension, the city shall consider:

1.    The nature and seriousness of the violation; e.g., public safety, license violations, license infractions;

2.    Corrective action, if any, taken by the licensee;

3.    Prior violation(s), if any, by the licensee;

4.    The likelihood of recurrence;

5.    All circumstances surrounding the violation;

6.    Whether the violation was willful or deliberate;

7.    Previous sanctions, if any, imposed against the licensee; and

8.    Whether the owner or manager is the violator or has directed an employee or other individual to violate the law. (Ord. 11-2018 § 1; Ord. 5-2015 § 4).


Title 9 PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY

Chapters:

9.10    Excavations

9.20    Numbering Buildings

9.30    Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters

9.40    Use of Public Rights-of-Way for Private Purposes

9.50    Snow Removal

9.60    Tree Ordinance 1989

9.70    Irrigation System


Chapter 9.10 EXCAVATIONS

Sections:

9.10.010    Excavations – Permit required.

9.10.020    Injury to pavement.

9.10.030    Interference with street repairs.

9.10.040    Excavations to be guarded.


9.10.010 Excavations – Permit required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any hole, drain, or ditch in any street or alley in the city without having first obtained a written permission from the manager. (Code 1997 § 9-1-1).


9.10.020 Injury to pavement.

It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or tear up any pavement or sidewalk without due authority. (Code 1997 § 9-1-2).


9.10.030 Interference with street repairs.

It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or obstruct the making or repairing of any pavement or walk which may be in the course of construction pursuant to any order of the council, or to hinder or obstruct any person employed by him in making or repairing any public improvement or work ordered by the council. (Code 1997 § 9-1-3).


9.10.040 Excavations to be guarded.

It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any thoroughfare without providing during the night either sufficient lights or a temporary fence or suitable obstruction around or in front of the same in order to prevent persons, animals, or vehicles from falling therein.

Any person who shall keep any open cellar door, pit, vault, or other subterranean opening on any street or sidewalk, or on any unfenced lot in such unsafe condition so as to endanger life or limb, and shall fail or refuse after three days’ notice by the chief of police to fence the same with a good and substantial board fence at least four feet high, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1997 § 9-1-4).


Chapter 9.20 NUMBERING BUILDINGS

Sections:

9.20.010    Building numbers required.

9.20.020    New buildings – Owner to secure number.

9.20.030    Application for number – Certificate.

9.20.040    Street map to be prepared.

9.20.050    Numbers – Size and type.

9.20.060    Street signs.

9.20.070    Numbers designated.

9.20.080    Unlawful acts.


9.20.010 Building numbers required.

All persons owning any building fronting upon the streets of the city are hereby required to number their buildings in the manner and as required by this chapter. (Code 1997 § 9-2-1).


9.20.020 New buildings – Owner to secure number.

The owner of any building hereafter constructed and required to be numbered shall, within 30 days after such building is ready for occupancy, apply to the treasurer for a certificate, showing the number of his building, and upon securing the certificate, shall immediately provide and place upon his building at his own expense the number, using such material and observing such rules and regulations as are prescribed herein. (Code 1997 § 9-2-2).


9.20.030 Application for number – Certificate.

It shall be the duty of the treasurer to receive all applications for the assignment of house numbers and to issue a certificate showing such assignment to any applicant. (Code 1997 § 9-2-3).


9.20.040 Street map to be prepared.

It shall be the duty of the engineer to prepare or cause to be prepared, according to the provisions of this chapter, a map or plat of the streets and avenues of the city showing the numbers of all houses which may now or hereafter front upon the several streets of the city. The engineer shall also prepare, from time to time, additional plats showing any change or addition in the number of houses as may be required by law. Upon the completion of any such plats the same shall be delivered by the engineer to the treasurer for his use in making the assignment of numbers. (Code 1997 § 9-2-4).


9.20.050 Numbers – Size and type.

Buildings shall be numbered in a plain manner, and all numbers shall be of some metallic substance, or porcelain, or may consist of gilt lettering on the glass transom or door, and shall be at least three inches in height. All numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place where they may be read from the street and where they are illuminated by the porch light. (Code 1997 § 9-2-5).


9.20.060 Street signs.

There shall be placed at each street intersection at the expense of the city two street signs on corners diagonally across from each other, which signs shall give the names of the intersecting street and avenue. Each street sign shall have a prefix “N” or “S” to designate the portion of the street north or south of Tomichi Avenue. Each avenue sign shall have a prefix “E” or “W” to designate the portion of the avenue east or west of Main Street. (Code 1997 § 9-2-6).


9.20.070 Numbers designated.

All streets shall be numbered northerly and southerly from Tomichi Avenue and the first number, either north or south from Tomichi Avenue, shall be 100, the next number 101 and such numbering shall increase in consecutive order to the end of the block. The first number in each block shall commence with the number 100 more than the beginning number in the block immediately preceding. The even numbers shall be on the east side and the odd numbers on the west side of all streets running north and south from Tomichi Avenue and such numbering shall continue, as herein directed, to the city limits on the north and south. All avenues shall be numbered easterly and westerly from Main Street and the first number, either east or west from Main Street, shall be 100, the next 101 and such numbering shall increase in consecutive order to the end of the block. The first number in each block shall commence with the number 100 more than the beginning number in the block immediately preceding. The even numbers shall be on the north side and the odd numbers on the south side of all avenues running east and west from Main Street, and such numbering shall continue, as herein directed, to the city limits on the east and west. One number shall be assigned to every 25 feet in each block on the streets and avenues; except that on that portion of Main Street between New York Avenue and Georgia Avenue one number shall be assigned to every 12.5 feet, excepting also that on that portion of Tomichi Avenue between Pine Street and Taylor Street one number shall be assigned to every 12.5 feet. (Code 1997 § 9-2-7).


9.20.080 Unlawful acts.

No person shall tear down, change, or in any way mutilate any house number or street sign, nor place, use, retain, or permit to remain any number other than the one assigned by the proper officers of the city as provided herein. (Code 1997 § 9-2-8).


Chapter 9.30 SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS

Sections:

9.30.010    Notice to construct or repair.

9.30.020    Failure to comply.

9.30.030    Assessment of cost.

9.30.040    Hearing – Notice.

9.30.050    Payment of assessment – Failure constitutes lien.

9.30.060    Certification of assessment to county.

9.30.070    Sidewalks – Specifications.

9.30.080    Bond required.

9.30.090    Curbs and gutters – Construction requirements.

9.30.100    Curbs and gutters – Grade established.

9.30.110    Cleaning sidewalks – Removal of snow and ice.

9.30.120    Cooperative repairs.


9.30.010 Notice to construct or repair.

Whenever the council may deem it necessary that a sidewalk, curb or gutter, or any portion thereof, be constructed or repaired, it may, by resolution passed and adopted by a majority vote of the members, declare the necessity and order the construction or repair of the sidewalk, curb or gutter within 30 days after notice is served upon the owner of the premises in the manner as herein specified. The notice shall be in writing, signed by the director of finance, and shall contain a description of the premises, lots or parcels of ground affected, and the name of the owner. The notice shall be served by the chief of police upon the owner or his agent in the same manner as summons are personally served under the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. In case personal service cannot be obtained within the city, as herein directed, service may be obtained by publication for at least once a week for three consecutive weeks in a public newspaper printed and published in the city. Service shall be complete five days after the date of the last publication. It is hereby made the duty of the director of finance to publish the notice and in case of such publication, he shall also deposit a copy of the notice in the post office addressed to the last known address of the owner named in the notice. (Code 1997 § 9-3-1).


9.30.020 Failure to comply.

In case of failure of any owner to construct or repair any such sidewalk, curb, or gutter within the time herein provided, and in the manner prescribed by the city, the city may construct or repair the same, the work to be done in accordance with the specifications set forth by the city for such work. (Code 1997 § 9-3-2).


9.30.030 Assessment of cost.

Upon the completion of the work contemplated by GMC 9.30.020, the council shall proceed to determine and assess the amount properly chargeable against the delinquent owner and against his lot or parcel of land on account of the construction, rebuilding or repair of the sidewalk, curb, or gutter. (Code 1997 § 9-3-3).


9.30.040 Hearing – Notice.

The council, as soon as may be after such assessment, shall cause to be published for a period of 10 days in some newspaper published in the city, a notice of the assessment, which notice shall contain a description of the abutting lot or parcel of land, the name of the owner thereof, the amount of the assessment and shall designate a time and place at which the owner may be heard by the council as to the justness and correctness of the amount so assessed. The notice shall also be served by the chief of police in the same manner as summons are served under the Code of Civil Procedure of the state, upon any owner that may be found within the city, and if not found within the city, a copy thereof shall be mailed to the last known post office address of the person. The publication for a period of 10 days shall be taken to mean and include at least once a week for three consecutive weeks, and service shall be complete and the hearing may be set at any time after five days have elapsed after the date of the last publication. At the time and place designated in the notice the council shall meet, and if expedient, may adjourn from time to time, and shall hear the owner with reference to the matter. Upon any such hearing the council shall take such final action as shall seem just and proper. (Code 1997 § 9-3-4).


9.30.050 Payment of assessment – Failure constitutes lien.

It shall be the duty of the owner to pay the assessment, or to pay the assessment as modified, as the case may be, within 30 days after such final action, and in case of his failure to do so, he shall be liable personally for the amount of the assessment, and the same shall be a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land from the time of the assessment, and the city shall have all the remedies for the collection thereof provided by the statutes of this state, including the right to certify the assessment to the proper officers of the county for the purpose of having same placed upon the tax list and collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, and including the right of sale of property for taxes and the redemption of the same.

The amount of any assessment may be paid to the treasurer at any time before the tax list is placed in the hands of the county treasurer, but thereafter only to the county treasurer. (Code 1997 § 9-3-5).


9.30.060 Certification of assessment to county.

In case the owner shall fail to pay the assessment within 30 days after the final action provided for in GMC 9.30.040, then it shall be the duty of the director of finance to certify the amount of the assessment to the proper county officers as provided by law. (Code 1997 § 9-3-6).


9.30.070 Sidewalks – Specifications.

The material and method of constructing sidewalks shall conform in all respects to the specifications adopted by the council. These specifications shall be on file in the engineer’s office at all times. (Code 1997 § 9-3-7).


9.30.080 Bond required.

Every person engaged in constructing sidewalks, crossings, curbs or gutters shall, before entering or engaging in work, enter into and give a bond to the city in the penal sum of $1,000, with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the council, which bond shall be filed with the director of finance and be conditioned that all cement work constructed by the person shall be done in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations established by the council and the bond shall be in effect for one year after completion of the work. (Code 1997 § 9-3-8).


9.30.090 Curbs and gutters – Construction requirements.

All curbs and gutters constructed in the city shall be constructed in accordance with the following specifications:

A.    Curb and Gutter Combined. Curbs and gutters, unless otherwise ordered or permitted, shall be constructed as one unit of construction.

B.    Dimensions. The type of curb and gutter and dimensions of the same shall be in accordance with detailed plans and specifications adopted by the council for any particular street, avenue or portion of the city and kept on file with the engineer who shall at all times exhibit the same for inspection of persons interested therein. (Code 1997 § 9-3-9).


9.30.100 Curbs and gutters – Grade established.

All curbs and gutters, or either, as specified by this section, as the case may be, shall be placed along a line and on a grade as marked and established on the ground by the engineer and no curb or gutter shall be placed until it is located and the grade marked and established by the engineer. (Code 1997 § 9-3-10).


9.30.110 Cleaning sidewalks – Removal of snow and ice.

A.    Generally. The owner, occupant, or agent of the owner of any building, property, or vacant lot in the city is required to maintain the sidewalks, parking area, and curbs (the area from the property line to the gutter) adjoining the building, property, or vacant lot in a clean condition and to remove snow and ice from adjoining sidewalks within a reasonable time after every snowfall in order to give safe passage to pedestrians.

    The obligation to remove snow and ice from the adjoining sidewalk imposed by this section shall not extend to the removal of snow and ice deposited upon a sidewalk lying parallel to the curb of the adjacent roadway, as a result of snow removal from the adjacent roadways by the city of Gunnison, where the snow and ice are plowed to roadway edge. The owner, occupant, or agent of the owner of any building or property, or vacant lot, is required to remove snow deposited upon a sidewalk or driveway or parking area by snow removal operations of the city of Gunnison that are perpendicular to the curb of the adjacent roadway.

B.    Violation. Any violation of this section, which continues after the giving of 24 hours’ written notice, is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 16-2017 § 5; Ord. 13-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 9-3-11).


9.30.120 Cooperative repairs.

Notwithstanding the provisions of GMC 9.30.010 through 9.30.090, should the city council determine during or through the budgetary process that it has sufficient funds available to effect needed repairs or replacement of existing curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, the city council may order such repairs by appropriating funds in the annual municipal budget. Such determination shall be made according to the availability of funds and the condition and priorities of the defects, which shall be set by the city council.

Any such expenditures shall only be made on a cooperative basis with the abutting land owner contributing a proportionate share in either cash or material. (Code 1997 § 9-3-13).


Chapter 9.40 USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR PRIVATE PURPOSES

Sections:

9.40.010    Purpose.

9.40.020    Definitions.

9.40.030    Applicability.

9.40.040    Administrative authority and responsibility.

9.40.050    Revocable license agreement required.

9.40.060    License types, application, and process.

9.40.070    Land Development Code applicability.

9.40.080    Commercial, B-1, CBD districts.

9.40.090    Residential districts.

9.40.100    Industrial district.


9.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to manage the use of public rights-of-way in a manner that is flexible, adaptable, and protects the community’s health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 4-2016 § 2).


9.40.020 Definitions.

“Accessway” means that portion of the public sidewalk section designated as the clear and continuous pedestrian corridor for use and enjoyment by the general public.

“Barrier” means any fence, landscaped planter, rope or other perimeter enclosures used to separate cafe sidewalk seating areas from the public accessway or required curb clearance established within the public rights-of-way.

“License” means a revocable license agreement, addressing the terms for using a portion of the public rights-of-way for private purposes.

“Licensee” means any property owner, business owner, representative, or assignee that is the signatory to a valid revocable license agreement and who is responsible for the maintenance, upkeep and general conformance of the standards established by this chapter.

“Merchandise display” means stands, tables, freestanding merchandise or other features intended for sale to the general public that is placed within the public rights-of-way. For the purposes of administering this chapter, sandwich board signs shall be considered a merchandise display.

“Permanent physical feature” means trees, public signage, street lights, fire hydrants, decks, and porch roofs extending into the rights-of-way and any other features deemed by the city manager to be a permanent feature. (Ord. 4-2016 § 2).


9.40.030 Applicability.

This chapter applies to all public rights-of-way within the city of Gunnison incorporated limits. Any private roads and sidewalks serving development within the city limits are not affected by the standards established herein, but private ways intended for the purposes of public use shall be subject to Section 4.1 (Adequate Public Facilities), Section 4.2 (Road Construction Standards), Section 4.5 (Pedestrian Circulation Facilities) and any other applicable standards established by the city of Gunnison Land Development Code.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the city’s ability to use public rights-of-way as deemed necessary or desired. (Ord. 4-2016 § 2).


9.40.040 Administrative authority and responsibility.

The city manager, or a designee assigned by the city manager, shall have the administrative authority over the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4-2016 § 2).


9.40.050 Revocable license agreement required.

All use of public rights-of-way for private purposes requires a revocable license agreement (license) approved by the city of Gunnison. 

Exceptions: Placing irrigation pumps, irrigation pump covers, mail boxes and landscaping improvements compliant with the Land Development Code (Section 4.6, Landscaping, Buffering and Screening) and parking of currently licensed private vehicles within the rights-of-way pursuant to Chapter 5.20 GMC (Traffic) shall not be subject to licensing requirements established in this chapter. (Ord. 4-2016 § 2).


9.40.060 License types, application, and process.

A.    Physical improvements within the public rights-of-way for private purposes are subject to the standards and conditions established by this chapter. Two types of licenses are established by this chapter:

1.    Permanent Feature License Agreement. Revocable license agreement applications requesting the placement of apparatus, facilities, posts, any structural element of a building extending into the right-of-way or other permanent physical features shall be subject to review and approval of a revocable license agreement acted on by the city council at a regular or special meeting. Applications proposing cafe sidewalk seating shall be classified as a permanent feature license agreement.

2.    Administrative Use License Agreement. A revocable license agreement application proposing the placement of merchandise, displays, racks, sandwich boards or other features that are temporary in nature are subject to administrative approval by the city manager under the provisions of this chapter.

B.    Interpretation Authority. The city manager shall have the discretionary authority to determine if a license application is classified as a permanent feature or an administrative use license agreement. The city manager may submit any administrative use license agreement application to the city council for consideration.

C.    Minimum Application Contents. All revocable license agreement applications shall include, at a minimum, the following information and materials:

1.    Name, Street and Mailing Address, Telephone Number, and Power of Attorney. The proposed licensee name, address and telephone number. If the licensee is to be represented by an agent, a letter signed by the licensee granting power of attorney to the agent shall be submitted, authorizing the agent to represent the licensee and stating the representative’s name, street and mailing address and phone number.

2.    Legal Description. The legal description and street address, if such exists, of the property on which the improvement is to be located. Legal descriptions are available at the county assessor office (970-641-1085) or city community development department (970-641-8150).

3.    Disclosure of Ownership. A disclosure of ownership of the property to which the application applies.

4.    Vicinity Map. An eight and one-half inch by 11-inch vicinity map locating the subject property within the city of Gunnison.

5.    Written Description. A written description of the proposal and an explanation in written, graphic or model form of how the proposed private use of the public right-of-way complies with the applicable review standards established in this chapter.

6.    Plan View and Elevation Drawing. Any license application proposing to develop a permanent feature within public rights-of-way shall provide a scaled plan view (map) and elevation drawing depicting the feature, the continuous and clear accessway, and any other permanent feature located on the sidewalk adjacent to the business front.

7.    Barriers. All applications proposing barriers shall include cut sheets or design illustrations depicting the proposal design.

D.    Process. Five stages comprise the process for the use of public rights-of-way for private purposes as described below.

1.    Pre-Application Conference. The licensee is encouraged but not required to meet with the community development department staff prior to the submittal of a revocable license agreement application.

2.    Application Submittal. The licensee must provide a complete application to the community development department prior to scheduling a formal review.

3.    Staff Review. The community development director or an assigned designee shall review the application within five working days of the application submittal. Upon review completion, the community development department shall notify the applicant of any omissions or required additional information.

4.    Decision. All permanent physical feature license applications shall be submitted to and discussed by the city council at a work session, prior to scheduling any action at a regular meeting. Administrative use license agreement shall be approved by the city manager or designee.

5.    Post-Decision Actions. All uses of public rights-of-way for purposes that are subject to license application review shall be memorialized through the execution of a revocable license agreement defining the terms by which the licensee shall comply.

E.    Insurance and Indemnification. The revocable license agreement shall be a binding contract approved as to form by the city attorney. The licensee/property owner hereby agrees to indemnify, defend, and save harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees against any and all claims for personal injury or property damage, including reasonable attorney’s fees arising out of or connected in any way with the licensee’s use of the public right-of-way. The licensee shall obtain and maintain in force comprehensive general liability, broad form property damage and blanket contractual liability insurance in a combined single limit amount, per claim and aggregate, of at least $1,000,000 covering the licensee’s operation on the sidewalk. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured.

F.    Application Fee. The application fee for a license agreement shall be determined by resolution approved by the city council.

G.    Termination. Upon termination of the license, the licensee shall immediately remove any permanent features, personal property, furnishings, display and equipment from the right-of-way. The public right-of-way shall be restored to its original condition. (Ord. 4-2016 § 2).


9.40.070 Land Development Code applicability.

A.    Sidewalk Facilities. Pedestrian circulation facility improvements associated with either a land use development application or a site development application shall be subject to the pedestrian circulation facilities standards established in Section 4.5 of the city of Gunnison Land Development Code.

B.    Landscaping. Landscaping improvements associated with either a land use development application or a site development application shall be subject to the standards established in Section 4.5 (Landscaping, Buffers and Screening) of the city of Gunnison Land Development Code.

C.    Signage. All signs and banners in the public rights-of-way shall be subject to Section 4.8.H of the city of Gunnison Land Development Code, which includes the requirement to maintain a current and valid administrative license agreement. (Ord. 4-2016 § 2).


9.40.080 Commercial, B-1, CBD districts.

Uses within the commercial, B-1, and CBD districts proposing to use public rights-of-way for private purposes shall be subject to the standards established herein.

A.    General Standards.

1.    Accessway. All public sidewalks shall maintain a minimum six feet wide clear and continuous pedestrian corridor. The accessway shall, in most cases, be located between the property line and any irrigation ditch located within the right-of-way. No clear and continuous accessway shall be located within the curb clearance area. To accommodate easy pedestrian movement, horizontal transitions of the accessway should be uniform and should not exceed three feet over a linear distance of eight feet.


[IMAGE]


2.    Curb Clearance. Proposed uses on public sidewalks shall be arranged and conducted in a manner to maintain a minimum three feet of clear distance from the curb edge. Placement of permanent features, merchandise displays or other items shall not create a physical impediment greater than 15 feet in length that precludes pedestrian movement between parking stalls and the accessway.


[IMAGE]


3.    Americans with Disabilities Act Standards. Any proposed use of public rights-of-way for private purposes shall fully comply with all provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

4.    Vertical Clearance. Any proposed use of public rights-of-way for private purposes shall maintain a minimum seven feet of vertical clearance distance from the sidewalk grade.

5.    Sound System Noise Level. The maximum noise level for any sound system equipped with speakers within the public rights-of-way shall not exceed 60 decibels.

6.    Electric Cords or Other Tripping Hazard. The use of electric cords or other features not specifically addressed herein, but that could create a tripping hazard, are prohibited.

B.    Merchandise Display Standards.

1.    Merchandise displays located on public sidewalks shall be contained in no more than two display clusters per business frontage.

2.    The aggregate maximum coverage area of displays shall be 35 square feet of the sidewalk surface area directly adjacent to the business store front. For the purposes of administering this chapter, the display of sandwich boards shall be considered a merchandise display, and signage standards established by the city of Gunnison Land Development Code (Section 4.8) shall apply.

3.    Alternative merchandise display configurations may be considered if subsection (A) of this section, General Standards, is satisfied.

4.    Merchandise displays shall be removed from the public rights-of-way after business hours.

5.    Placement of merchandise displays shall not create a dangerous public condition and shall provide adequate means for emergency egress and ingress from any adjacent building.

C.    Sidewalk Cafe Standards.

1.    Sidewalk cafe seating shall be arranged in a manner that complies with all provisions of subsection (A) of this section, General Standards.

2.    Sidewalk cafe seating shall be licensed for use between March 15th and November 15th. The licensee may be required to discontinue sidewalk cafe seating at any time as determined and ordered by the city manager.

3.    Sidewalk cafe seating shall be located directly adjacent to the business wall-plane or property line. Alternative seating layout may be considered if subsection (A) of this section, General Standards, is satisfied.

4.    Sidewalk cafe seating may extend onto an adjacent business only upon written agreement by the adjacent property owner and under the condition that insurance indemnification provisions protecting the city’s interest are satisfied.

5.    Tables, chairs and other features associated with sidewalk cafe seating shall not interfere with the pedestrian accessway or the curb clearance area. Chairs next to the pedestrian accessway shall be placed in a manner as not to impede upon the accessway.


[IMAGE]


6.    Smoking in the cafe seating area is prohibited.

7.    Sidewalk cafe seating associated with a business serving alcoholic beverages shall be limited to the specified premises established by a current Colorado state and city liquor license. The specified premises shall abut directly to the building wall-plane/property line bordering the licensee’s business.

8.    Sidewalk cafe seating associated with a business serving alcoholic beverages shall have a barrier bordering the liquor license’s established premises. Pursuant to state regulations, the serving of alcohol shall be conducted within defined barrier. Sidewalk cafe seating businesses not serving alcohol are not required to but may install a barrier.

9.    Perimeter barriers associated with sidewalk cafe seating shall be constructed, installed and maintained according to the following standards:

a.    General. The location, design and construction of all barriers is subject to review and approval by the city council.

b.    Design Concept. The physical design of the barrier shall be compatible with the design of the building, shall be visually appealing and help to separate the dining/seating area from the sidewalk.

c.    Open Appearance. Barriers shall be at least 70 percent open (transparent) in order to maintain visibility of street level activity.

d.    Height. Barriers shall be a minimum height of 36 inches and may not exceed 42 inches in height.

e.    Anchoring. Barriers may be anchored through the use of recessed sleeves and posts or weighted bases, or other means approved by the city. When removed, the resulting surface must be flush with the sidewalk.

f.    Support Members. Stanchions or other vertical supporting members that have a base shall not create a tripping hazard. The stanchion base shall not be domed or more than one-half inch above the sidewalk surface. The stanchion bases shall not impede upon accessway.

g.    Use of Planters. Planters may be used in situations where no barrier is required. All planters must have living plants contained within them. Dead plants must be replaced or the planter removed from public view.

h.    Prohibited Materials. Fabric inserts of any size, chain-link, cyclone fencing, standard wire gage material or similar small soft metal materials are prohibited from being used as part of the barrier.

10.    Furniture and Features. Furniture and features associated with sidewalk cafe seating shall be constructed, installed and maintained according to the following standards:

a.    The licensee shall ensure that tables, chairs and other materials do not interfere with pedestrian movement in the accessway.

b.    Umbrellas placed within the public rights-of-way shall not display trademarks, logos, brands or other advertising messages.

c.    Furniture and features must be maintained in good visual repair.

d.    All furniture and features must be durable and of sufficiently sturdy construction as not to blow over with normal winds.

e.    Furniture and features must not be secured to trees, lampposts, street signs, hydrants or any other public street infrastructure by any means during restaurant operation hours or when the business is closed.

11.    Lighting. Lighting will be required for outdoor dining areas where food will be eaten during evening hours. Lighting features shall be decorative and complement the architectural character of the building facade. Lighting features will illuminate only the sidewalk area and shall not cause direct glare or other visual obstruction to pedestrians or vehicle drivers.

12.    Maintenance. The licensee shall keep the outdoor dining area clear from litter, food scraps, and soiled dishes and utensils at all times. Debris generated from the business shall not be disposed in public trash receptacles located in the public rights-of-way. Private trash receptacles shall be emptied daily. The licensee is required to keep the entire sidewalk in and around the sidewalk seating area clean and orderly. No debris shall be swept, washed or blown into the sidewalk, irrigation ditches, gutter or street. (Ord. 4-2016 § 2).


9.40.090 Residential districts. 

Reserved. (Ord. 4-2016 § 2).


9.40.100 Industrial district. 

Reserved. (Ord. 4-2016 § 2).


Chapter 9.50 SNOW REMOVAL

Sections:

9.50.010    Snow removal from private property.

9.50.020    Application.

9.50.030    Agreement.

9.50.040    Entering upon private property.

9.50.050    Snow removal from public sidewalks.

9.50.060    Violation.


9.50.010 Snow removal from private property.

Snow taken or removed from property, excluding public sidewalks, shall not be deposited in any city right-of-way, city street, alley or roadway, except:

A.    An agreement be first entered into with the city as hereinafter provided; or

B.    Snow removed from property adjacent to city rights-of-way may be placed in an existing center-line windrow established by the city’s public works department. Snow may not interfere with traffic flow, be located within travel ways, or cause the existing windrow to encroach into the established travel lane, or, if applicable, extend beyond the median turn lane.

C.    No debris may be pushed into city rights-of-way in connection with snow removal. (Ord. 5-2018 § 1; Ord. 16-2017 § 1; Code 1997 § 9-5-1).


9.50.020 Application.

Upon written application being made, the city manager may, on behalf of the city, enter into an administrative license agreement with such applicant for the removal of snow from private property. The charge for removal shall be based upon the area of the property to be serviced. Fees will be established annually by council. (Ord. 16-2017 § 2; Code 1997 § 9-5-2).


9.50.030 Agreement.

The agreement shall cover the period from October 1st through May 30th, renewed annually. Agreements entered into after October 1st will be prorated accordingly. (Ord. 16-2017 § 3; Code 1997 § 9-5-3).


9.50.040 Entering upon private property.

No provisions of this chapter, and no agreement executed pursuant hereto, shall impose upon the city any obligation to collect, load, haul, or dispose of any materials or substance other than snow or ice, or to enter upon private property and remove snow therefrom except when snow shall have been deposited upon such private property at the direction of the city manager. (Code 1997 § 9-5-4).


9.50.050 Snow removal from public sidewalks.

The requirements for snow removal from public sidewalks are as set forth in GMC 9.30.110. (Ord. 13-2000 § 3; Code 1997 § 9-5-5).


9.50.060 Violation.

Any violation of GMC 9.50.010 is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 16-2017 § 4).


Chapter 9.60 TREE ORDINANCE 1989

Sections:

9.60.010    Short title.

9.60.020    Definitions.

9.60.030    Creation and establishment of a city tree board.

9.60.040    Duties and responsibilities.

9.60.050    Street tree species to be planted.

9.60.060    Distance from curb and sidewalk.

9.60.070    Distance from street corners and fireplugs.

9.60.080    Utilities.

9.60.090    Public tree care.

9.60.100    Tree topping.

9.60.110    Pruning, corner clearance.

9.60.120    Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.

9.60.130    Removal of stumps.

9.60.140    Interference with city tree board.

9.60.150    Penalty.


9.60.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “tree ordinance 1989.” (Code 1997 § 9-6-1).


9.60.020 Definitions.

A.    “Park trees” means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park.

B.    “Private trees” means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation located on private property.

C.    “Public trees” means street and park trees.

D.    “Street trees” means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between public rights-of-way on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. (Code 1997 § 9-6-2).


9.60.030 Creation and establishment of a city tree board.

There is hereby created and established a city tree board which shall consist of the city council. The city council shall rely on city staff members, the Colorado State Forest Service, and other qualified and interested citizens for recommendations, work program preparation, and implementation. The city council may delegate their responsibilities as city tree board as they deem necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. (Code 1997 § 9-6-3).


9.60.040 Duties and responsibilities.

It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel, develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the public and upon approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The board may request investigations, findings, reports, and recommendations upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. (Code 1997 § 9-6-4).


9.60.050 Street tree species to be planted.

The city community development department shall maintain a list of recommended species for the Gunnison area. In an effort to provide a variety of landscape species within the city, the public is encouraged to plant any of the trees listed. (Code 1997 § 9-6-5).


9.60.060 Distance from curb and sidewalk.

Trees may not be planted any closer than three feet from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks. (Code 1997 § 9-6-6).


9.60.070 Distance from street corners and fireplugs.

No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curb or curb lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet of any fireplug. (Code 1997 § 9-6-7).


9.60.080 Utilities.

No trees shall be planted within a power line easement. No street trees may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility. (Code 1997 § 9-6-8).


9.60.090 Public tree care.

It is the responsibility of the adjacent private property owner to maintain street trees.

The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the public right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.

The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners. (Code 1997 § 9-6-9).


9.60.100 Tree topping.

It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. “Topping” is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the city tree board. (Code 1997 § 9-6-10).


9.60.110 Pruning, corner clearance.

Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. (Code 1997 § 9-6-11).


9.60.120 Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.

The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city tree board will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner’s property tax notice. (Code 1997 § 9-6-12).


9.60.130 Removal of stumps.

All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. (Code 1997 § 9-6-13).


9.60.140 Interference with city tree board.

It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter. (Code 1997 § 9-6-14).


9.60.150 Penalty.

Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction therefor, subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000. (Ord. 19-1997 § 8; Code 1997 § 9-6-15).


Chapter 9.70 IRRIGATION SYSTEM

Sections:

9.70.010    Terms defined.

9.70.020    Diversion of water permitted.

9.70.030    Limitations for diversion – Permit.

9.70.040    Hours when diversion prohibited.

9.70.050    Use of wastewater exception.

9.70.060    Manner of diverting water.

9.70.070    Water flowing on streets prohibited.

9.70.080    Removal of gates or dams.

9.70.090    Ditches to be kept clear.

9.70.100    Council may fix regulations.

9.70.110    Violation – Denial of water.


9.70.010 Terms defined.

For the purpose of this chapter the term “water user” shall be taken to include any person owning or having title to lots or other parcels of land within the corporate limits, or having the possession or use thereof under lease or otherwise, and diverting water from the city ditches for domestic or irrigation purposes. The term “city ditches” shall be taken to include the main ditch and all other ditches and laterals owned and operated by the city as the surface water and irrigation system of the city and the water herein referred to shall include all the water delivered to the ditches under the decreed water rights of the city. (Code 1997 § 9-7-1).


9.70.020 Diversion of water permitted.

Any water user may divert water from the city ditches for domestic and irrigation purposes, subject to the limitations, regulations, and restrictions herein contained. (Code 1997 § 9-7-2).


9.70.030 Limitations for diversion – Permit.

No water user shall divert water from the city ditches for irrigating more than five lots of ground, a lot being taken as 25 feet by 125 feet in area, or a tract of land equivalent thereto in area, without first having obtained permission from the council as hereinafter provided, and if any water user shall apply water diverted from the city ditches to more than five lots of ground without such permission, it shall be conclusively presumed that he is diverting and using more water from the ditches than he is entitled to receive. Any water user desiring to divert water from the city ditches to irrigate more than five lots of ground herein specified shall, on or before the first day of May of each year, file a written application with the director of finance asking permission to irrigate from the city ditches any additional land. The application shall give a description of the land which applicant wishes to irrigate, the nature of the crop he expects to raise, and the amount of water he wishes to divert from the city ditches for use thereon. The council shall consider all applications filed with the director of finance at the regular meeting of the council in May of each year, and the council may grant or refuse any application or approve the application as to the part of the land described therein and reject it as to the remaining parcels of land. If any such application be granted, the applicant shall receive a written permit which shall contain a description of the land which may be irrigated under the permit; and thereupon, and before the applicant is permitted to divert any water under the permit, he shall pay to the treasurer $2.00 for each lot or tract of land equivalent to 25 feet by 125 feet in area or fraction thereof, described in the permit. Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall lapse on the first day of May following its date of issue. The permit shall be accepted by the water user subject to all the rules and regulations contained in this chapter, and shall not entitle the water user to whom it is issued to any rights or privileges not enjoyed by any other water user, save and except the right to apply water diverted from the city ditches to more than five lots of ground as described herein. (Code 1997 § 9-7-3).


9.70.040 Hours when diversion prohibited.

No water user shall divert water from the city ditches between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of each 24 hours, and no water user during said time shall leave a floodgate, dam or other obstruction in the ditches; provided, however, any water user may obtain permission from the council to divert water during said time. (Code 1997 § 9-7-4).


9.70.050 Use of wastewater exception.

GMC 9.70.030 and 9.70.040 shall not apply to water users who take water from the city ditches at the point or places where the city water is discharged as wastewater; provided, however, the diversion of the wastewater shall be subject to the control of the council and the rules and regulations contained in the other sections of this chapter; and provided further, that the point or places where water is discharged as wastewater shall be designated from time to time by the council. (Code 1997 § 9-7-5).


9.70.060 Manner of diverting water.

The water user in diverting water from the city ditches shall divert the water from the nearest ditch to the lot to be irrigated unless it is impossible to irrigate the lot from the nearest ditch; and the water user shall conduct the water directly to the lots or parcels of land to be irrigated and shall not construct ditches or other water conduits for conducting the water along the streets or alleys of the city without permission obtained from the council. Any water user making a ditch across the sidewalk shall bridge or pipe the ditch for the full width of the sidewalk. (Code 1997 § 9-7-6).


9.70.070 Water flowing on streets prohibited.

No water user or any other person shall cause water to flow upon the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city, and no water user shall divert and use the water from the ditches, nor place any floodgate, dam or other obstruction in the ditches, nor irrigate his land in such manner as to cause water to flow upon the streets, sidewalks, or alleys of said city. Water flowing upon the streets, sidewalks or alleys from a city ditch where water is being used or diverted by a water user, or from the private ditches of the water user, or from the land which he is irrigating shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section by the water user diverting the water. (Code 1997 § 9-7-7).


9.70.080 Removal of gates or dams.

No water user nor any other person shall move, alter or in any manner displace any floodgate, dam or any obstruction which is placed in a city ditch under the supervision and direction of the city. (Code 1997 § 9-7-8).


9.70.090 Ditches to be kept clear.

All water users and other persons living within the limits of the city shall keep the ditches in front and rear of their respective premises clear and free from filth and dirt and shall not pour nor dash into the ditches any slop, or filthy or offensive matter of any description whatsoever. (Code 1997 § 9-7-9).


9.70.100 Council may fix regulations.

The council in the management and control of the city ditches, in making an equitable distribution therefrom, and in combating the mosquito pest, may cause the water in the ditches to be turned off, and may order to be removed or cause to be removed, any floodgate, dam or obstruction by which water is being diverted from the ditches by the water user, or may establish ditch districts within the city and allow the residents of one district to use the water for a specific number of hours to the exclusion of the residents of the other districts, or may shut off any water from any water user who diverts water for an unreasonable length of time. The chairman of the ditch and water committee is hereby empowered to make suitable orders carrying out any of the powers of the council reserved and mentioned in this section save and except any order fixing the time during which water shall be turned off in combating the mosquito pest and any order establishing ditch districts as specified herein. All water users and their rights to divert water from the city ditches are subject to any and all orders that may be made pursuant to this section. (Code 1997 § 9-7-10).


9.70.110 Violation – Denial of water.

Any water user and any other person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall disobey any lawful notice of the mayor or council or any duly authorized officer of the city concerning the city ditches or the water therein shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to the general penalty provided by this code, or may be deprived of the use of and right to divert water from the city ditches for a period of time not exceeding three months of the irrigation season, or both such fine and denial of right to divert water from the city ditches, in the discretion of the police magistrate. (Code 1997 § 9-7-11).

 


Title 10 SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

Chapters:

10.10    Special Improvement Districts

10.20    Service Plans for Title 32, C.R.S., Special Districts (Including Metropolitan Districts)


Chapter 10.10 SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS

Sections:

10.10.010    Title.

10.10.020    Adoption of state statutory procedure.

10.10.030    Specific alterations of statutes.

10.10.040    Notice requirement.

10.10.050    Administrative regulations.


10.10.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the “special improvement district ordinance” of the city. (Code 1997 § 10-1-1).


10.10.020 Adoption of state statutory procedure.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in the Municipal Home Rule Charter of the city, the statutes of the state of Colorado codified as part 5 of article 25 of title 31, C.R.S., in effect as of the date hereof, shall prescribe the procedures for creating special improvement districts by the city, and all other matters related to special improvement districts. In addition, the city shall have the right and authority to use and operate under the provisions of the statutes of the state of Colorado codified as part 11 of article 25 of title 31, C.R.S., in connection with such special improvement districts. Pursuant to Section 6.6 of the city’s Municipal Home Rule Charter, such statutes are hereby adopted by reference without reading or publishing such statutes in full. (Code 1997 § 10-1-2).


10.10.030 Specific alterations of statutes.

In accordance with the authority contained in GMC 10.10.020, it is hereby provided that:

A.    The provisions of Section 31-25-501(2) and (3), C.R.S., shall not apply to special improvement districts created or to be created by the city. In addition, for purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:

1.    “Elector” means only registered electors who are owners of property within or residents of the district.

2.    “Owners,” with reference to petitions, means those entities or persons in whom record fee title is vested although such title may be subject to a lien or other encumbrance.

3.    “Property” means all real property, whether platted or unplatted, regardless of improvements.

a.    The provisions of Section 31-25-503(1)(a), (b), (c), and (d), C.R.S., shall not apply to special improvement districts created or to be created by the city. Any improvement and any special improvement district may be initiated by either:

i.    Submission to the city of a petition therefor signed by the owners of not less than 25 percent of the property by area within a proposed special improvement district; or

ii.    Adoption of an ordinance by the city council declaring its intention to create a special improvement district and to construct, install, or otherwise acquire such improvements, without the necessity of receiving a petition therefor. References in part 5 of article 25 of title 31, C.R.S., to the resolution of intention to create a special improvement district under Section 31-25-503(1)(d), C.R.S., shall be deemed to refer to the ordinance of intention provided herein. If initiated by ordinance, the city council shall make a preliminary order as required by Section 31-25-503(3), C.R.S., in the same manner as if the improvements had been requested by petition. Such preliminary order may be included in the ordinance of intention to construct the improvements. In accordance with Section 8.7 of the city’s Municipal Home Rule Charter, if the owners of a majority of the property within a special improvement district oppose a project, the cost of such project if constructed shall not be assessed against the property in such district. The city shall not be required to create any special improvement district, to construct, install, or otherwise acquire any particular improvement, use any particular materials, or to assess the costs thereof in any particular manner, regardless of any petition submitted.

b.    Petitions shall be in the form prescribed by the city clerk and shall contain:

i.    A general description of the improvements requested by the petitioners;

ii.    The properties to be assessed;

iii.    The requested method or methods of assessing the costs of the improvements;

iv.    The names and addresses of the persons or entities signing the petition;

v.    The name and address of at least one person who is empowered to represent those signing the petition; and

vi.    Such other information as the city clerk may require. Unless otherwise determined by the city clerk, any petition presented to the city council shall be accompanied by a cash deposit, bond, or other surety acceptable to the city clerk, sufficient to cover the costs (as estimated by the city clerk) associated with the giving of notice, the holding of hearings, and all other matters associated with the creation of the proposed district. If at any time the amount of surety deposited proves insufficient to cover such costs, the city clerk may order the posting of additional surety, and the failure to post such security as determined by the city clerk will constitute grounds for terminating any proceedings in connection with the petition for such special improvement district.

c.    Upon either:

i.    Receipt of a petition meeting the requirements of this section; or

ii.    Adoption of an ordinance declaring the intention of the city council to create a special improvement district, the notice provided in Section 31-25-503(4), C.R.S, shall be given; provided, that pursuant to Section 31-25-503(4.5), C.R.S., such notice and hearing may be waived. A certificate signed by the city clerk or the city manager certifying that such notice was mailed or delivered in accordance with Section 31-25-503(4), C.R.S., shall be conclusive of the facts so stated.

d.    The provisions of Section 31-25-516, C.R.S., shall not apply to special improvement districts created or to be created by the city. The letting of contracts for the construction, installation, or other acquisition of improvements for special improvement districts shall be in such manner as provided in the city’s purchasing policies and procedures then in effect adopted pursuant to Section 11.8 of the city’s Municipal Home Rule Charter.

e.    The provisions of Section 31-25-518, C.R.S., shall not apply to special improvement districts created or to be created by the city. Contracts for the construction, installation, or other acquisition of improvements for special improvement districts shall contain such provisions as may be determined by the city manager to be in the best interest of the city and consistent with the city’s purchasing policies then in effect adopted pursuant to Section 11.8 of the city’s Municipal Home Rule Charter.

f.    The provisions of Section 31-25-534(1) and (2), C.R.S., shall not apply to special improvement districts created or to be created by the city. The city may issue securities for the purposes of paying any costs in connection with a district or the improvements therefor, including the costs of refunding outstanding special assessment securities, which securities shall be payable from special assessments, and which payment may be additionally secured as provided herein. The securities may be issued in such form and amount, bearing such interest rate or rates, payable in such period, bearing such signatures or other evidences of authentication, payable in such manner and in such place or places, and having such other terms as may be determined by the city council and set forth in the ordinance or other documents pertaining to the issuance of the securities. Any election that may be required shall conform to the provisions of Section 31-25-534(3) and (4), C.R.S., except that those entitled to vote shall be electors, as defined in this section, and that such elections shall be by mail ballot. If the election held pursuant to Section 31-25-534(3) and (4), C.R.S., is limited to the electors of the district, then the provisions of Section 8.7 of the city’s Municipal Home Rule Charter allowing a pledge of a surplus and deficiency fund or an annual tax of no more than three mills shall not apply.

g.    The provisions of Section 31-25-537 C.R.S. shall not apply to special improvement districts created or to be created by the city. (Ord. 13-1997 §§ 1, 2; Code 1997 § 10-1-3).


10.10.040 Notice requirement.

It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, convey, or otherwise transfer real property which is within a special improvement district created by the city, or any interest in such property, without disclosing to the purchaser or transferee, in writing, the existence of such special improvement district. (Code 1997 § 10-1-4).


10.10.050 Administrative regulations.

The city manager may recommend and the city council may adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter concerning the creation, administration, and other matters relating to special improvement districts. (Code 1997 § 10-1-5)


Chapter 10.20 SERVICE PLANS FOR TITLE 32, C.R.S., SPECIAL DISTRICTS (INCLUDING METROPOLITAN DISTRICTS)

Sections:

10.20.010    Introduction.

10.20.020    Service plans.

10.20.030    Bonded indebtedness.

10.20.040    Multiple-district structures.

10.20.050    Dissolution of district.

10.20.060    Model service plan.

10.20.070    Default of district.

10.20.080    Annual report.

10.20.090    Notice to purchasers.

10.20.100    Sanctions.

10.20.110    Review and approval process.

10.20.120    Fees.


10.20.010 Introduction. 

A.    The city of Gunnison, Colorado, (hereinafter “city”) establishes the following as its special district policy for (1) the review and approval or disapproval of service plans, including any amendment thereof, for metropolitan districts and other title 32, C.R.S., special districts (collectively, “districts”); and (2) for the regulation of districts.

1.    This policy is intended as a guide only. Nothing in this chapter is intended, nor shall it be construed, to limit the discretion of the city council, which retains full discretion and authority regarding the terms and limitations of all district service plans.

B.    The city generally accepts the formation of districts where it is demonstrated that the formation of a district is needed to provide public services or facilities to local development and will result in enhanced benefits to existing or future residents or business owners of the city and the district, whether such enhanced benefits are provided by the district or made possible to be provided by the developer because the district exists to provide public improvements.

1.    Districts will be permitted to conduct ongoing operations and maintenance activities where it can be demonstrated that having the district provide operations and maintenance is in the best interest of the city and the existing or future residents and taxpayers of the district.

2.    For districts whose primary revenue source is property taxes, and in the absence of special circumstances, district formation will not be favorably received where the future assessed value of all property within the district at full build-out is projected to be less than $5,000,000. The $5,000,000 assessed valuation threshold, for districts whose primary revenue source is property taxes, will increase biennially after 2008 to adjust for increases in the Consumer Price Index for the Denver-Boulder statistical region as prepared by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Special circumstances and special cause must be demonstrated for exceptions to be granted.

3.    Districts, when properly structured, can enhance the quality of growth in the city. The city is receptive to district formation as an instrument to provide competitive financing for projects, build better and enhanced infrastructure, and, where needed, create a quasi-governmental entity to provide essential and beneficial services which are otherwise not available and could not be practically provided by the city or any other existing municipal or quasi-municipal entity, including existing special districts, within a reasonable time and on a comparable basis. It is not the intent of the city to create multiple entities which could be construed as “competing governments.”

4.    District formation will not be favorably received unless the district enables the underlying project to be enhanced by either the district or the entity developing the district. In determining whether such project is enhanced, the city may consider: (a) ways in which the proposed services or improvements exceed the city’s minimum requirements and standards; (b) ways in which the existence of the district facilitates the enhancement of the services or improvements and whether the enhancements are feasible without the district; and (c) any other factors the city deems relevant under the circumstances. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


10.20.020 Service plans.

A.    Any service plan submitted to the city for approval must comply with all state, federal and local laws and ordinances, including article 1, title 32, C.R.S. (the Special District “Act”).

B.    The service plan shall include all information required by the Act.

C.    The service plan shall enumerate and describe all powers requested on behalf of the district. Demonstration of the need or benefit of each power is required. Powers which are not clearly needed will not be approved in the service plan.

D.    Any intergovernmental agreement which is required, or known at the time of formation of the district to likely be required, to fulfill the purposes of the district, must be described in the service plan, along with supporting rationale.

E.    The service plan shall include the description of any planned inclusion into, or exclusion of property from, the district’s boundaries. The service plan shall provide that inclusions or exclusions by the district that are not described in the service plan shall require notice of same to city council as set forth in the model service plan.

F.    The service plan shall describe any planned extraterritorial service agreement. The service plan shall provide that any extraterritorial service agreements by the district that are not described in the service plan shall require prior written notice of same to the city council as set forth in the model service plan.

G.    The service plan shall outline any anticipated plans or needs for the exercise, by the district, of its power of eminent domain. The service plan will contain language limiting the use of the district’s power of eminent domain to carry out the district’s essential functions and services as well as to implement the intent of the preliminary infrastructure plan as defined in the model service plan described in GMC 10.20.060. Additionally, the use of eminent domain will be undertaken strictly in compliance with state laws.

H.    The service plan shall restrict the district’s debt service mill levy authorization to 30 mills (the “maximum debt mill levy”) and operations and maintenance mill levy authorization to 10 mills (the “maximum operations and maintenance mill levy”). The service plan shall restrict the district’s total aggregate mill levy (debt service mill levy plus operations and maintenance mill levy) to 35 mills (the “maximum aggregate mill levy”). This means that the district shall not simultaneously levy a debt service mill levy equal to the maximum debt mill levy and an operation and maintenance mill levy equal to the maximum operations and maintenance mill levy.

1.    The service plan may provide that the maximum aggregate mill levy may be increased from 35 mills to 45 mills by a resolution of city council, with the resulting increase of mills attributable to a five-mill increase in the maximum debt mill levy, a five-mill increase in the maximum operations and maintenance mill levy, or a combination of the two. In the event the service plan includes such a provision and council passes such a resolution, such increase shall not constitute a material modification of the service plan.

2.    The maximum debt mill levy, the maximum operations and maintenance mill levy, and the maximum aggregate mill levy shall be adjustable from the base year of 2008; provided, however, that in the event the method of calculating assessed valuation is changed after the base year of 2008, the mill levy limitation applicable to such debt may be increased or decreased to reflect such changes, such increases or decreases to be determined by the district board in good faith (such determination to be binding and final), so that to the extent possible the actual tax revenues generated by the mill levy, as adjusted, are neither diminished nor enhanced as a result of such changes. For purposes of the foregoing, a change in the ratio of actual valuation to assessed valuation shall be deemed to be a change in the method of calculating assessed valuation.

I.    The service plan shall include debt and operating financial projections prepared by an investment banking firm or financial advisor qualified to make such projections. Said firm shall be listed in the Bond Buyers Marketplace as a provider of financial projections or said firm shall provide an affidavit that it has prepared financial schedules used in more than 20 Colorado local government bond issuances. The debt financial projections shall include debt issuance and service schedules and calculations establishing the district’s projected maximum debt capacity based on assumptions of (1) the projected interest rate on the debt to be issued by the district; (2) the projected assessed valuation of the property within the district; and (3) the projected rate of absorption of the assessed valuation within the district. These assumptions must use market-based, market-comparable valuation and absorption data and shall not use an annual inflation rate which exceeds the greater of three percent and the Consumer Price Index for the preceding 12-month period for the Denver-Boulder statistical region as prepared by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The maximum debt authorization in the service plan shall not exceed 100 percent of the projected maximum debt capacity. The operating financial projections shall include foreseeable administrative and operation and maintenance costs. The service plan may provide that the maximum debt authorization may be increased up to an amount equal to 150 percent of the initial projected maximum debt capacity by a resolution of city council, and any such increase shall not constitute a material modification of the service plan.

J.    If, after the service plan is approved, the state Legislature includes additional powers or grants new or broader powers for special districts by amendment of part 10 of article 1, title 32, C.R.S., no such powers shall be available to or exercised until notice is provided to city council as set forth in the service plan.

K.    Every service plan shall include, in addition to all materials, plans and reports required by the Act, a preliminary infrastructure plan (“PIP”) as defined in the model service plan. This PIP shall include, at a minimum, a map or maps, of such scale, detail and size as required by the planning department, providing an illustration of public improvements proposed to be built, acquired or financed by the district, along with a written narrative and description of those items and a general description of the district’s proposed role with regard to the same. Due to the preliminary nature of the PIP, the service plan shall indicate that the city’s approval of the PIP shall not bind the city in reviewing and making land use approvals.

L.    The district may impose a one-time development fee only if such fee is payable and collectible no later than the closing of the initial sale of the property to the first end user. The development fee, the right to collect the development fee, and any lien on the property to secure the development fee shall terminate immediately following such closing. The fee shall be calculated based on the limitations stated in the service plan. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


10.20.030 Bonded indebtedness.

A.    Original issuance of bonded indebtedness by the district prior to build-out shall be limited to that debt which can be sized, serviced and defeased with no more than 30 mills as described in GMC 10.20.020(H).

B.    The district shall be limited to issuing new debt as provided in the financial plan set forth in the service plan. In the absence of evidence that development phasing will be of a duration that makes it impracticable to issue all debt within a 15-year period, or other special circumstances, the financial plan shall provide that all new debt will be issued within a period of 15 years from the date of the district’s first debt authorization election. Debt issued by the district shall have a maximum maturity of 30 years for each series of debt. The restrictions on issuance shall not pertain to refundings, but the 30-year maximum maturity shall apply to refundings unless such refundings result in a net present value savings as set forth in Section 11-56-101, et seq., C.R.S., and are otherwise permitted by law. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


10.20.040 Multiple-district structures.

A.    It is the intent of the city that citizen/resident control of districts be encouraged to occur as early as possible.

B.    Multiple-district structures may be proposed:

1.    When the projected absorption of the project and the public improvements to be financed are reasonably projected to occur over an extended period of time after the date of organization of the district.

2.    When the project has varying projected uses, such as residential and commercial.

C.    The service plan must fully describe and articulate the need, reasoning and mechanics if a multiple-district structure is proposed. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


10.20.050 Dissolution of district.

The service plan shall provide for the dissolution of the district after the district’s debts and financial obligations are fully defeased and the district has completed all of its operations and maintenance responsibilities. A district with long-term, ongoing operations and maintenance will not be obligated to dissolve. However, the service plan must provide that, in the event said obligations are someday undertaken by another party or are otherwise no longer the responsibility of the district, it shall be required to dissolve. Additionally, the service plan shall provide that the district shall be obligated to obtain the approval of the city council 25 years after organization of the district (and every 10 years thereafter) in order to continue providing operations and maintenance services; provided, however, that failure to obtain such approval shall not be considered a material modification unless such approval is not obtained 45 days after written notice to the district by the city of the need to request such approval. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


10.20.060 Model service plan.

A.    A city of Gunnison model service plan shall be developed consistent with these policies, approved (and modified from time to time) by resolution of the council, and made available from the community development department.

B.    All service plans submitted to the city should follow the basic outline, form, sequence and structure of said model. Service plans should duplicate the language contained in the model service plan, and justification shall be provided for any material departures. Notwithstanding the preceding, any service plan approved by the city, or changes thereto approved in the manner set forth in such service plan, shall be deemed to be in compliance with all city requirements.

C.    Service plans shall be submitted in such numbers and format as specified by the city planning department. The initial submittal shall be accompanied by a mark-up copy showing changes from the model service plan. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


10.20.070 Default of district.

A.    In the event that a district fails to pay its debt when due or defaults in the performance of any obligation that has been agreed to between the district and the city, which obligation has been identified by the city in writing as a material obligation, and such default is continuing after the delivery of notice thereof to the district and the expiration of any cure periods, the district shall be precluded from issuing additional debt except refunding bonds issued to avoid or to cure a payment default, without the prior approval of the city council.

B.    In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction has made a final, unappealable determination that a district has defaulted on any of its financial obligations, the district shall be precluded from issuing additional debt except to refund or refinance a financial obligation for the purpose of avoiding or curing a default without receiving written permission from the city council following a public hearing on the matter.

C.    In the event of a material modification of the service plan, the city and the electors of the district shall be entitled to exercise their respective rights under the Act. Departures from the service plan that constitute a material modification include without limitation:

1.    Actions or failures to act that create greater financial risk or burden;

2.    Performance of a service or function or acquisition of a major facility that is not closely related to a service, function or facility authorized in the service plan; and

3.    Failure to perform a service or function or acquire a facility required by the service plan.

Actions that are not to be considered material modifications include without limitation changes in quantities of facilities or equipment, immaterial cost differences, and actions expressly authorized in the service plan. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


10.20.080 Annual report.

A.    The service plan shall obligate the district to file an annual report not later than September 1st of each year with the city clerk for the year ending the preceding December 31st, the requirements of which may be waived in whole or in part by the city council.

    The service plan shall require the annual report to include the following, unless waived by the city from year to year or completely:

1.    A narrative summary of the progress of the district in implementing its service plan for the report year;

2.    Except when exemption from audit has been granted for the report year under the Local Government Audit Law, the audited financial statements of the district for the report year including a statement of financial condition (i.e., balance sheet) as of December 31st of the report year and the statement of operations (i.e., revenues and expenditures) for the report year;

3.    Unless disclosed within a separate schedule to the financial statements, a summary of the capital expenditures incurred by the district in development of improvements in the report year;

4.    Unless disclosed within a separate schedule to the financial statements, a summary of the financial obligations of the district at the end of the report year, including the amount of outstanding indebtedness, the amount and terms of any new district indebtedness or long-term obligations issued in the report year, the amount of payment or retirement of existing indebtedness of the district in the report year, the total assessed valuation of all taxable properties within the district as of January 1st of the report year and the current mill levy of the district pledged to debt retirement in the report year; and

5.    Any other information deemed relevant by the city council or deemed reasonably necessary by the city manager.

B.    In the event the annual report is not timely received by the city clerk or is not fully responsive, notice of such default shall be given to the board of such district, at its last known address. The failure of the district to file the annual report within 45 days of the mailing of such default notice by the city clerk may constitute a material modification of the service plan, at the discretion of the city. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


10.20.090 Notice to purchasers.

Within 30 days of the issuance of a decree organizing a district, the district, or the proponents of the district, shall cause notice of the district to be recorded in the land records of the Gunnison County clerk and recorder. Additionally, by submission of a service plan to the city, the proponents of the district consent to the city’s inclusion in an approved development plan or other land use regulation document a requirement that the initial end-purchaser of property within the district receive notice of the district and other district matters (A) in the contract to purchase the property and (B) in a separate document to be acknowledged at closing. The district shall use its best efforts to confirm that such notice is being provided. Notice shall be in the form of the following, with any changes subject to the approval of the city planning department:

BUYER ACKNOWLEDGES THAT THE PROPERTY BEING PURCHASED IS WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF ONE OR MORE METROPOLITAN DISTRICTS. THE DISTRICT(S) EXIST PRIMARILY FOR INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCING PURPOSES. AS A RESULT, THE DISTRICTS ARE AUTHORIZED TO ASSESS A PROPERTY TAX MILL LEVY UP TO 45 MILLS, SUBJECT TO CHANGES IN THE STATEWIDE METHOD OF CALCULATING ASSESSED VALUATION. THE DISTRICTS ARE AUTHORIZED TO INCUR DEBT IN THE MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF $____________, FOR A PERIOD OF UP TO 40 YEARS FOLLOWING THE ISSUANCE OF THE DEBT. OTHER PROVISIONS AND ALLOWANCES APPLY AS CONTAINED IN THE DISTRICTS’ SERVICE PLAN.

Acknowledged this ______ day of __________________, 20____

__________________________ Buyer

The requirements of this section shall be reflected in the service plan. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


10.20.100 Sanctions.

Should any district undertake any act which constitutes a material modification to the service plan, the city council may impose one or more of the following sanctions, as it deems appropriate:

A.    Exercise any applicable remedy under the Act;

B.    Withhold the issuance of any permit, authorization, acceptance or other administrative approval, or withhold any cooperation, necessary for the district’s development or construction or operation of improvements or provision of services;

C.    Exercise any legal remedy under the terms of any intergovernmental agreement under which the district is in default; or

D.    Exercise any other legal remedy, including seeking injunctive relief against the district, to ensure compliance with the provisions of the service plan or applicable law. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


10.20.110 Review and approval process.

A.    Once the city manager has established compliance with the special district policy, the city manager shall, within a reasonable time, place before the city council for its consideration a resolution adopting the service plan. The resolution shall be subject to a public hearing and shall be processed and governed by the City Charter and the city code.

B.    The proponents of the district shall cause a notice of the proposed resolution to be mailed by first class mail to the owners of record of all property within the proposed district and within any inclusion area specifically identified in the service plan, as such owners of record are listed on the records of the county assessor. The mailed notice shall be made at least 10 days prior to the hearing on the resolution. The notice shall include the following:

1.    A description of the general nature of the proposed services and public improvements.

2.    A description of the property to be included in the district and the inclusion area (if any), which description shall be by street address, by reference to lots or blocks on any recorded subdivision plat thereof, or by metes and bounds if not subdivided, by tax identification number or by any other method reasonably calculated to apprise owners of the property to be included in the district.

3.    The place at which a map of the district, preliminary plans and specifications and the service plan may be examined.

4.    The date, time and place of the hearing.

5.    A statement that all protests and objections must be submitted in writing to the city manager at or prior to the hearing in order to be considered.

6.    A statement that all protests and objections to the district, as proposed, shall be deemed to be waived unless presented in writing at the time and in the manner specified in this subsection.

C.    Such resolution shall be conclusive of the city’s determination. No action or proceeding, at law or in equity, to review any acts or proceedings or to question the validity of the council’s determination pursuant to this chapter, whether based upon irregularities or jurisdictional defects, shall be maintained unless commenced within 30 days after the adoption of the council’s resolution, or else be thereafter perpetually barred. In the manner and to the extent provided in this chapter, the council shall maintain continuing jurisdiction over the operations and affairs of the district and shall exercise its rights in relation thereto, as deemed appropriate by the council, pursuant to the Special District Act and as consistent with this chapter. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


10.20.120 Fees.

With the submittal of a service plan, the proponent of the district shall also pay the city clerk (A) a nonrefundable application fee not to exceed $1,000 and (B) a $5,000 deposit to reimburse the city for staff, legal, and consultant time on a monthly basis. A request for an amendment or modification to a service plan shall be accompanied by (A) a nonrefundable application fee not to exceed $250.00 and (B) a $1,500 deposit to reimburse the city for staff, legal, and consultant time on a monthly basis. City draws against such deposit shall be based upon then-current hourly rates (including benefits) of employees working on the service plan and the applicable rates for legal and other consultants. If the amount reimbursable exceeds the deposit, the balance shall be due the city on a monthly basis and prior to consideration of the service plan or amendment by the city council. Any deposit amounts remaining shall be returned. The purpose of staff, legal, and consultants’ review is to provide the city council with expert advice in considering the adequacy of the service plan and in forming a basis for adopting a resolution approving, disapproving, or conditionally approving the service plan for the district. (Ord. 1-2009 § 1).


Title 11 (Reserved)


Title 12 UTILITIES

Chapters:

12.05    Contractor’s Certification Program

12.10    Sewer System

12.20    Waterworks System

12.30    Electric System

12.40    Utility Service Rates and Fees, Rules and Regulations

12.50    Utility Reimbursement Policy

12.60    Garbage Collection and Recycling System

12.70    Backflow Prevention Standards


Chapter 12.05 CONTRACTOR’S CERTIFICATION PROGRAM

Sections:

12.05.010    Established.


12.05.010 Established.

The public works department of the city of Gunnison is hereby directed to establish a contractor’s certification program to certify individuals to install building water and sewer service lines. (Ord. 8-2004 § 1; Ord. 7-1997 §§ 1, 2, 3).


Chapter 12.10 SEWER SYSTEM

Sections:

12.10.010    Sewer system division.

12.10.020    Connection requirements.

12.10.030    Permits and costs.

12.10.040    Building sewer/service line installation.

12.10.050    Sewer main extensions.

12.10.060    Wastewater service charges.

12.10.070    Powers and authority of inspectors.

12.10.080    Violations.

12.10.090    Penalties.


12.10.010 Sewer system division.

A.    Sewer System Division – Responsibility. The sewer system division shall be responsible for all components of the city sewer system used for collection and treatment of the sanitary waste.

B.    Sewer System Management. The public works director (hereinafter “director”), under the direction and control of the city manager, shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the sewer system. The director shall be responsible for the enforcement of the city sewer system regulations, complying with state and federal rules concerning sewage disposal, and shall be accountable for materials used in the maintenance or extension of the sewer system.

C.    Rules and Regulations. The director shall recommend such rules, ordinances, or regulations for adoption to the city manager as may be required to protect the system and to ensure safe and efficient operation of the system.

D.    Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:

1.    “Assessment district (local improvements)” means a legally formed district having definite boundaries and formed to finance the construction of a particular improvement or improvements.

2.    “ASTM” means the American Society for Testing and Materials.

3.    “BOD,” denoting biochemical oxygen demand, shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).

4.    “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.

5.    “Building/sewer service line” means that part of the drainage system which, located within private property, extends from the end of the building drain and receives the wastewater of the building drain conveying the wastewater to the city/sewer service line.

6.    “Capital improvement fee” means a fee charged to pay for the installation and replacement of the wastewater system infrastructure and is a one-time fee to use the system.

7.    “Capital improvements” means new facilities, expansion or extensions of the city sewer system which are not considered general maintenance, repair, or operations.

8.    “City/sewer service line” means that part of the drainage system which is located within the public street right-of-way or a utility easement dedicated to and accepted by the city, from the point of connection of the building/sewer service line, and receives the wastewater from the building/sewer service line and conveys the wastewater to the sewer main.

9.    “Connection permit” means written authorization to connect to the sewer main or expand the number of fixtures that will drain into the city sewer system.

10.    “Developer” means a person, persons, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity requesting extension of sewer mains.

11.    “Dwelling unit” means a room or combination of rooms containing cooking and bathroom facilities, sufficient for occupancy by one or more persons on a permanent basis.

12.    “Floatable oil” means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility.

13.    “Homeowner” means a person occupying and owning a residential dwelling unit that is not being built for resale, rental, or similar purposes.

14.    “Industrial wastes” means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.

15.    “Licensed plumber” means a plumber as defined in and licensed pursuant to the Colorado Revised Statutes as the same may be now or hereafter amended.

16.    “Natural outlet” means any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water.

17.    “Operation and maintenance” means all expenditures during the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities, and other items which are necessary for managing and maintaining the sewage works to achieve the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.

18.    “Open for public use (street or alley)” means a street or alley legally platted or accepted by the city as a street or alley and which is being used by the general public as such.

19.    “Private sewer” means the building sewer/service line and any building drains upstream of it.

20.    “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries wastewater from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.

21.    “Sewer district” means a legal entity formed in accordance with Colorado Revised Statutes having as one of its purposes the collection, transportation, or treatment of wastewater.

22.    “Sewer main” means that part of the wastewater facilities located within the public street right-of-way or a utility easement dedicated to and accepted by the city to which one or more city/sewer service lines are connected, and receiving wastewater from the city/sewer service lines and conveying such wastewater to the treatment facility. Sewer mains are owned by the city or a sewer district and are a minimum of eight inches in diameter.

23.    “Slug” means any discharge of wastewater of 15 minutes or longer which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation.

24.    “Special event” means any activity, commercial, civic or otherwise, which obtains a city special events permit or which has a duration of no more than seven days.

25.    “Storm drain,” sometimes termed “storm sewer,” shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying water, ground water, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.

26.    “Suspended solids” means total particulate matter that either floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” and referred to as nonfilterable residue.

27.    “Tap fee” means a fee charged by the city for materials and labor for the physical tap of the building sewer/service line into the city’s service main.

28.    “Wastewater” means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and storm water that may unintentionally be present.

29.    “Wastewater facilities” means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent and sludge. (Ord. 11-2003 §§ 1, 2, 3; Ord. 16-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 12-1-1).


12.10.020 Connection requirements.

A.    Connection Required.

1.    Connection to Sewer Main. The owner of any building required to have a sanitary sewer by the Uniform Plumbing Code, current edition, as adopted by the state of Colorado, situated within the city and abutting any public street, alley, right-of-way, or utility easement dedicated to and accepted by the city in which there is now located a sewer main, is hereby required, at owner’s expense, to connect such building to the sewer main by means of a building/sewer service line and city/sewer service line in accordance with this chapter. New buildings or lots requiring sanitary sewer disposal devices shall be required to extend a sewer main to serve the property in accordance with GMC 12.10.050, Sewer main extensions, if a sewer main does not abut the property in question, but is located within 400 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel of land upon which the building is to be located, unless a waiver is granted by the city council pursuant to the provisions set forth herein. For the purpose of this section, the term “property line” shall include the city of Gunnison boundary if the boundary transects a single parcel of property.

2.    Connection to ISDS. A building required to have a sanitary sewer by the International Building Code, current edition, as adopted by the state of Colorado, may connect to an ISDS in lieu of connection to a sewer main, provided all of the following conditions are met:

a.    The ISDS shall have a flow capacity not to exceed 450 gallons per day.

b.    The parcel of land upon which the ISDS is to be constructed is not less than two acres in size and is not located within an existing subdivision as defined in GMC Title 15, or was not created by a prior subdivision of land.

c.    The nearest sewer main is located not less than 400 feet from any property line of the parcel of land on which the ISDS is to be constructed. This requirement may be waived by the city council upon a finding that the connection to the sewer main is not feasible for economic or physical reasons.

d.    There shall be no more than one ISDS on any parcel of land.

e.    All ISDS shall comply with the requirements of the “Gunnison County Individual Sewage Disposal System Regulations” and have a valid permit issued therefor by the county of Gunnison.

3.    Adoption of ISDS Regulations by Reference.

a.    Adoption. The “Gunnison County Individual Sewage Disposal System Regulations,” except for Part IX, Requirements for Other Systems; Part XII, ISDS District; and Part XVII, Environmental Health Board; adopted on June 20, 1995, by the board of county commissioners of Gunnison County, Colorado, as the Gunnison County board of health, whose address is 200 East Virginia Avenue, Gunnison, Colorado 81230, are hereby adopted by reference.

b.    Conflicts and Changes. If any provision of the “Gunnison County Individual Sewage Disposal System Regulations” conflicts with the provisions of this chapter, then the terms of this chapter shall be deemed to be controlling. Wherever the term “Environmental Health Board” appears in the “Gunnison County Individual Sewage Disposal System Regulations,” the city council shall be substituted therefor.

c.    Enforcement. The city of Gunnison shall have concurrent enforcement authority with the county of Gunnison to enforce the provisions of the “Gunnison County Individual Sewage Disposal System Regulations” within the corporate limits of the city of Gunnison.

4.    Connection Required When Sewer Main Available. Within one year after written notification by the city that a sewer main is available within 400 feet from any property line of the parcel of land served by an ISDS, cesspool, privy vault, or other device, such device shall be abandoned and filled, and the owner or user thereof shall connect to the sewer main in accordance with this chapter. This requirement may be waived by the city council upon a finding that the existing device is not a threat to public health or water quality, and that connection to the sewer main is not feasible for economic or physical reasons.

5.    Interconnection Prohibited – Separate Building/Sewer Service Lines. Building/sewer service lines shall not be interconnected in any manner which would allow the service of separate buildings or parcels of property which are in separate ownership or which may be sold or conveyed separately. All separate buildings or parcels of land that may be sold or conveyed separately, except individual air spaces located in a single building, are required to have a separate building/sewer service line. In cases where more than one building or parcel of land in separate ownership has been connected to a single building/sewer service line prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the same may continue to be utilized until a sewer main is constructed adjacent to the property. After such sewer main is constructed and upon written notice by the city to the owner, such building or parcels of land shall be connected to the sewer main by an individual building/sewer service line within one year. One or more building/sewer service lines may be connected to a city/sewer service line that is of adequate size and capacity to convey the wastewater generated by all the buildings and uses connected thereto.

6.    Portable Sanitary Toilets. Portable sanitary toilets are permitted within the city only in connection with special events or upon a construction site for which a valid building permit has been issued. All portable sanitary toilets shall be regularly serviced and cleaned as often as necessary to prevent unsanitary conditions or odors.

7.    Other Devices Prohibited. No cesspool, septic tank, privy vault, or other device for sanitary sewage disposal, except as expressly permitted herein, shall be excavated or constructed within the corporate limits of the city of Gunnison.

C.    Penalties. Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter or the provisions of the “Gunnison County Individual Sewage Disposal System Regulations” shall be fined in the sum of not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 11-2003 §§ 4, 5; Ord. 13-1998 §§ 1, 2; Code 1997 § 12-1-2).


12.10.030 Permits and costs.

A.    Connection Permit Required.

1.    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any portion of the city’s wastewater facilities. The owner or the owner’s agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city in order to gain service to the city’s wastewater facilities. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information as required by the community development department. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit.

2.    A connection permit shall be secured before any person may make a connection to the city’s wastewater facilities or expand the size of an existing building/sewer service line. Buildings destroyed and razed or rebuilt or expanded shall be given credit for the size of the building/sewer service line that previously existed in the structure’s drainage system. Any increase in the size of the building/sewer service line shall be subject to the existing capital improvement fee in effect on the day the increased building/sewer service line is installed, less the applicable credit. A separate connection permit shall be required for each physical connection to the city’s wastewater facilities and/or increases in size of the building/sewer service line. The cost of a connection permit will be determined on the basis of the size of the building/sewer service line as outlined in the sewer system fee schedule.

3.    There are two components to the connection permit fee which are associated with the use of the city’s wastewater facilities. Those fees are (a) the tap fee; and (b) the capital improvement fee.

B.    Connection Permit, Issuance, and Requirements. A connection permit will not be issued nor will fees therefor be accepted until: (1) a need exists; or (2) a building permit and/or state plumbing permit has been issued.

    The physical installation of the building sewer/service line and/or drainage fixtures for new and existing structures shall be completed within 180 days of acquiring the connection permit.

    The physical connection to the sewer main and/or drainage fixtures for new construction must be completed within 180 days of acquiring the connection permit.

    One extension of the preceding time limits may be granted by the community development department for undue and unforeseen delays caused by circumstances beyond the control of the permittee.

    If the permittee fails to complete the physical connections within the prescribed time limit, the connection permit shall become null and void, permit fees refunded less $10.00 for administration fees, and a reapplication for a permit will be necessary. Fees charged for the new connection permit will be determined using the line size cost. (Ord. 16-1998 § 2; Code 1997 § 12-1-3).


12.10.040 Building sewer/service line installation.

A.    General. New building sewer/service lines shall not serve properties that are not owned by the permittee.

1.    Subdivisions or sales of land that will create situations where a building sewer/service line could serve properties under different ownerships shall require the installation of separate building sewer/service lines to serve the new parcels. Original abandoned service lines must be disconnected.

2.    All abandoned lines shall be capped in a manner approved by the public works department so as to eliminate the possibility of ground water infiltration.

3.    Location of the Building/Sewer Service Lines. Location of building/sewer service lines shall be approved by the public works department and as-built location of the building/sewer service line shall be furnished to the department after connection. No building/sewer service line which is located underneath a building in separate ownership or any improvements located on property in separate ownership shall be approved.

4.    City/sewer service line installation within the city right-of-way, including excavation, bedding, compaction, and backfill, shall be done by authorized agents of the city. A person holding a current certification from the department of public works or a licensed plumber under supervision of a master plumber and licensed by the state shall install a building/sewer service line on a private property which is connected to the city’s sewer system. A homeowner may do the installation of a building/sewer service line on private property on which is placed a single dwelling unit of which he is a resident. Unauthorized persons doing building/sewer service line installation shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.

B.    Colorado Plumbing Code. All building sewer/service lines within the city or connected to the city’s wastewater facilities shall be installed in accordance with the Colorado Plumbing Code, current edition, and amendments thereto which have been adopted by the state of Colorado and any additional requirements of this chapter.

C.    Building Sewer/Service Line Specifications.

1.    Specifications.

a.    Building sewer/service lines shall not be larger than six inches nor smaller than four inches.

b.    Building sewer/service line pipe shall be formed of polyvinyl chloride pipe material (PVC) conforming to ASTM D-3034 with SDR ratio of 35 or less or cast iron pipe conforming to the Colorado Plumbing Code, current edition. Gaskets used in conjunction with PVC pipe shall conform to ASTM D-3212 and tie seal gaskets shall be used with cast iron for soil pipe and building sewer/service lines.

c.    Backfill and compaction shall be in accordance with specifications provided by the department of public works.

d.    Depth of building sewer/service lines shall be sufficient to prevent freezing and constructed to prevent damage to pipes from imposed loads.

e.    Building sewer/service lines shall be located a minimum of 10 feet horizontally from any water main or water service line. If a building sewer/service line must cross a water main or water service line within 18 inches vertically, above or below, the building sewer must be encased in concrete a minimum of 10 feet in each direction from the crossing point or cast iron pipe may be used if a joint at least 18 feet long, centered at the crossing point, is used and the joints at the end of this section are encased in concrete.

f.    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer/service line and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code and the Colorado Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, state, and federal governments.

g.    A separate and independent building sewer/service line shall be provided for every building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot or cannot be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer/service line, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection.

h.    Existing building sewer/service lines may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the public works department, to meet all requirements of this chapter.

i.    Whenever possible, the building sewer/service lines shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the sewer main, wastewater carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer/service line.

j.    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface water, storm water, or ground water to a building sewer/service line which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a sewer main.

k.    The connection of the building sewer/service line into the sewer main shall conform to the requirements of the International Building Code and Colorado Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, state, and federal governments. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved before installation.

l.    The applicant for the building sewer connection permit shall notify the community development department when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The testing shall be made under the supervision of the community development department representative.

2.    Interceptors and Pretreatment.

a.    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the director they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease or excessive amounts of any sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the director. Any removal, hauling, and disposal of the collected materials shall comply with current federal, state, and local regulations.

b.    The director may require that building sewer/service lines carrying industrial wastes be equipped with pretreatment facilities. Pretreatment of industrial wastes shall comply with applicable state and federal regulations prior to actual connection to the city’s wastewater facilities.

c.    When required by the director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the state of Colorado. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.

d.    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies shall comply with state of Colorado regulations.

e.    All costs for verification, tests, sampling, certifications, etc., meeting these standards shall be borne by the user.

D.    Costs. Sewer service line installation by the city within the city right-of-way including material, labor, hardware, equipment use, and land surface replacement (due to excavation) shall be paid by the permittee. The portion of the service line from the property line to the main, including a clean-out at the property line, shall be installed by authorized city personnel. Prior to issuance of the connection permit, all fees shall be paid.

E.    Inspection – Tests. The permittee shall make arrangements for inspection of the building sewer/service line, giving ample time (minimum of 24 hours) for the inspector to schedule same. The following inspections must be accomplished:

1.    Test of the building sewer/service line, before backfill. The building sewer/service line shall be capped at one end and water tested with a head of water pressure equal in height to the surrounding surface elevation nearest the building, applied to the other end of the building sewer/service line or tested in any manner approved by the community development department. The leakage test shall be conducted by the plumber in the presence of the community development department inspector and any leakage of the building sewer/service line shall be corrected by the person responsible for laying that portion of the building sewer/service line which leaks.

2.    Bedding of the pipe, compaction and backfill.

F.    Maintenance Responsibility. The city shall be responsible for any problems with the building sewer/service line within the public right-of-way.

    The city shall be responsible for and shall repair the excavation if and when settlement occurs within the public right-of-way.

    The property owner shall bear all responsibility for maintenance of the building sewer/service line and excavation on private property.

    If the city determines through observation television of the sewer mains or other appropriate methods that a building sewer/service line is permitting infiltration of ground water, the public works department may notify the owner of the line in writing and require that the line be repaired or replaced or other measures taken, at the owner’s expense, in order to alleviate the infiltration problem. Remedial action must take place within a reasonable time as determined by the public works director. (Ord. 8-2004 § 2; Ord. 11-2003 § 6; Ord. 7-1997 §§ 1, 2, 3; Code 1997 § 12-1-4).


12.10.050 Sewer main extensions.

A.    General Applicability. These sewer main extension regulations apply to those portions of the city that have been legally subdivided and platted prior to the effective date of these regulations. Any portion of the city which has not been platted prior to enactment of this chapter shall comply with the requirements stated in the subdivision regulations.

B.    Length and Location of Extended Mains. All new sewer main extensions shall extend the full length of the property to be served or developed and continue to the next intersecting right-of-way.

    Sewer mains shall be located in a public right-of-way and the location must be approved by the public works department.

C.    Engineering and Design.

1.    The city shall provide the engineering and design work, at its cost, for extensions of sewer mains that will be located in developed city streets or alleys that have been previously platted, accepted, and opened for use as a public right-of-way.

2.    In those instances where the streets, alleys, or rights-of-way have not been opened for public use (in platted areas), the developer shall furnish engineering data and plans conforming to city regulations and specifications. The design and engineering work shall be done by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Colorado and these engineering and design costs shall be borne by the developer. All plans shall require approval of the public works director.

D.    Excavation and Installation of City Sewer Mains. The developer shall be responsible for installation of the main and shall secure all permits and inspections as required by this chapter.

    The minimum size of a sewer main shall be eight inches. If the city requires a sewer main larger than that required to serve the developer, the city shall bear the differences in cost of the pipe required because of oversizing.

    All sewer mains installed in the city sewer system shall be formed of polyvinyl chloride pipe material conforming to ASTM D-3034 (for four- to 15-inch pipe) or F679 (for four- to 15-inch pipe) with an SDR ratio of 35 or less, and shall have flexible joints employing gaskets conforming to ASTM D-3212.

    Before any work is commenced, approval of the public works director must be secured.

    Upon completion of the main, prior to dedicating the line to the city, the developer shall furnish as-built plans stamped by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Colorado to the public works department. The plans shall show materials, location, elevations and profiles of all components of the new sewer main.

    Required inspections:

1.    All contracted excavations for main line extension shall be installed and inspected to meet city specifications.

2.    Inspections shall be required before and during the bedding of the sewer main. The developer must notify the public works department inspector 24 hours prior to backfill placement.

3.    A leakage test, with the public works department inspector present, must be conducted either before or after the main is buried.

    Installation of the sewer main, all components of the main, and backfill shall be in accordance with this chapter, the Plumbing Code, current edition, and city specifications.

    Work shall not be covered until approved by the public works department.

E.    Testing. Sewer main extensions shall be tested by the following methods:

1.    If ground water is not present in the trench, the line or portion of the line being tested shall be capped water-tight at the low end and a head of water pressure equal in height to the surrounding surface applied at the other end, or the line may be tested in any manner approved by the public works department.

2.    If trench water is present to a depth so as to inundate over the top of the entire pipe along the entire length of sewer main, the following method shall be used for the test. A “V” notch weir shall be installed at the lower end of the main so that the infiltration rate can be checked.

    Any leakage of the sewer main, regardless of test method used, shall not exceed 50 gallons per inch diameter of the main, per mile per 24-hour period. Any leakage in excess of the above limits shall be corrected by the contractor/plumber.

    Upon the completion of a successful test, the public works department shall sign a certificate of testing and give one copy to the contractor.

F.    Cost, Responsibility Of. Costs of materials for sewer main extensions including pipe, manholes, labor, and testing shall be borne by the developer. In cases where main lines will benefit multiple land owners, or properties, the use of assessment districts (local improvements) is encouraged in order that the costs can be shared by all of those who benefit from the new infrastructure. Local improvements can be initiated by either the city or by petition of land owners and are addressed in Chapter 10.10 GMC.

G.    Dedication of Mains to the City. Upon completion of the extended main to the satisfaction of the public works department, the developer for which the sewer main was extended shall convey said sewer main to the city, relinquishing all ownership rights. This dedication will be prepared by the developer and approved by the city attorney.

    Upon acceptance by and conveyance to the city, the developer shall warrant the materials and workmanship of the conveyed facilities for a period of one year from date of acceptance. Upon the expiration of the warranty period, the city shall assume all responsibilities of ownership and maintenance of the main. Until the main is conveyed, the responsibility and maintenance shall be borne by the developer.

    No building sewer connections shall be made to the sewer main until the ownership of the main has been conveyed to the city.

H.    Extension of Sewer Mains Outside the City Limits. Extension of sewer mains to areas outside the corporate limits of the city shall require city council approval. (Ord. 7-1997 §§ 1, 2, 3; Code 1997 § 12-1-5).


12.10.060 Wastewater service charges.

A.    The User Charge. The user charge shall generate adequate annual revenues to pay costs of annual operation and maintenance, including replacement, and other related sewer system costs which the city may determine by ordinance to be paid by the user charge. User charges are outlined in the sewer system fee schedule.

B.    Review of User Charge System. The city will review the user charge system periodically and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance, including replacement, and that the system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance, including replacement costs, among users and user classes. (Code 1997 § 12-1-6).


12.10.070 Powers and authority of inspectors.

A.    Entry of Properties. The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.    Obtain Information. The public works director or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors.

C.    Limitations. While performing the necessary work on private properties, the public works director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all applicable safety rules. The owner or occupant shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the owner or occupant against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner or occupant, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to maintain safe conditions as required.

D.    Entry of Areas Within an Easement. The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds either a duly negotiated easement or a prescriptive easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Code 1997 § 12-1-7).


12.10.080 Violations.

Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1997 § 12-1-8).


12.10.090 Penalties.

Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 4.20 GMC. (Code 1997 § 12-1-9).


Chapter 12.20 WATERWORKS SYSTEM

Sections:

12.20.010    Waterworks division.

12.20.020    Connection requirements.

12.20.030    Permits and costs.

12.20.040    Building water service line installation.

12.20.050    Water main extensions.

12.20.060    Water meters.

12.20.070    Water service charges.

12.20.080    Power and authority of inspectors.

12.20.090    Violations.

12.20.100    Penalties.


12.20.010 Waterworks division.

A.    Waterworks Division Responsibility. The waterworks division shall be responsible for the water supply serving the city.

B.    Waterworks Management. The public works director (hereinafter “director”), under the direction and control of the city manager, shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the waterworks and shall have charge of all matters concerning the water supply, enforcement of waterworks regulations, accountability for materials and the manner in which the same are used or disposed of.

C.    Rules and Regulations. The director shall recommend such rules, ordinances or regulations for adoption to the city manager as may be required to ensure safe and efficient operation of the water supply system, for a water supply sufficient to satisfy the public needs, and for water quality, by protecting the water supply from polluting or unsanitary substances and conditions.

D.    Definitions.

1.    “Business or commercial buildings” means any building housing one or more spaces or rooms from which a mercantile pursuit, transaction, industry, occupation, trade or commerce is conducted for the primary purpose of financial gain.

2.    “Capital improvement fee” means a fee charged to pay for the installation and replacement of the water system infrastructure and is a one-time fee to use the system.

3.    “Capital improvements” means new facilities, expansion or extensions of the city waterworks system which are not considered general maintenance, repair, or operations.

4.    “Connection permit” means written authorization to connect to the water main or expand the size of the customer line that will be served by the city water system.

5.    “Developer” means a person, persons, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity requesting extension of water mains.

6.    “Dwelling unit” means as is defined in GMC Title 15.

7.    “Homeowner” means a person occupying and owning a residential dwelling unit and not building for resale, rental, or similar purposes.

8.    “Housekeeping facilities” shall include at least a cooking stove, heating facilities, bathroom group, refrigerator, and kitchen sink.

9.    “Immediately accessible” means access to something that does not require moving objects other than the access cover and where removal of the access cover does not require tools to open.

10.    “Licensed plumber” means a licensed plumber as defined in and licensed pursuant to the Colorado Revised Statutes 1973, as the same may be now or hereafter amended.

11.    “Opened for public use (street or alley)” means a street or alley legally platted or accepted by the city as a street or alley and which is being used by the general public as such.

12.    “Tap fee” means a fee charged for city materials and labor for the physical tap of the service line into the city’s distribution main.

13.    “User” means any person who uses, takes water from, or is connected to the water supply system of the city.

14.    “Water distribution main” means that dedicated portion of the waterworks system which transmits and distributes water of the city from treatment facilities (wells) and storage facilities to the users, excluding service lines. Water distribution mains are a minimum of six inches in diameter.

15.    “Water service line/building” means that portion of the waterworks located on private property connecting the user’s building or premises to the distribution main, and includes all piping to the user’s side of the water meter.

16.    “Water service line/city” means that portion of the waterworks which is located within the public street right-of-way or utility easement dedicated to and accepted by the city, to which one or more water service lines/buildings are connected, which connects to a water distribution main.

17.    “Waterworks facilities” means any and all rights and property of the city concerning water and water supply facilities. Any and all devices, facilities, structures, equipment or works owned or used by the city for the purpose of collection, storage, transmission, treatment, regulation or distribution of potable water, including land, wells, distribution mains, pumping facilities, metering devices and their appurtenances. (Ord. 11-2003 §§ 7, 8, 9; Ord. 16-1998 § 3; Code 1997 § 12-2-1).


12.20.020 Connection requirements.

A.    Connection Required.

1.    Connection to Water Distribution Main. The owner of any house or other building utilized for business or residence purposes which requires water-using devices situated within the city and abutting any public street, alley, right-of-way, or easement in which there is now located a water distribution main of the city is required, at owner’s expense, to connect such building by means of service lines to the distribution main in accordance with this chapter. New buildings or lots requiring water-using devices shall be required to extend the main to serve property in accordance with GMC 12.20.050 if a water main does not abut the property in question, but is located within 400 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel of land upon which the building is to be located, unless a waiver is granted by the city council pursuant to the provisions set forth herein. For the purposes of this section, the term “property line” shall include the city of Gunnison boundary if the boundary transects a single parcel of property.

2.    Connection to Individual Well. A building or lot requiring water-using devices may connect to an individual water well in lieu of connection to a water distribution main provided all of the following conditions are met:

a.    The parcel of land upon which the well is to be constructed is not less than two acres in size and is not located within an existing subdivision as defined in GMC Title 15, or was not created by a prior subdivision of land.

b.    The nearest water distribution main is located not less than 400 feet from any property line of the parcel of land on which the individual water well is to be constructed. This requirement may be waived by the city council upon a finding that the connection to the water distribution main is not feasible for economic or physical reasons.

c.    There shall be no more than one individual water well on any parcel of land.

d.    A valid permit for the construction and use of such well shall have been issued by the Colorado Division of Water Resources. 

3.    Connection Required When Water Distribution Main Available. Within one year after written notification by the city that a water distribution main is available within 400 feet from any property line of the parcel of land served by an individual water well, the owner or user thereof shall connect the building utilizing said well to the water distribution main in accordance with this chapter. This requirement may be waived by the city council upon a finding that connection to the water distribution main is not feasible for economic or physical reasons.

4.    Interconnection Prohibited – Separate Service Line. Service lines shall not be connected in any manner to serve buildings or parcels of land which are not part of the site being developed, and which are not owned by the permittee. Separate buildings on existing platted lots are required to have an individual service connection if lots can be sold separately under current zoning. In cases where service lines have been constructed from a single tap on a distribution main to parcels of land under different ownership prior to enactment of this chapter, and where a shutoff has been installed so water may be turned off to each parcel under separate ownership, and where a meter has been installed to measure the use of each parcel, these extensions shall be permitted until a distribution main is laid in a street, alley, or public right-of-way abutting these parcels of land. Within one year of notification by the city that a distribution main is available in the street, alley, or right-of-way abutting the property, any improvements thereon shall be connected thereto as required in this section. (Ord. 11-2003 § 10; Ord. 12-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 12-2-2).


12.20.030 Permits and costs.

A.    Connection Permit Required.

1.    A connection permit shall be required before any person may make a connection to the city distribution main or expand the size of an existing connection to a city distribution main. Buildings destroyed or razed and rebuilt will be given credit for the size of the preexisting service line connection to the distribution main.

2.    Any increase in the size of a water service line connected to a city distribution main shall be subject to the existing connection permit fees existing on the date such connection is made. Credit shall be given for the size of the preexisting water service line.

3.    There are two components to the connection permit fee which are associated with the use of the city water system. Those fees are: (a) the tap fee; and (b) the capital improvement fee.

B.    Connection Permit – Issuance – Requirements. A connection permit will not be issued nor will fees therefor be accepted until: (1) a needs exists; or (2) a building permit and/or state plumbing permit has been issued.

    The physical installation and connection of the service line and/or water-using devices for existing and new structures shall be completed within 180 days of acquiring the connection permit.

    One extension of the preceding time limits may be granted by the community development department for undue and unforeseen delays caused by circumstances beyond the control of the permittee.

    If the permittee fails to complete the physical connections within the prescribed time limit, the connection permit shall become null and void, permit fees refunded less $10.00 for administration fees, and a reapplication for a permit will be necessary. Prior to issuance of a connection permit, all fees shall be paid. (Ord. 16-1998 § 4; Code 1997 § 12-2-3).


12.20.040 Building water service line installation.

A.    General. New water service lines/buildings shall not serve properties that are not owned by the permittee.

1.    Subdivisions or sales of land that will create situations where a water service line/building could serve properties under different ownerships shall require the installation of a separate water service line/building to serve each of the new parcels. Original abandoned water service line/building must be disconnected. One or more water service lines/building may be connected to a water service line/city that is of adequate size and capacity to deliver sufficient water to all buildings and uses connected thereto.

2.    Location of service line connections to the water distribution main must be approved by the public works department, and as-built locations of water service lines shall be furnished to the department after connection. No water service line/building which is located underneath a building in separate ownership or any improvements located on property in separate ownership shall be approved.

3.    City/water service line installation within the city right-of-way, including excavation, bedding, compaction, and backfill, shall be done by authorized agents of the city. A person holding a current certification from the department of public works or a licensed plumber under the supervision of a master plumber and licensed by the state shall install water service line/buildings, including meter installation on private property, except that a homeowner may do the installation of a water service line/building on private property on which is placed a single dwelling unit of which he is a resident. Unauthorized persons doing water service line/building installation shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.

B.    State of Colorado Plumbing Code. All water service lines and service pipes connected to the city water system shall be installed in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code, current edition, state of Colorado, and amendments thereto, which have been legally adopted by the city and requirements of this chapter.

C.    Water Service Line Specifications.

1.    All service lines and pipes appurtenant thereto which are laid in streets, alleys, or other public ways shall be of type “K” copper.

2.    All service lines shall be laid at a depth of not less than six feet below the finished surface of the ground.

3.    All service lines shall be connected to a curb stop located at the property line and such stop shall be protected by an adjustable iron box or cylinder which shall be adjusted to be level with the adjacent ground surface.

4.    Backfill and compaction shall be in accordance with specifications adopted by the department of public works.

D.    Costs. Tap fees for water service line installation by the city within the city right-of-way, including material, labor, hardware, equipment use, and surface replacement (due to excavation) shall be paid by the permittee. This payment will be calculated by the public works department and is a part of the connection permit fee paid at the time of building permit issuance.

E.    Inspection – Tests. The permittee shall make arrangements for inspections of the service line, giving ample time (minimum of 24 hours) for the inspector to schedule same. The following inspections must be accomplished:

1.    Service line, curb stop, and adjustable cylinder (before backfill).

2.    Inspection of the service line piping from the curb stop to five feet outside of the exterior wall of the building in a manner approved by the community development department.

3.    The service line shall be tested for leaks in the presence of the community development department inspector (prior to backfill).

4.    Bedding, compaction, and backfill (during backfill).

F.    Maintenance Responsibility. The city shall be responsible for any problems with the service line within the public right-of-way. The city shall be responsible for and shall repair the excavation if and when settlement occurs within the public right-of-way.

    The property owner shall bear all responsibility for maintenance of the service line and excavation on private property.

G.    Abandonment of Service Lines. The public works department shall determine practical means for abandonment of a service line. (Ord. 8-2004 § 3; Ord. 11-2003 § 11; Ord. 7-1997 §§ 1, 2, 3; Code 1997 § 12-2-4).


12.20.050 Water main extensions.

A.    General – Applicability. These water main regulations apply to those portions of the city that have been legally subdivided and platted prior to the effective date of these regulations. Any portion of the city which has not been platted prior to enactment of this chapter shall comply with the requirements stated in the subdivision regulations.

B.    Length and Location of Extended Mains. All new water main extensions shall extend the full length of the property being served or developed and to the centerline of any adjacent street right-of-way.

    Water mains shall be located in a public right-of-way and location must be approved by the public works department.

C.    Engineering and Design.

1.    The city shall provide the engineering and design work at no cost to the developer for extensions of water mains that will be located in developed city streets or alleys that have been previously platted, accepted, and opened for use as a public right-of-way.

2.    In those instances where the streets, alleys, or rights-of-way have not been opened for public use (in platted areas), the developer shall furnish engineering data and plans conforming to city regulations and specifications. The design and engineering work shall be done by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Colorado and these engineering and design costs shall be borne by the developer. All plans shall require approval of the public works director.

D.    Excavation and Installation of City Water Mains. The developer shall be responsible for installation of the main and shall secure all permits and inspections as required by this chapter.

    All water mains installed in the city water system shall be formed of ductile iron manufactured in accordance with the requirements of ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51. Mechanical joints for such pipe shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11. Pipe thickness shall be Class 52 or greater and be designed in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C150/A21.50. Pipe and fittings shall have cement mortar lining and seal coating in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4. All pipe shall be provided with CAD welded continuity straps.

    Before any work is commenced, approval of the public works director must be secured.

    Upon completion of the main, prior to dedicating the line to the city, the developer shall furnish as-built plans stamped by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Colorado to the public works department. The plans shall show materials, location, elevations, and profiles of all components of the new water main.

    Required inspections:

1.    All contracted excavations for main line extension shall be installed and inspected to meet city specifications.

2.    Inspections shall be required before and during the bedding of the water main. The developer must notify the public works department inspector 24 hours prior to backfill placement.

3.    A leakage test, with the public works department inspector present, must be conducted either before or after the main is buried.

    Installation of the water main, all components of the main, and backfill, shall be in accordance with this chapter, the Plumbing Code, current edition, and city specifications.

    Work shall not be covered until approved by the public works department.

E.    Testing and Disinfection of Mains. City distribution mains shall be disinfected and tested in accordance with AWWA Standard C601 prior to being placed in service. Hydrostatic tests shall be performed on all water main installations as specified in AWWA Standard C600. Tests will be observed by and meet with the approval of the public works department.

    If chlorine tablets are to be used as a disinfecting means, the installing contractor shall place the tablets as required by AWWA C601.

    Other means of disinfection shall be accomplished by qualified city personnel.

    The city shall test the water for and assure adequate disinfection in accordance with the AWWA Standard C601.

F.    Costs – Responsibility Of. Costs of materials for water main extensions including pipe, manholes, labor and testing shall be borne by the developer. In cases where main lines will benefit multiple land owners or properties, the use of assessment districts (local improvements) is encouraged in order that the costs can be shared by all of those who benefit from the new infrastructure. Local improvements can be initiated by either the city or by petition of land owners and are addressed in Chapter 10.10 GMC.

    If the city requires a main to be installed which is larger than six inches and which is larger than required to serve or provide fire protection to a subdivision, the city shall bear the difference in cost of the hardware.

G.    Dedication of Mains to City. Upon completion of the extended main to the satisfaction of the public works department, the developer for which the water main was extended shall convey said water main to the city, relinquishing all ownership rights. This dedication will be prepared by the developer and approved by the city attorney.

    Upon acceptance by and conveyance to the city, the developer shall warrant the materials and workmanship of the conveyed facilities for a period of one year from date of acceptance. Upon the expiration of the warranty period, the city shall assume all responsibilities of ownership and maintenance of the main. Until the main is conveyed, the responsibility and maintenance shall be borne by the developer.

    No water shall be turned on to the user’s premises except for testing purposes until ownership of the main has been conveyed to the city.

H.    Extension of Mains Outside City Limits. Extension of water distribution mains to areas outside the corporate limits of the city shall require city council approval. (Ord. 7-1997 §§ 1, 2, 3; Code 1997 § 12-2-5).


12.20.060 Water meters.

A.    General. Each city water user shall install a water meter in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

    Location of every meter shall be approved by the public works department and shall be located within three feet of an access opening which measures at least 22 inches by 24 inches in area. This opening must provide direct and immediate access to the water meter. Water meters shall be located so as to provide a clear area one foot above the meter, nine inches below and three feet in front of the meter to provide space for removal or changing of the meter. Water meters must be kept immediately accessible to city personnel for reading and maintenance and access shall be kept clear from obstructions.

    New location of meters for remodeling must adhere to the rules for installation of new meters as directed by this chapter.

    If the water meter is not equipped with a read-o-matic (remote reading device) for normal monthly meter reading, any access means shall be kept clear of snow, ice, and debris. If the city determines that the meter access is obstructed, the city may request by mail that the user remedy the problem within 48 hours after receipt of the letter or the user’s water bill shall be estimated.

B.    Size and Maintenance of Water Meters. The city shall purchase, retain title to, maintain, and furnish to the user a five-eighths-inch-by-three-fourths-inch water meter for any installation required by the city.

    In cases where the user wishes to install a water meter which is not required by the city, the user shall purchase, maintain, and will be the sole owner of the meter.

    Any meter so installed shall comply with regulations governing water meters. An agreement for testing and maintenance of these meters by the city may be made with approval of the public works department.

    Any required water meter larger than five-eighths inch by three-fourths inch shall be purchased through the city by the user. Only the cost of the new meter, minus the cost of a five-eighths-inch-by-three-fourths-inch meter shall be borne by the user.

    The city shall maintain the larger meters and will retain ownership of same.

    Water meters may be removed at any time for service and repair at the discretion of the public works department.

C.    Water Meter Installation. Valves shall be installed in the water service line on both sides of the water meter within three feet of the water meter at the expense of the water user.

    A removable grounding strap shall be attached to the service line on both sides of the water meter so as to ensure a good conductor for water pipes used as a ground for the house’s electrical system.

    Installation of any new or relocated water meter shall require that a remote reading device be installed next to the electric meters at a height which can be read by the meter reader without use of a ladder, etc.

D.    Pit Meters. Pit meters shall be allowed only when it has been determined by the director that an inside installation is or would be impractical. When pit meters are allowed, they shall be located as near the property line as practical and be kept free from any obstructions.

    Where a pit meter is allowed, the pit and meter shall be installed in accordance with city specifications for pit meters.

E.    Protection Against Freezing. Individual dwelling unit water systems shall be capable of having the water shut off and drained independently of other dwelling units’ systems, if a multiunit configuration.

    Any water user who has an individually metered service shall notify the city at least five working days prior to vacating the premises during the colder months and make arrangements for the city to remove the water meter. When the user intends to reoccupy the premises, he should make arrangements with the city to have the water meter reinstalled, giving the city ample time (minimum of 24 hours) to schedule same.

    It is the responsibility of the user to prevent the meter from freezing by adequate protection. If the water user fails to have the water meter removed prior to vacating the premises, the user shall be liable for any damage to the meter caused by freezing.

    The city assumes no liability for pipes, meters, or other appurtenances on private property.

F.    Safety. Water meter locations, entrances, and accesses to water meters shall be such as to provide safe entrance for city personnel to the meter for removal, repair, or monthly readings.

G.    Failure of Water Meter. If a water meter shall fail to register in any month, the user shall be charged according to the average quantity of water used in a similar period when the meter was in order. The preceding also applies to meters unaccessible due to failure to meet safety requirements of subsection (E) of this section. (Ord. 7-1997 §§ 1, 2, 3; Code 1997 § 12-2-6).


12.20.070 Water service charges.

A.    The User Charge. The user charge shall generate adequate annual revenues to pay costs of annual operation and maintenance, including replacement, of other related waterworks system costs which the city may determine by ordinance to be paid by the user charge. User charges are outlined in the water system fee schedule.

B.    Review of User Charge System. The city will review the user charge system periodically and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance, including replacement, and that the system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance, including replacement costs, among users and user classes.

C.    Charges for Pipe Thawing and Turning on Water. If it becomes necessary to have the service line between the distribution main and the curb stop thawed, the city will provide this service at no cost to the customer. The city will not thaw pipes on private property.

    It shall be unlawful for anyone other than authorized city personnel to turn off or turn on water to a premises at the curb stop unless the person doing so is expressly authorized by the public works director to do so.

D.    Emergency Water Provisions. Whenever there is a shortage of water, and in the opinion of the city council an emergency exists, the council shall have the power to regulate watering hours or ration water use by resolution. Such resolution shall be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and such power shall continue until such time as the council voids the resolution. Water usage contrary to the emergency regulations may warrant water shutoff by the city. (Code 1997 § 12-2-7).


12.20.080 Power and authority of inspectors.

A.    Entry of Properties. The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of discontinuing service, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to water supply in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.    Limitations. While performing the necessary work on private properties, the public works director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the person, and the person shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, shall indemnify the person against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the person to maintain safe conditions as required.

C.    Entry of Areas Within Easement. The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds either a duly negotiated easement or a prescriptive easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the waterworks facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Code 1997 § 12-2-8).


12.20.090 Violations.

A.    Water Turned Off. The city reserves the right to turn off water for violations of this chapter if no other means can be found, satisfactory to the city, to correct the violation.

B.    If water for a premises has been turned off for a violation of this chapter or for nonpayment, a reconnection charge shall be paid prior to turn-on.

C.    Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1997 § 12-2-9).


12.20.100 Penalties.

Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 4.20 GMC. (Code 1997 § 12-2-10).


Chapter 12.30 ELECTRIC SYSTEM

Sections:

12.30.010    Electric division.

12.30.020    Connection requirements.

12.30.030    Permits and costs.

12.30.040    Service line installation and connection.

12.30.050    Electric distribution line extensions and reinforcements.

12.30.060    Electric meters.

12.30.070    Powers and authority of inspectors.

12.30.080    Violations.

12.30.090    Penalties.


12.30.010 Electric division.

A.    Electric Division Responsibility. The electric division shall be responsible for the electric supply system serving the city and designated areas outside of the city limits as certified by the public utilities commission.

B.    Electric Management. The public works director (hereinafter “director”), under the direction and control of the city manager, shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the electric system and shall have charge of all matters concerning the electric system, enforcement of electric regulations, accountability for materials and the manner in which the same are used or disposed of.

C.    Rules and Regulations. The director shall recommend such rules, ordinances or regulations for adoption to the city manager as may be required to ensure safe and efficient operation of the electric supply system, for an electric supply sufficient to satisfy the public needs, and a reliable electric distribution system.

D.    Definitions.

1.    “Behind meter” means all electrical wiring and facilities, not including the meter base, toward the premises side.

2.    “Customer” means the person or organization responsible for the electric utility account for the premises and includes authorized employees or agents of the customer.

3.    “Distribution extension” means distribution facilities including primary and secondary distribution lines, transformers, service lines, and all appurtenant facilities excepting meters and meter installation facilities necessary to supply service to additional customers.

4.    “Distribution line” means primary distribution lines, transformers, and all appurtenant facilities, excluding service lines, meters, and meter installation facilities.

5.    “Distribution reinforcement” means increase in size of existing facilities necessitated by applicant’s estimated electric requirements.

6.    “Energy diversion” means the act of “bypassing,” “tampering,” or “unauthorized metering,” as those terms are defined in Section 40-7.5-101, C.R.S.

7.    “Front side of meter” means all electrical wiring and facilities, including the meter base and meter, toward the service side.

8.    “NEC” means the National Electric Code, as adopted by the State Electrical Board pursuant to Section 12-23-104, C.R.S.

9.    “Open for public use (street or alley)” means a street or alley legally platted or accepted by the city as a street or alley and which is being used by the general public as such.

10.    “Point of service” means the point of connection between the facilities of the serving utility and the premises wiring.

11.    “Service line” means the secondary overhead or underground electric circuit and associated facilities located between the distribution line and customer point of service. A service line provides service for a customer’s exclusive use.

12.    “Service upgrade” means an increase in the wire capacity in amperage.

13.    “Wedge” means a clamp connection between service line to service point. (Code 1997 § 12-3-1).


12.30.020 Connection requirements.

A.    Connection Required. The owner of any house or other building occupied for business or residence purposes, situated within the city and abutting any public street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located an electric distribution line of the city and desiring electric service is hereby required at owner’s expense to connect such building by means of a service line directly with the distribution system, in accordance with this chapter and the NEC. New buildings or lots requiring electric-using devices shall require the extension of a distribution line to serve the property in accordance with GMC 12.30.050 if a distribution line, legally dedicated to the city, does not abut the property in question. All connections to the city’s electrical distribution system shall be inspected by the State Electrical Inspector.

    Service lines shall not be connected in any manner to serve buildings or parcels of land which are not part of the site being developed and which are not owned by the permittee. Separate buildings on existing platted lots are required to have an individual service line if lots can be sold separately under current zoning.

    Within one year of notification by the city that a distribution line is available in the street, alley, or right-of-way abutting the property, any improvements thereon shall be connected thereto as required in this section.

B.    Unlawful Acts and Damage.

1.    Damage.

a.    No person shall injure or damage any property, equipment, or appliance constituting or being a part of the city’s electric facilities.

b.    No person, except those authorized by the city, shall trespass upon the enclosed lands upon which any portion of the city’s electric facilities are constructed, or in any manner interfere with the facilities or any portion thereof.

c.    No person, except those authorized by the city, shall make any connection to any distribution lines.

2.    Energy Diversion.

a.    No person shall do or perform any act which constitutes energy diversion.

b.    Due to its hazardous nature, discovery by the city of energy diversion shall be grounds for immediate disconnection of service, without prior notice to the customer or user at such premises. Where energy diversion has occurred and immediate disconnection is effected, the city shall give notice concurrent with the disconnection or as soon as practical thereafter, and provide an opportunity for hearing. The sole purpose of the hearing will be to ascertain the facts concerning the event of energy diversion and its duration. Service may be reconnected only after the means by which energy diversion was accomplished has been corrected. The city may impose a deposit requirement sufficient to protect the city from any future acts of energy diversion.

    In case of energy diversion, the city may bill the customer for estimated energy consumed but not properly registered. In its discretion, the city may also charge the customer for the costs of investigation and correction resulting from the energy diversion. (Code 1997 § 12-3-2).


12.30.030 Permits and costs.

Connection Permit Required. A connection permit shall be required before any person may make a connection to a city distribution line or for a service upgrade. The connection permit is issued by the State of Colorado Electrical Inspector in accordance with the NEC. (Code 1997 § 12-3-3).


12.30.040 Service line installation and connection.

A.    General. New electric service lines shall not serve properties that are not owned by permittee.

    Subdivisions of land that will create situations where an electric service line could serve properties under different ownerships shall require the installation of separate service lines to serve the new parcels. Original abandoned service lines must be disconnected.

    Location of service lines and connections to the main must be approved by the public works department.

    In performing a service line connection to the city distribution line, an electrician licensed by the state of Colorado shall be responsible for the following:

1.    Calculate mast height necessary to comply with NEC right-of-way clearance requirements.

2.    Leave enough service drop wire for the city electric line crew to physically make the connection to the city point of service within NEC requirements.

3.    Perform the actual service line connection to the building in conformance with NEC requirements.

4.    Measure and certify to the city prior to installation of the meter that minimum height requirements have been met.

5.    The city electric line crew shall be responsible for the actual physical connection at the point of service. All installation and maintenance from the point of service to and throughout the buildings shall be the responsibility of the property owner.

    A homeowner may perform electrical work on private property on which is placed a single dwelling unit of which sole residency is by the owner. This provision applies to all installations behind the city’s electric meter.

    Electrical work from the front side of the meter to the transformer and distribution line must be performed by a licensed electrician.

B.    State of Colorado Electric Code. All service lines and service line connections to the city electric system shall be installed in accordance with the NEC and requirements of this chapter.

C.    Electric Service Line Installation Within the City Right-of-Way.

1.    Electric service line installation within the city right-of-way, including the connection of service lines to the transformer and distribution line and any electric for underground electric lines, excavation, bedding, compaction, and backfill, shall be done by authorized agents of the city.

2.    Specifications.

a.    All electric service lines shall be of the type required by the NEC.

b.    All underground service lines shall be laid at a depth of not less than that required by the NEC.

c.    Backfill and compaction of underground lines shall be in accordance with city specifications.

D.    Costs. Electric service line installation by the city within the city right-of-way, including material, labor, hardware, equipment use, and land surface replacement (due to excavation) shall be paid by the permittee. This payment is a part of the fees paid at the time of building permit issuance.

E.    Inspections. The permittee shall make arrangements for inspections of the service line with the State of Colorado Electrical Inspector, giving ample time (minimum of 24 hours) for the inspector to schedule same. Inspections are required for temporary service and throughout the construction process to final inspection.

F.    Maintenance Responsibility. The property owner shall be responsible for the service line within the public right-of-way and on private property. However, any maintenance within the city right-of-way shall be performed by city personnel at the property owner’s expense.

G.    Abandonment of Service Lines. The public works department shall determine the practical means for abandonment of a service line.

    The property owner shall bear all responsibility for maintenance of the service line and excavation on private property. (Ord. 7-1997 §§ 1, 2, 3; Code 1997 § 12-3-4).


12.30.050 Electric distribution line extensions and reinforcements.

A.    General – Applicability. These electric distribution line regulations apply to those portions of the city system that have been legally subdivided and platted prior to the effective date of these regulations. Any portion of the city and designated areas outside of the city limits which has not been platted prior to enactment of this chapter shall comply with the requirements stated in the subdivision regulations.

B.    Length and Location of Extended Distribution Lines. All new electric extensions shall extend the full length of the property being served or developed.

    Electric distribution lines shall be located in a public right-of-way, whenever possible, and all locations must be approved by the public works department. In cases where the line will traverse private property, a utility easement for installation, access and maintenance must be approved by the public works department and accepted by the city. Easements must be accepted by the city prior to construction.

C.    Engineering and Design.

1.    The city shall provide the engineering and design work at no cost to the developer for extensions of electric lines that will be located in developed city streets or alleys that have been previously platted, accepted, and opened for use as a public right-of-way.

2.    In those instances where the streets, alleys or rights-of-way have not been opened for public use (in platted areas), the developer shall furnish engineering data and plans conforming to city regulations and specifications. The design and engineering work shall be done by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Colorado and these engineering and design costs shall be borne by the developer. All plans shall require approval of the director.

D.    Excavation and Installation of City Electric Distribution Lines. The city shall be responsible for installation of any distribution line.

    All overhead electric distribution lines installed in the city electric system shall be aluminum core steel, reinforced wire.

    All underground electrical distribution lines in the city system shall be 220 mills EPR, with full concentric neutral and fully jacketed cable. Sizing for all distribution lines shall be determined by the public works department.

E.    Distribution Line Costs – Responsibility Of. Costs of materials, labor, hardware, equipment use and land surface replacement (due to excavation) for distribution line extensions shall be borne by the developer. In cases where main lines will benefit multiple land owners, or properties, the use of assessment districts (local improvements) is encouraged in order that the costs can be shared by all of those who benefit from the new infrastructure. Local improvements can be initiated by either the city or by petition of land owners and are addressed in Chapter 10.10 GMC.

    If the city requires a distribution line to be installed which is larger than that required to serve the subdivision, the city shall bear the difference in cost of the hardware.

F.    Dedication of Distribution Lines to City. Upon completion of the line to the satisfaction of the director, the developer/user for which the distribution line was extended shall convey said line to the city, relinquishing all ownership rights. This will be a legal agreement prepared by the developer’s attorney and must meet with the approval of the city attorney.

    Upon acceptance by the director, and after the ownership of the extended distribution line is conveyed to the city, the city shall assume all responsibilities of ownership and maintenance of the line.

    No electricity shall be turned on to the user’s premises until ownership of the distribution line has been conveyed to the city, except for testing.

G.    Extension of Distribution Lines Outside City Limits. Extension of distribution lines to areas outside the corporate limits of the city shall be in conformance with public utility commission requirements. (Ord. 7-1997 §§ 1, 2, 3; Code 1997 § 12-3-5).


12.30.060 Electric meters.

A.    General. Each city electric user shall utilize an electric meter in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Meters and meter bases are furnished by the city; however, the property owner is required to have a licensed electrician install the meter base and outside disconnect. Following this installation and prior to the city’s installation of the meter, the State Electrical Inspector must inspect and issue approval to proceed.

    Location of every meter shall be approved by the public works department. Electric meters must be kept immediately accessible to city personnel for reading and maintenance and access shall be kept clear from obstructions. If the city determines that the meter access is obstructed, the city may request by mail that the user remedy the problem within 48 hours after receipt of the letter or the user’s electric bill shall be estimated.

    New location of meters for remodeling must adhere to the rules for installation of new meters as directed by this chapter.

B.    Size and Maintenance of Electric Meters. The city shall purchase, retain title to, maintain, and furnish to the user an appropriate meter for any installation required by the city.

    Electric meters may be removed at any time for service and repair at the discretion of the public works department.

C.    Electric Meter Installation. The property owner shall install the meter base and outside disconnect at a location approved by the public works department. The installation must meet with the approval of the State Electrical Inspector prior to the installation of the meter by the city.

D.    Safety. Electric meter locations, entrances, and access to electric meters shall be such as to provide safe entrance for city personnel to the meter for removal, repair, maintenance, or monthly readings.

E.    Failure of Electric Meter. If an electric meter shall fail to register in any month, the user shall be charged according to the average electricity used in a similar period when the meter was in order. The preceding also applies to meters unaccessible due to failure to meet the safety requirements of subsection (D) of this section.

F.    Electric Meter Testing. The city reserves the right to make tests and inspections as required on its meters to ensure a high standard of accuracy. A meter will be considered accurate if it tests within two percent, plus or minus. A customer may request that a test of the meter be made. In the event the meter is found to register within two percent, plus or minus, the customer will be required to pay a test fee of $20.00. If the meter is found to exceed the two percent limit, plus or minus, prior bills may be adjusted for the prior six-month period or until the date of the previous test if the meter was tested less than six months previously. No charge will be made for the test of a meter which exceeds the two percent standard. (Ord. 7-1997 §§ 1, 2, 3; Code 1997 § 12-3-6).


12.30.070 Powers and authority of inspectors.

A.    Entry of Properties. Customers shall permit employees and inspectors of the city, when properly identified, to enter customers’ premises and to examine the wiring, appliances, or other equipment relating to the department service, to ascertain loads, make necessary tests, and to replace or remove the department’s own equipment.

B.    Limitations. While performing the necessary work on private properties, the director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the person, and the person shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the person against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the person to maintain safe conditions as required.

C.    Entry of Areas Within Easement. The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds either a duly negotiated easement or a prescriptive easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the electrical facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Code 1997 § 12-3-7).


12.30.080 Violations.

Electricity Turned Off. The city reserves the right to turn off electricity for violations of this chapter if no other means can be found, satisfactory to the city, to correct the violation.

Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1997 § 12-3-8).


12.30.090 Penalties.

Any person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 4.20 GMC. (Code 1997 § 12-3-9).


Chapter 12.40 UTILITY SERVICE RATES AND FEES, RULES AND REGULATIONS

Sections:

12.40.010    Definitions.

12.40.020    Rate tables.

12.40.030    Rules and regulations.

12.40.040    Photovoltaic and wind service pilot program and rate schedule.


12.40.010 Definitions.

A.    “Break in service” means any period of time when utility service is discontinued and there is no person accepting responsibility for payment of services.

B.    “Capital improvement fees for waterworks and sewer connections” means a fee charged to pay for the installation and replacement of the water or sewer system infrastructure and is a one-time fee to use the system.

C.    “Commercial electric customer” means a person using electricity in connection with the operation of business establishments for all purposes, including stores, offices, motels, restaurants, and industrial concerns, but not including buildings, structures, trailers or mobile or modular homes, which are used for residential purposes only.

D.    “Commercial refuse customer” means a person whose tract or parcel of land with improvement thereon, other than “residential refuse customers” as defined herein, within the city.

E.    “Commercial water and/or sewer customer” means a person receiving potable water from which a mercantile pursuit, transaction, industry, occupation, trade, or commerce is conducted for the primary purpose of financial gain. The term includes professional, real estate, insurance offices and when a single water meter serves a dwelling consisting of two or more residential units.

F.    “Construction costs of distribution facilities” means the combined costs of all facilities necessary to the distribution extension or reinforcement, including satisfactory right-of-way.

G.    “Construction payment” means the amount advanced by an applicant to the city to pay all construction costs in excess of free construction allowance.

H.    “Contract customer” means a person taking delivery of electricity at primary voltage or a person using 3,000,000 gallons of water per year, or commercial refuse customer or sanitation district.

I.    “Contract light customer” means a person using electricity in connection with dusk-to-dawn lighting service with controlled security lights per contract with the city.

J.    Default of Payment or Delinquent. Bills for any utility charges remaining unpaid 30 days or more from the date of billing are considered “in default of payment” and “delinquent.”

K.    “Energy charge” means the rate multiplied by the kilowatts per hour (Kwh) consumed.

L.    “Free construction allowance” means that portion of necessary construction made by public works at its expense.

M.    “Monthly service charge” means a monthly fee charged to each customer regardless of the monthly volume or energy charge.

N.    “Net metering” means, for billing purposes, the net consumption as measured at the city of Gunnison’s service meter. When net metering is negative, such that the PV-W system production is greater than the customer’s consumption in any month, the city of Gunnison will credit customer for such production. In the event that such negative balance remains after December 31st of each year, the city of Gunnison will pay customer for such negative balance at the city of Gunnison’s average wholesale rate. If customer consumption is greater than the PV-W system production, the customer shall pay for that electric use at the most current published rate on a monthly billing. Customers will be billed the monthly service charge for each month, even in months when negative or no net electric consumption by the customer results.

O.    “Normal domestic wastewater” means wastewater that has a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) concentration of not more than 300 mg/l and a suspended solids (SS) concentration of not more than 300 mg/l. Normal domestic wastewater is considered to have a concentration which may generally range from approximately 125 to 300 mg/l of both BOD and SS.

P.    Payment Due Date. Utility charges become due and payable 10 days from the date of billing.

Q.    “Person” means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group and shall include both singular and plural.

R.    “Photovoltaic or wind pilot program” means the city of Gunnison’s program to accommodate the installation of PV-W systems on the city of Gunnison’s electric distribution system for the purpose of providing residential and commercial electric customers an option to own photovoltaic or wind generation equipment which is tied to the city of Gunnison’s electric grid.

S.    “Rate” means the amount charged per unit of commodity or service.

T.    “Refund of construction payment” means the amount of construction payment returned to the applicant or the applicant’s assignees by the city.

U.    “Residential electric customer” means a person whose residential dwelling unit is individually metered by unit to measure the amount of electricity used for domestic purposes.

V.    “Residential refuse customer” means a person whose tract or parcel of land within the city is improved with at least one, but not more than eight, residential dwelling units. Each unit will be considered as a customer.

W.    “Residential water and/or sewer customer” means a person whose residential dwelling unit is individually metered by unit to measure the volume of potable water used for domestic purposes.

X.    “Temporary service charges” means the amount the applicant, prior to connection, pays to the city not subject to refund, for the city’s estimated costs of installing and removing the meter less the salvage value of materials used. City utility facilities placed at other than the permanent location shall be considered as temporary service.

Y.    “Volume charge” means the rate multiplied by the volume of water consumed. (Ord. 4-2015 § 1; Ord. 10-2003 §§ 1, 2; Code 1997 § 12-4-1).


12.40.020 Rate tables.

A.    Electrical Rates. The city council of the city of Gunnison hereby establishes the following rates for electrical service provided by the city:

Electrical Rates  

	 	2019 Rates

	Residential:

	  Monthly Service Charge

	    Flat Rate	$14.75

	    Time-of-Day Rate	$19.25

	  Usage Charge	$0.08430/kWh

	  Time-of-Day Rate

	    On-Peak	$0.10260/kWh*

	    Off-Peak	$0.05010/kWh*

	Commercial:

	  Monthly Service Charge	$25.00

	  Usage Charge	$0.08700/kWh

	City Government Service:

	  Monthly Service Charge	$25.00

	  Usage Charge	$0.08700/kWh

	Western Colorado University:

	  Monthly Service Charge	$85.00

	  Usage Charge	$0.05840/kWh

	  Demand Charge	$9.50/kW

	Contract Lights:

	  Monthly Charge	$10.15

	Wind Power Attributes:	$1.70/100 kWh per month added to usage charge**

    * On-peak billing shall be the usage occurring during the time between 6:00 a.m. through 10:00 a.m. as well as the time between 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. Off-peak billing shall be all times not described as on-peak.

    ** Wind power attributes may be purchased by the customer in blocks of 100 kWh per month.

B.    Water Rates. The city council of the city of Gunnison hereby establishes the following monthly service charge for water service as follows. Monthly service charges are based on the size of the meter installed for each service based on the following table:

Water Rates  

	Monthly Service Charges for All Customers Based on Size of Water Meter:

	 	Current 2018	2019

	5/8" meter	$11.00/month	$11.77/month

	3/4" meter	$11.00/month	$11.77/month

	1" meter	$11.00/month	$11.77/month

	1-1/2" meter	$17.00/month	$18.19/month

	2" meter	$19.00/month	$20.33/month

	3" meter	$57.00/month	$60.99/month

	4" meter	$77.00/month	$82.39/month

	Usage Charge:

	First 5,000 gallons/month	$1.68/1,000 gallons	$1.80/1,000 gallons

	Next 10,000 gallons/month	$1.83/1,000 gallons	$1.96/1,000 gallons

	Over 15,000 gallons/month	$1.88/1,000 gallons	$2.01/1,000 gallons

    Waterworks Capital Improvement Fees. The city council of the city of Gunnison hereby establishes the following capital improvement fees to be charged for each connection to the waterworks system of the city. The waterworks system capital improvement fee is based on the size of the meter installed for each service, based on the following table:

	Water Service Line Size	Capital Improvement Fee for Waterworks Services

	3/4" or less	$    2,500	 

	1"	4,500	 

	1 1/2"	10,000	 

	2"	17,500	 

	3"	35,000	 

	4"	60,000 	 

	6"	120,000	 

    There shall be no additional capital improvement fee for connections requiring oversized water service lines for fire sprinkler systems or other fire suppression system.

C.    Sewer Rates. The city council of the city of Gunnison hereby establishes the following monthly service charges and use charges for the sewer system of the city of Gunnison:

Sewer Rates**  

	 	Current 2018	2019 Rate

	Residential:

	Monthly Service and Usage Charge	$27.56	$32.25

	Commercial:

	Monthly Service Charge	$13.23*	$15.48*

	Monthly Usage Charge	$0.00278/gallon of water used as determined by water meter**	$0.00325/gallon of water used as determined by water meter**

	Septic Tank and Portable Toilet Waste:	$32.47/load plus $0.17160/gallon***	$32.47/load plus $0.18447/gallon***

	Gunnison County: 	 	 

	Dos Rios	$0.00252	$0.00295

	North Valley	$0.00267	$0.00312

	Tomichi Village	$0.00267	$0.00312

	Sewer Districts	Per Gallon	Per Gallon

    * If a commercial customer has consumptive use of water or in some other manner uses water which is not returned to the wastewater facility, the user charge for that customer may be based on a wastewater meter or separate water meter installed and maintained at the customer’s expense, or any other method accepted, in writing, by the city council.

    ** For those customers who contribute wastewater strength which is greater than the upper limit of normal domestic sewage, a surcharge, in addition to the normal fee, will be collected as follows:

BOD in excess of 300 mg/l                $0.363 per pound

SS in excess of 300 mg/l                  $0.062 per pound

    *** The dumping of waste from recreation vehicles, septic tanks, and portable toilets shall require authorization of the public works department and payment to the city of the fees as set forth herein for each dumping of recreational vehicle waste, septic tank waste, or portable toilet waste, prior to said dumping. The location where recreational vehicle waste, septic tank waste, or portable toilet waste may be dumped shall be designated by the public works director. It shall be unlawful to dump recreational vehicle waste, septic tank waste, or portable toilet waste without having proof of prior payment of the fees in possession of the person so dumping. Requests for recreational vehicle dumping, septic tank dumping, or portable toilet dumping into the city’s wastewater treatment facilities, outside of the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. local time, Monday through Friday, or on holidays, shall be subject to an after-hours charge of $30.00 per dump.

    Sewer Capital Improvement Fees. The city council of the city of Gunnison hereby establishes the following capital improvement fees to be charged for each connection to the sewer system within the city of Gunnison. The sewer system capital improvement fee is based on the size of the water meter servicing the facility or structure to be connected to the city’s wastewater facility as follows:

	Water Meter Size	Capital Improvement Fee for Sewer Services

	3/4"	$   5,000	 

	1"	9,000	 

	1 1/2"	20,000	 

	2"	35,000	 

	3"	70,000	 

	4"	120,000	 

D.    Refuse/Recycle Collection Rates. The city council of the city of Gunnison hereby establishes the following refuse and recycle collection rates within the city of Gunnison: 

Refuse/Recycle Rates  

	 	2014 Rates	Current 2015 Rates

	Residential Refuse:

	Monthly Basic Service Charge*

	1 38-gallon container	$16.00/month	$15.00/month

	1 68-gallon container	$20.00/month	$19.00/month

	1 98-gallon container	$25.00/month	$23.00/month

	1 2-yard dumpster (4 home minimum)	$25.00/month/home	$23.00/month

	Special Pick-Up: Must be in container with the exception of furniture, appliances and tree limbs.

	1 38-gallon container	$4.00/each	$4.00/each

	1 68-gallon container	$5.00/each	$5.00/each

	1 98-gallon container	$6.25/each	$6.25/each

	1 piece of furniture/appliance	$10.00/each	$10.00/each

	1 refrigerator (includes freon capture)	$35.00/each	$35.00/each

	Residential Recycle:	No charge	No charge

	Commercial Refuse/Recycle:

	Monthly Basic Service Charge*

	1 2-yard dumpster (refuse)	$62.00/month	$60.00/month

	1 2-yard dumpster (recycle cardboard)	$25.00/month	$25.00/month

	1 Maximum 50-gallon container of plastic/aluminum/tin/paper	$12.50/month	$12.50/month

	Construction Dumpster (Temporary)

	1 2-yard dumpster/each pick-up	$30.00/pick-up	$30.00/pick-up

	Minimum per month	$30.00	$30.00

*    Residential basic service consists of the weekly pickup of one container. Commercial basic service consists of the weekly pickup of one two-cubic-yard dumpster. All recycle pickups are for one container/dumpster weekly.

E.    It is the intention of the city council of the city of Gunnison to review the rates charged for utility services on an annual basis during the budget preparation process. (Ord. 2-2019 § 1; Ord. 17-2018 § 1; Ord. 16-2018 § 1; Ord. 3-2018 § 1; Ord. 12-2017 § 1; Ord. 11-2017 § 1; Ord. 13-2016 § 1; Ord. 12-2016 § 1; Ord. 11-2016 § 1; Ord. 15-2015 § 1; Ord. 14-2015 § 1; Ord. 13-2015 § 1; Ord. 8-2015 §§ 1, 2, 3; Ord. 14-2014 § 1; Ord. 13-2014 § 1; Ord. 12-2014 § 1; Ord. 11-2014 § 1; Ord. 1-2013 § 1; Ord. 6-2009 § 1; Ord. 6-2008 § 1; Ord. 5-2008 § 1; Ord. 4-2008 § 1; Ord. 1-2008 § 1; Ord. 12-2007 § 1; Ord. 11-2007 § 1; Ord. 10-2007 § 1; Ord. 3-2007 § 1; Ord. 2-2007 § 1; Ord. 1-2007 § 1; Ord. 3-2006 § 1; Ord. 1-2006 § 1; Ord. 13-2004 § 1; Ord. 7-2004 § 1; Ord. 14-2003 § 1; Ord. 8-2001 § 1; Ord. 7-2001 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 1-2001 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 14-1999 §§ 1, 2, 3; Ord. 16-1998 §§ 7 – 15; Ord. 15-1998 § 1; Ord. 7-1997 §§ 1, 2, 3; Code 1997 § 12-4-2).


12.40.030 Rules and regulations.

A.    Electric Service Construction Allowances. Payments by applicants for costs of extending electric lines will be subject to the following rules and regulations:

1.    Overhead or underground electric line extensions for secondary or primary service where the use of the service is to be permanent and where a continuous return to the city of sufficient revenue to support the necessary investment is assured will receive a construction allowance. The construction allowance will be equivalent in cost to the gross embedded investment per customer and the city will install, at its expense, necessary overhead or underground electric distribution extension facilities equal to this construction allowance.

    Applicants required to pay the city for electric line extensions in accordance with GMC 12.30.040 and 12.30.050 shall pay in advance all estimated construction costs for the electric distribution facilities necessary to serve the applicant in excess of the construction allowance.

2.    Construction allowance by customer rate class:

a.    Residential: $475.00;

b.    Commercial: $1,195.

3.    Said construction payment shall be refundable in part or its entirety during a five-year period immediately following installation. At the end of said five-year period, any remaining construction payment becomes nonrefundable.

4.    Calculation and Payment of Refunds. When an additional permanent service customer connects directly to an electric distribution extension upon which there is unrefunded construction payment remaining, the city will recalculate the extension costs by: (a) identifying those costs associated with specifically extending the system to the additional permanent service; and (b) recalculating the common costs and apportioning those costs equally between customers.

    Unrefunded construction payments paid in excess of this recalculated cost will be refunded after factoring in the construction allowance per customer. In no case shall refunds be made which exceed in total the amount of construction payment made by any customer. In no event shall any customer who has terminated service be eligible for any refund after such termination.

B.    Application for Monthly Service.

1.    Each customer requesting utility service shall sign a standard application for service. The customer shall supply information requested by the city including but not limited to information related to the manner in which the utility will be utilized.

2.    By signing the application, the customer agrees to be bound by the ordinances which form a contract of service.

3.    Failure of the city to enforce or insist upon strict compliance with any ordinance shall not constitute a waiver.

C.    Deposit Requirements for Monthly Service. The city may require any customer to give an approved guarantee that their bill for service will be paid promptly, by providing a letter of credit from a utility company who has provided services to the customer within the past six months, reflecting the customer has not had any delinquencies within the previous 12-month period. In lieu of such a guarantee, the city may require any customer to make a cash deposit sufficient to secure the payment of an estimated billing not to exceed a 90-day billing, but if a deposit is required it may never be less than $100.00. The cash deposit will be returned to the customer either after: (a) the service is ordered discontinued and all charges for services are paid in full; or (b) in December following one year of service with the city, provided no monthly billing has been in default of payment. The city will apply the amount of the refundable deposit to any charges for services outstanding at the time of the discontinued service. Any deposit remaining will be refunded to the customer as quickly as practicable.

D.    Default of Payment for Monthly Service. When a customer is in default of payment and delinquent, the city may discontinue its utility service to such delinquent customer. The service of any customer shall not be discontinued except upon written notice of at least 10 days, advising the customer of such fact, or in an extreme emergency that threatens the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city of Gunnison.

E.    Reconnection of Monthly Service.

1.    The city shall impose a reconnection fee to the customer requesting reconnection in the event service has been discontinued and a break in service has occurred.

2.    Fees may be charged to the customer by the city for collection of accounts in default of payment and for restoration of service to customers in default of p ayment.

3.    When a customer is in default of payment, the city shall have the right to:

a.    Impose a collection fee if and whenever the city shall have been required to initiate collection efforts against the customer and if in response thereto the customer shall pay the delinquent amount without the city resorting to disconnection of service. The city shall waive the payment of one such collection fee if the customer has not defaulted in payment at any time in the 12 months immediately preceding the month for which said charge is to be waived.

b.    Impose a reconnection fee if and whenever the city initiates collection efforts against the customer and disconnects service as a consequence and has to reconnect it.

4.    The reconnection fee shall be $30.00.

5.    The collection fee shall be $20.00.

F.    Termination of Monthly Service.

1.    The city shall not discontinue the service of any customer for violation of any rule of the city and/or for nonpayment of any sum due for utility service except upon written notice mailed by first class mail or delivered at least 10 days in advance of the proposed termination date, advising the customer of what particular rule has been violated for which service will be discontinued, and/or the amount due and the date by which the same shall be paid. In the event the customer previously has executed a third-party notification form indicating a third party to whom notices of discontinuance or terminations are to be sent, written notice also shall be mailed by first class mall or delivered at least 10 days in advance of the proposed termination date to said third party. The notice of discontinuance shall be conspicuous in nature and in easily understood language. The heading of the notice of discontinuance shall be in block letters. The heading shall contain, as a minimum, the following warning written in English:

THIS IS A FINAL NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE OF ELECTRIC UTILITY SERVICE AND CONTAINS IMPORTANT INFORMATION INVOLVING YOUR LEGAL RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.

    The heading shall also contain the same wording written in Spanish with an additional sentence at the end of the warning stating in Spanish:



IF YOU DO NOT READ ENGLISH YOU SHOULD REQUEST SOMEONE WHO UNDERSTANDS SPANISH AND ENGLISH TO TRANSLATE THIS NOTICE FOR YOU.

    This rule shall not apply where a bypass is discovered on the customer’s service meter, or any hazardous condition on a customer’s premises, or in the case of a customer utilizing service in such manner so as to make it dangerous for occupants of the premises, thus making an immediate discontinuance of service to the premises imperative.

2.    Delinquency in payment for service rendered to a previous occupant of the premises to be served and unpaid charges for service or facilities not ordered by the present or prospective customers shall not constitute a sufficient cause for refusal of service to a present or prospective customer; provided, however, the city may decline to furnish service at the same premises for the use of a delinquent customer by subterfuge in any manner.

    Subterfuge includes, but is not restricted to, an application for service at a given location in the name of another party by an applicant whose account is delinquent and who continues to reside at the premises. Service shall not be discontinued or refused for failure to pay any indebtedness except as incurred for utility services rendered by the city.

3.    In situations involving permanent residents in multiunit dwellings known by the city to exist where the utility service for the entire dwelling is recorded on a single meter, the city, at least 10 days prior to the proposed termination date for the dwelling involved, shall make every reasonable effort to: (a) deliver a written notice to each individual dwelling unit within the multiunit dwelling advising that a notice of discontinuance has been sent to the party responsible for payment of electric bills for the dwelling, the date upon which termination will become effective, and how the individual resident in the dwelling unit may contact the city for additional information concerning the proposed termination; or (b) mailing such notice by first class mail to the addressee or occupant of each unit of the multiunit dwelling, and to the extent possible, posting a copy of said notice in at least one of the common areas of the multiunit dwelling.

4.    Notice of discontinuance of service shall be mailed or delivered in accordance with subsection (F)(1) of this section. As a minimum, said notice shall advise the customer:

a.    How to contact the city, without expense to the customer of a toll call, to resolve any dispute with respect to the amount or date due, and/or with respect to violation of any rule.

b.    That the customer is entitled to a hearing in person before termination of service at a reasonable time and place within 10 days of the date of the notice of discontinuance before the city manager or his designee.

c.    That the customer has the right to make an informal complaint to the city council by letter or in person.

d.    That the customer has the right to request, in writing, a hearing before the city council.

e.    The city council, at its discretion and upon such terms as it may prescribe, may order the city not to terminate service pending an investigation and/or hearing.

f.    That in the event a hearing before the city council on the proposed discontinuance of service is requested by the customer, the city council, upon motion by the finance department, may order the customer to post a deposit or an additional deposit with the city in such amount as the city council deems reasonable under the circumstances, which deposit may be in addition to any deposit previously posted with the city.

g.    That the customer may avoid termination of service by paying the current month’s bill in full and entering into a reasonable installment payment plan with the city to pay the past due balance in no more than six equal monthly installments.

h.    That in the event the customer is unable to pay for service as regularly billed by the city, or is able to pay for such service but only in reasonable installments, and there is a medical certification delivered to the city indicating that termination of service would be especially dangerous to the health or safety of the customer or a permanent resident of the customer’s household, that there will not be discontinuance of service for 60 days from the date of the medical certification with a possible 30-day extension upon delivery of a second medical certification.

5.    Service shall not be disconnected:

a.    If all current bills are paid when due and all past due amounts are being amortized by reasonable installment payments. The due date on the bill must be specifically indicated on the bill and the due date shall be no earlier than 10 days subsequent to the mailing or delivery of the bill. “Current bill” means that portion of the bill which is not 30 days past the date of billing. The minimum reasonable installment payment is that which pays a current bill in full and is at least one-sixth of any past due balance. A reasonable installment payment plan shall require that a past due balance be paid off in no more than six equal monthly installments. The city has the right, in the event there is a breach in the installment agreement, to discontinue service upon the seventh day following the mailing of a notice of termination and to require payment in full and the posting of a reasonable deposit in order for the customer to be reconnected.

b.    A “reasonable installment” is defined as one which is at least one-sixth of the past due balance and is made no less frequently than once a month.

c.    Between 12:00 noon on Friday and 8:00 a.m. the following Monday, or between 12:00 noon on the day prior to 8:00 a.m. on the day following any federal holiday or city-observed holiday.

d.    During any period when termination of service would be especially dangerous to the health or safety of the residential customer or a permanent resident of the customer’s household and such customer establishes that he is unable to pay for the service as regularly billed by the city, or he is able to pay for such service but only in reasonable installments.

    Termination of service that would be especially dangerous to the health or safety of the residential customer or a permanent resident of the customer’s household means that termination of service would aggravate an existing medical condition or create a medical emergency for the customer or a permanent resident of the customer’s household. Such shall be deemed to be the case when a physician licensed by the state makes a certification thereof in writing and said certification is received by the city.

    In the event a medical certification as aforesaid is delivered or received by the city, the nondiscontinuance of service as herein prescribed shall be effective for 60 days from the date of said medical certification. One 30-day extension of nontermination of service pursuant to this subsection may be effected by delivery to or receipt by the city of a second medical certification, as aforesaid, prior to the expiration of the initial 60-day nontermination period. A residential customer may invoke the provisions of this subsection (F)(5)(d) no more than once during any period of 12 consecutive months.

e.    Until the city has made a reasonable effort to give notice of the proposed discontinuance in person or by telephone both to the residential customer (or to a resident of the customer’s household 18 years of age or over) and to any third party who is listed by the customer on a third-party notification form.

f.    In the event a customer at any time proffers full payment of any bill by cash or bona fide certified check to a representative of the city. The provisions herein shall not preclude the city, by tariff rule and rate, from making a reasonable charge for a service call.

G.    Budget Billing. Customers who do not have a pending notice of discontinuance of service may elect, at their option, to pay monthly bills for service on a budget billing plan beginning with any billing month. Any customer electing the budget billing plan will pay a monthly amount equal to one-tenth of the total of the most recent 12 months’ bills. Said monthly payment shall be made for 11 successive months with the twelfth month’s payment being a settlement amount equal to the difference between the total of the prior 11 months’ payments and the actual billings for the 12-month period. If the settlement amount is a credit balance, the city will issue a check to the customer in the amount of the credit balance, or the customer may elect to have the credit applied to future billings.

    If the settlement amount is a debit balance owed by the customer, the total balance will be due and payable on the due date shown on the bill for the settlement month, except that in the event the debt balance exceeds $20.00, the customer may elect to pay the debit over a two-month period with at least one-half of the total debt balance payable in the settlement month. The customer may continue on the budget billing plan for succeeding years, in which case the settlement for each year will occur in 12-month cycles starting with the beginning month.

    If a customer electing the budget billing plan fails to pay the budget billing obligation in any month, normal collection procedures shall be applicable for the outstanding budget billing amount. Upon termination of service of a customer on the budget billing plan, the customer is subject to removal from the plan and the entire outstanding amount of the account for actual usage shall be due and payable.

H.    Lien on Premises – Owner Liable. All delinquent water, sewer, and refuse charges shall become a lien upon the premises to which these services are delivered from the date same becomes due and until paid. The owner of the lot or building shall be liable for payment of all these charges levied against the property for these services used or taken upon the property and, if delinquent charges are not paid within 30 days of the date of billing, the lien may be made effective by the city certifying the amount of the charges and the period covered by the charges and giving a legal description of the premises to the county treasurer, to be collected and paid over by the county treasurer in the same manner as taxes are authorized to be collected and paid over by the county treasurer. The city may add to the amount due the late payment penalty, and costs incurred by the city in attempting to collect the amount due, including attorney’s fees.

    An occupant or tenant’s obligation to pay for these services under any occupancy or rental agreement shall not relieve the owner from such liability or lien when these service bills become delinquent.

    No change of ownership or occupancy shall affect the application of this subsection and failure of any owner to learn that he purchased property against which a lien for these services exists shall in no way affect his liability for payment in full.

    The lien under this section shall be prior to any and all other liens and encumbrances filed subsequent to the certifying of the lien to the county treasurer, but shall be subject to all general taxes and all local improvement assessments, whether levied prior or subsequent thereto.

I.    Late Payment Penalties. If the payment of any electric, water, sewer and/or refuse service bill is not made within 30 days from the date of billing, there shall be charged a penalty of 10 percent for late payment; however, if the customer has not previously been in default of a payment for the preceding 12-month period, the penalty shall be waived by the director of finance. (Ord. 9-2015 § 1; Ord. 7-2013 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 2-2008 § 1; Code 1997 § 12-4-3).


12.40.040 Photovoltaic and wind service pilot program and rate schedule.

A.    Applicability. The photovoltaic and wind pilot program is applicable to residential and commercial electrical customers to install eligible photovoltaic or wind (PV-W) systems under the following rate, whose electric service is supplied by the city of Gunnison. The PV-W rate is applicable to electric customers who own, operate, and maintain a photovoltaic or wind generation system in parallel with the city of Gunnison’s electric system. The PV-W system shall be limited to a maximum capacity of 25 kilowatts. Service under the following rate schedule is an exception to the applicability of the electric rate schedule such that these schedules are applicable for standby and/or auxiliary service for this program only, and is not available to resale service.

B.    All customers taking advantage of this rate shall be located within the city of Gunnison’s service territory.

C.    All electric energy delivered by the city of Gunnison to the customer hereunder shall be received and paid for by the customer at the applicable residential or commercial rate. The city of Gunnison shall net meter all electric energy produced by the PV-W system. The city of Gunnison will charge the customer an additional $2.50 per month service charge for administrative expenses and additional meter costs that are incurred over that of a typical single-phase meter and an additional $5.00 per month for three-phase meters.

D.    Customers who have installed photovoltaic systems prior to this revision shall continue to operate under the conditions of Ordinance No. 10-2003 unless they choose to increase the size (kW) of their systems, at which time they will fall under the requirements of this revision.

E.    The city of Gunnison shall, at its sole discretion, provide, own, operate, and maintain all meters and metering equipment necessary to measure both the energy supplied by the city of Gunnison and the energy produced by the PV-W system. The city of Gunnison reserves the right to utilize measurements from its meter of the energy produced by the PV-W system for billing the unit’s productions. (Ord. 4-2015 § 2; Ord. 10-2003 § 3; Code 1997 § 12-4-4).


Chapter 12.50 UTILITY REIMBURSEMENT POLICY

Sections:

12.50.010    Statement of policy.

12.50.020    Definitions.

12.50.030    Utility extension specifications.

12.50.040    Reimbursement agreements.


12.50.010 Statement of policy.

A.    The general policy of the city of Gunnison is that development shall pay its own way and that the owners of undeveloped property benefitted by installation of utilities and other public improvements shall contribute financially to the cost of such improvements upon the development of their properties. This policy is designed to achieve fairness in the division of costs of installation of utilities and other public improvements and to protect the taxpayers of the city of Gunnison.

B.    The city council has determined that reimbursement agreements, where agreed to by the initial developer and the city, are an equitable and efficient means of promoting private installation of minor public improvements, particularly for infill of areas in a utility service area that requires utility line extensions. This policy does not apply to special improvement districts or utilities and other public improvements constructed within new developments, be they new subdivisions or PUDs, as defined in GMC 15.160.030(B).

C.    The decision whether to enter into a reimbursement agreement between the city and an initial developer is wholly discretionary on the part of the city and an initial developer, dependent upon the individual circumstances of each development. In any specific development proposal where the city deems it inappropriate to do so, the city may decline to enter into a reimbursement agreement pursuant to this policy or may vary the terms of any reimbursement agreement in a manner that the city deems appropriate to the circumstances. The adoption of this policy does not create an obligation upon the city to enter into a reimbursement agreement with any particular initial developer, nor require any specific terms thereof. The adoption of this policy is not to be interpreted as creating or giving rise to an expectation that a reimbursement agreement will be entered into between the city and an initial developer, nor once such an agreement is entered into, that any sums will be collected by the city for reimbursement to the initial developer except pursuant to the terms of the written reimbursement agreement. (Ord. 1-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 12-5-1).


12.50.020 Definitions.

Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:

A.    “City” means the city of Gunnison, Colorado.

B.    “Connection” means access to a public street, alley, electrical service, irrigation system improvements, or a physical connection via tap to public potable water or sewer service.

C.    “Construction costs” means actual costs borne by the initial developer of master planning, right-of-way acquisition, engineering and design, labor, materials, and all other documented amounts paid for the actual installation of a utility, as well as administrative costs not to exceed five percent of all costs as detailed in a sworn affidavit from the initial developer.

D.    “Initial developer” means a person constructing or contracting for construction of an extension of utilities to provide service to a particular development.

E.    “Person” means natural persons, corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships, or governmental entities.

F.    “Service charge” means a fee to be paid to the city in the amount of $100.00 per connection, to be deducted from reimbursements from subsequent developers, which represents the reasonable costs incurred by the city in administering the reimbursement procedure set forth herein.

G.    “Subsequent developer” means a person seeking to connect to the city’s utilities after completion of a utility extension by an initial developer. Such utility extensions must be eligible items for reimbursement as set forth herein.

H.    “Utilities” means:

1.    Curb and gutter improvements consisting of all concrete work facing driveable public street surfaces as designed and constructed by the initial developer and approved by the city.

2.    Electric distribution facilities, including distribution lines, conduit, poles, switches, fuses, transformers, and related equipment designed by the initial developer and approved and constructed by the city.

3.    Irrigation system improvements, including all open ditches, culverts, sumps, pumping stations, or pressurized mains used to convey nonpotable water for irrigation purposes which are designed and constructed by the initial developer and approved by the city.

4.    Sewer collection facilities, including all public main lines, appurtenances, required lift stations, and forced mains designed and constructed by the initial developer and approved by the city.

5.    Storm drainage facilities, including public main lines, appurtenances, and reservoirs designed and constructed by the initial developer and approved by the city.

6.    Street improvements, including structural fill, road base, and finish surface such as asphalt, concrete, or other all-weather surface, which are designed and constructed by the initial developer and approved by the city.

7.    Water distribution facilities, including all public main lines, appurtenances, and required pump stations designed and constructed by the initial developer and approved by the city. (Ord. 1-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 12-5-2).


12.50.030 Utility extension specifications.

In order to be eligible for reimbursement as set forth herein, all utility extensions shall meet the following requirements:

A.    Utility extension will be engineered by the initial developer.

B.    All utility extensions shall conform to and be in accordance with the city of Gunnison construction standards.

C.    All plans for the utility extension will be approved in advance by the city of Gunnison.

D.    Prior to acceptance by the city, all utility extensions will be inspected and approved by the city of Gunnison.

E.    All utility extensions for which reimbursement is sought, upon their inspection and approval by the city of Gunnison, shall be dedicated by the initial developer to the city and shall be the sole property of the city. (Ord. 1-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 12-5-3).


12.50.040 Reimbursement agreements.

A.    An initial developer who extends utilities through undeveloped areas of the city to extend utility services to the initial developer’s property, and in making such extension, provides capacity therein to serve the undeveloped property and who has paid the entire cost of such construction will be eligible for reimbursement pursuant to a reimbursement agreement as provided herein.

B.    An initial developer who extends utilities as set forth in subsection (A) of this section may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the city, the terms of which are fully described in such agreement, and which agreement is mutually reached between the initial developer and the city. The agreement shall specify, at the minimum, the following terms and conditions:

1.    Total reimbursable costs.

2.    Method of determining reimbursement obligation (formula using lineal or square footage or other method).

3.    Properties subject to reimbursement obligations.

4.    Estimated reimbursement obligations of each affected property.

5.    Service charge of $100.00 per connection.

6.    Nonliability clause for failure to collect or the impossibility of collection by the city.

    In the event such an agreement is entered into, the city is hereby authorized to assess a charge against each subsequent developer whose property is specially benefitted by the utility extension for the proportional cost of the utility extension at the time connection to the utility is granted.

C.    In the event a reimbursement agreement is entered into and reimbursement is collected from a subsequent developer, the city shall reimburse the initial developer to the extent of such collection, after deducting the service charge of $100.00 per connection. All construction costs of the utility extension must be fully paid by the initial developer before the initial developer shall be entitled to any reimbursement. Reimbursement of the initial developer is absolutely contingent upon actual collection from the subsequent developer by the city.

D.    The amount of reimbursement which the city shall assess upon subsequent developers shall be based upon the city’s determination of the reasonable cost of construction, not to exceed the original actual construction costs.

E.    In order to obtain approval of a reimbursement agreement by the city, the initial developer shall first request such an agreement be considered during the pre-application conference or site plan review of the development, and provide to the city’s community development department, within 120 days of completion of the utility extension, six copies of the following material:

1.    Completed bid forms from qualified contractors indicating which contractor was awarded the project, and evidence of a bidding process. All bid forms must contain the description, estimated quantity, and unit price for each utility included in the project.

2.    Satisfactory evidence that all costs in connection with the utility extension have been paid, as detailed in a sworn affidavit of the initial developer, and supported by evidence of payment.

3.    A map which shall include the following information:

a.    Location of the utility extensions.

b.    Names and addresses of the owners of each property specially benefitted by the utility extensions and the amount of those benefits.

c.    Legal descriptions of the properties specially benefitted by the utility extensions.

d.    Such additional information which the city’s department of community development or public works may deem necessary.

F.    During the preparation of the reimbursement agreement, the books and records of the initial developer relating to the construction costs of the utility extensions for which the initial developer seeks reimbursement shall be open to the city for purposes of auditing and verifying the initial developer’s cost.

G.    In the event the information required in subsection (E) of this section is not submitted by the initial developer within 120 days of the date of completion of the improvements, there shall be no reimbursement agreement. In the event the information is submitted within the time allowed, the city will review such information and prepare an appropriate reimbursement agreement to be executed between the initial developer and the city. The reimbursement agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Gunnison County clerk and recorder at the initial developer’s cost. Reimbursement payments shall be made to the city by the subsequent developer for distribution to the initial developer, less the city’s service charge. The initial developer shall have 90 days, from and after the date of mailing of written notification by the city to the initial developer sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address provided to the city by the initial developer, in which to claim the proceeds of reimbursement payments. After such time, the city shall have no further obligation to the initial developer with regard to reimbursement payments referred to in the notice, and such amounts shall become the sole property of the city.

H.    Upon request of the initial developer, which request shall not occur more than once every 12 months, the city shall provide an accounting of each reimbursement payment collected during the proceeding 12 months, the name and address of the remitter of such reimbursement payment, the property address for which the reimbursement was paid, and the current balance of the actual reimbursable costs incurred by the initial developer remaining unreimbursed.

I.    The term of a reimbursement agreement shall not exceed a period of 15 years from the date of its execution and, unless earlier terminated, shall expire when all reimbursable costs, less service charges, have been reimbursed to the initial developer. The city shall not be liable for any portion of the uncollected balance of reimbursable costs. There shall be no collection of reimbursement payments by the city on or after the expiration of the term of the reimbursement agreement. Subsequent developers shall similarly have no obligation to make reimbursement payments after the expiration of the term of the reimbursement agreement.

J.    The right to receive reimbursement pursuant to the reimbursement agreement is personal to the initial developer who executes the reimbursement agreement. Any assignment of such right shall be by written assignment signed and acknowledged by the initial developer, its successor or assign, and physically delivered to the city. (Ord. 1-1998 § 1; Code 1997 § 12-5-4).


Chapter 12.60 GARBAGE COLLECTION AND RECYCLING SYSTEM

Sections:

12.60.010    Definitions.

12.60.020    Owners or occupants of premises to provide for collection and disposal of trash, garbage, ashes, and rubble.

12.60.030    System established.

12.60.040    Residential service.

12.60.050    Residential containers.

12.60.060    Residential service to be provided.

12.60.070    Cost of residential service.

12.60.080    Source separated recycling program.

12.60.090    Commercial service.

12.60.100    Commercial service to be provided.

12.60.110    Cost of commercial service.

12.60.120    Repealed.

12.60.130    Prohibited acts.

12.60.140    Penalty.


12.60.010 Definitions.

Whenever the following words are used in this chapter, they shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Ashes” means all byproducts left of something after it has been burned, wood waste burned in devices commonly called “tepee burners” or “silos,” and other such burners commonly used in the wood products industry, and other high-temperature materials.

B.    “City” means the city of Gunnison, Colorado.

C.    “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Gunnison, Colorado.

D.    “Commercial user” means all tracts or parcels of land with improvements thereon, other than residential users as defined herein.

E.    “Garbage” means all discarded food, animal and vegetable matter, slop, and materials from dwellings, rooming houses, motels, hotels, clubs, restaurants, boarding houses, eating places, shops, and places of business.

F.    “Prohibited items” means motor oil, lubricating oil, transmission fluid, kerosene, lamp oil, diesel fuel, brake fluid, antifreeze, auto batteries, motorcycle and snowmobile batteries, boat batteries, engine degreasers, auto body filler, paint in liquid form, epoxy, varnish, paint thinner, turpentine, mineral spirits, paint stripper with methylene chloride, flourescent light ballasts, broken smoke detectors, railroad ties, treated fence posts, asbestos, swimming pool acid, ceramic glazes, artist oils, acrylics (unless dried), and pesticides or weed killer.

G.    “Recyclable material” means all materials accepted for recycling by the Gunnison County recycling program, as the same may be amended from time to time.

H.    “Residential user” means all tracts or parcels of land within the city improved with at least one, but not more than eight, residential dwelling units.

I.    “Rubble” means large brush, wood, cardboard boxes or parts thereof, large and/or heavy yard trimmings, discarded posts, crates, motor vehicle tires, scrap metal, bedsprings, water heaters, refrigerators, stoves, discarded furniture, and all other household goods or items, and discarded building materials; provided, that rubble shall not include demolition materials resulting from the destruction or remodeling of a building or a major part of any building.

J.    “Trash” means all debris, waste, brush, leaves, grass, weeds, waste paper, boxes, glass, cans, offal, cuttings from trees, lawns, and gardens, and other refuse and waste materials other than garbage or rubble. (Code 1997 § 12-6-1).


12.60.020 Owners or occupants of premises to provide for collection and disposal of trash, garbage, ashes, and rubble.

A.    Every owner or occupant of premises within the city shall provide for the collection and disposal of trash, garbage, ashes, and rubble in accordance with the regulations of this chapter.

B.    Rubble shall not be allowed to accumulate upon public or private property. The regular collection service provided for herein shall not remove rubble. The owner or occupant of any building, house, structure, or land shall have these items removed and properly deposited in an approved disposal area at his own expense within seven days.

C.    Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any person from keeping building materials on the premises for a period up to 30 days before or during a period of active construction, nor shall anything herein contained be construed to prohibit any person from storing any materials used in the operation of a business which is located in a zone allowing such use to be carried on; provided, however, that such materials must at all times be stored in a neat and orderly manner so as not to constitute unsafe, unhealthful, or unsightly conditions. (Code 1997 § 12-6-2).


12.60.030 System established.

A garbage, trash, and recyclable material collection and disposal system for the city is hereby established, which shall be maintained and operated within the city and under the direction of the officials of the city. (Code 1997 § 12-6-3).


12.60.040 Residential service.

All owners or occupants of premises within the city which are encompassed by the definition of residential users are hereby required to use the garbage and trash collection and disposal system established herein. (Code 1997 § 12-6-4).


12.60.050 Residential containers.

Garbage and trash from residential users shall be deposited in lidded containers in serviceable condition. Said containers shall have a capacity not exceeding 35 gallons. Brush and cuttings from trees shall be cut in lengths not to exceed four feet in length and be securely bundled. Bundles shall not exceed a weight of 40 pounds. (Code 1997 § 12-6-5).


12.60.060 Residential service to be provided.

The city’s system of garbage and trash collection and disposal for residential users shall consist of weekly pickup and disposal of all garbage and trash properly deposited into the system in accordance with the regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. Each residential user of the system, in consideration of the charge made therefor by the city, shall be entitled to deposit up to three 35-gallon containers, or the equivalent thereof, per week. (Code 1997 § 12-6-6).


12.60.070 Cost of residential service.

The property owners or occupants of premises within the city encompassed within the definition of residential users shall be assessed and pay a monthly charge for the use of the system set by the city manager at a rate equivalent to the cost of providing such service, after advising the city council of such rates. (Code 1997 § 12-6-7).


12.60.080 Source separated recycling program.

Each property owner or occupant of premises within the city encompassed within the definition of residential user shall be provided with three bins for his use in depositing recyclable materials. The city shall provide weekly pickup of recyclable material for disposal at the Gunnison County recycling program.

Replacement bins shall be available pursuant to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the city manager. (Code 1997 § 12-6-8).


12.60.090 Commercial service.

All owners or occupants of premises within the city encompassed within the definition of commercial users may, but are not required to, use the garbage and trash removal and disposal system established hereby. Garbage and trash of commercial users shall be deposited in lidded containers having a capacity not exceeding 35 gallons or in trash dumpsters to be supplied by the city, in accordance with a contract for such service, conforming to the requirements and specifications of the city. (Code 1997 § 12-6-9).


12.60.100 Commercial service to be provided.

The service to be provided to commercial users shall be the subject of individual contract, based on the needs of the commercial user, entered into by and between the city manager and each individual commercial user. (Code 1997 § 12-6-10).


12.60.110 Cost of commercial service.

The owner or occupant of premises requesting commercial services from the city shall be assessed and pay a monthly charge for collection and disposal of garbage and trash in accordance with the individual contract of service between the city and such commercial user. (Code 1997 § 12-6-11).


12.60.120 Payment of charges – When due – Delinquencies – Lien.

Repealed by Ord. 9-2015. (Code 1997 § 12-6-12).


12.60.130 Prohibited acts.

A.    Garbage or trash containers found to be in an unsanitary condition shall be tagged with a red tag by the city. Within 72 hours after a garbage or trash container has been tagged, the owner or occupant of the premises and users of the containers shall cause them to be cleaned and put in a sanitary condition. Failure to do so shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.

B.    Ashes shall be deposited in a separate metal container clearly marked in three-inch letters or greater “Caution – Ashes.” No person shall deposit or permit or allow to be deposited any ashes or other hot materials in any trash or garbage container except as herein set forth.

C.    No person shall deposit or permit or allow to be deposited any prohibited items for disposal by the city, as defined herein.

D.    It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any garbage or other materials subject to decay, other than leaves or grass, excepting in a container meeting the requirements of this chapter.

E.    It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any ashes, trash, or rubble in a manner that it can be blown away by the wind within the city.

F.    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit another to place any garbage or trash in any container used in the city’s garbage and trash collection disposal system without the permission of the person financially responsible for the services provided to such container. (Code 1997 § 12-6-13).


12.60.140 Penalty.

Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of a violation of any of the prohibited acts set forth in this chapter shall be fined or imprisoned in accordance with Chapter 4.20 GMC, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Code 1997 § 12-6-14).


Chapter 12.70 BACKFLOW PREVENTION STANDARDS

Sections:

12.70.010    Purpose.

12.70.020    Authority.

12.70.030    Applicability.

12.70.040    Definitions.

12.70.050    Requirements.

12.70.060    Inspection, testing and repair.

12.70.070    Reporting and recordkeeping.

12.70.080    Right of entry.

12.70.090    Compliance.

12.70.100    Violations and penalties.

12.70.110    Conflict with other codes.


12.70.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the city’s water system from contaminants or pollutants that could enter the distribution system by backflow from a customer’s water supply system through the service connection. (Ord. 5-2017 § 1).


12.70.020 Authority.

The authority to implement this program is contained in the following statutes, legislation, regulations and acts:

– Article 1-114 and Article 1-114.1 of Title 25 of the Colorado Revised Statutes

– Section 39 of 5 CCR 1002-11, Colorado Primary Drinking Water Regulations

– Colorado Plumbing Code

The city shall have the authority to survey all service connections within the distribution system to determine if the connection is a cross-connection.

The city shall have the authority to control all service connections within the distribution system if the connection is a cross-connection.

The city may control any service connections within the distribution system in lieu of a survey as long as the service connection is controlled with an air gap or reduced pressure zone backflow prevention assembly.

The city may collect fees for the administration of this program.

The city shall maintain records of cross-connection surveys and the installation, testing and repair of all backflow prevention assemblies installed for containment and containment by isolation purposes.

Except as otherwise provided herein, the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 5-2017 § 2).


12.70.030 Applicability.

This chapter applies to all commercial, industrial and multifamily residential service connections within the city’s water system and to any persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city’s water system. This chapter does not apply to single-family residential service connections unless the city becomes aware of a cross-connection at the single-family connection. (Ord. 5-2017 § 3).


12.70.040 Definitions.

“Active date” means the first day that a backflow prevention assembly or backflow prevention method is used to control a cross-connection in each calendar year.

“Air gap” is a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel installed in accordance with standard AMSE A112.1.2.

“Backflow” means the undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the city’s water distribution system from any source or sources other than its intended source.

“Backflow contamination event” means backflow into the city’s water system from an uncontrolled cross-connection such that the water quality no longer meets the Colorado Primary Drinking Water Regulations or presents an immediate health and/or safety risk to the public.

“Backflow prevention assembly” means any mechanical assembly installed at a water service line or at a plumbing fixture to prevent a backflow contamination event; provided, that the mechanical assembly is appropriate for the identified contaminant at the cross-connection and is an in-line field-testable assembly.

“Backflow prevention method” means any method and/or nontestable device installed at a water service line or at a plumbing fixture to prevent a backflow contamination event; provided, that the method or nontestable device is appropriate for the identified contaminant at the cross-connection.

“Certified cross-connection control technician” means a person who possesses a valid backflow prevention assembly tester certification from one of the following approved organizations: American Society of Sanitary Engineering (ASSE) or the American Backflow Prevention Association (ABPA). If a certification has expired, the certification is invalid.

“City’s water supply system” means the city’s water distribution system, piping, connection fittings, valves and appurtenances within a building, structure, or premises. Water supply systems are also referred to commonly as premises plumbing systems.

“Containment” means the installation of a backflow prevention assembly or a backflow prevention method at any connection to the city’s water system that supplies an auxiliary water system, location, facility, or area such that backflow from a cross-connection into the city’s water system is prevented.

“Containment by isolation” means the installation of backflow prevention assemblies or backflow prevention methods at all cross-connections identified within a customer’s water system such that backflow from a cross-connection into the public water system is prevented.

“Controlled” means having a properly installed, maintained, and tested or inspected backflow prevention assembly or backflow prevention method that prevents backflow through a cross-connection.

“Cross-connection” means any connection that could allow any water, fluid, or gas, such that the water quality could present an unacceptable health and/or safety risk to the public, to flow from any pipe, plumbing fixture, or a customer’s water system into a public water system’s distribution system or any other part of the city’s water system through backflow.

“Multifamily” means a single residential connection to the city’s water distribution system from which two or more separate dwelling units are supplied water.

“Single-family” means a single dwelling which is occupied by a single family and is supplied by a separate service line; or a single dwelling comprised of multiple living units where each living unit is supplied by a separate service line.

“Uncontrolled” means not having a properly installed and maintained and tested or inspected backflow prevention assembly or backflow prevention method, or the backflow prevention assembly or backflow prevention method does not prevent backflow through a cross-connection. (Ord. 5-2017 § 4).


12.70.050 Requirements.

A.    Commercial, industrial, and multifamily service connections shall be subject to a survey for cross-connections. If a cross-connection has been identified, an appropriate backflow prevention assembly and/or method shall be installed at the customer’s water service connection within 120 days of its discovery. The assembly shall be installed downstream of the water meter or as close to that location as deemed practical by the city. If the assembly or method cannot be installed within 120 days, the city must take action to control or remove the cross-connection, suspend service to the cross-connection or receive an alternative compliance schedule from the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.

B.    In no case shall it be permissible to have connections or tees between the meter and the containment backflow prevention assembly.

C.    In instances where a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer cannot be installed, the owner must install approved backflow prevention devices or methods at all cross-connections within the owner’s plumbing system.

D.    Backflow prevention assemblies and methods shall be installed in a location which provides access for maintenance, testing and repair.

E.    Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall not be installed in a manner subject to flooding.

F.    Provisions shall be made to provide adequate drainage from the discharge of water from reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies. Such discharge shall be conveyed in a manner which does not impact waters of the state.

G.    All assemblies and devices shall be protected to prevent freezing. Those assemblies and methods used for seasonal services may be removed in lieu of being protected from freezing. The devices must be reinstalled and then tested by a certified cross-connection control technician prior to the service being activated.

H.    Where a backflow prevention assembly or method is installed on the city’s water supply system using storage water heating equipment such that thermal expansion causes an increase in pressure, a device for controlling pressure shall be installed.

I.    All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation and on an annual schedule thereafter. Such tests must be conducted by a certified cross-connection control technician.

J.    The city shall require inspection, testing, maintenance and as needed repairs and replacement of all backflow prevention assemblies and methods, and of all required installations within the owner’s plumbing system in the cases where containment, assemblies and/or methods cannot be installed.

K.    All costs for design, installation, maintenance, testing and as needed repair and replacement are borne by the customer. 

L.    No grandfather clauses exist except for fire sprinkler systems where the installation of a backflow prevention assembly or method will comprise the integrity of the fire sprinkler system.

M.    For new buildings, all building plans must be submitted to the city’s building department and public works department and approved prior to the issuance of water service. Building plans must show:

1.    Water service type, size and location;

2.    Meter size and location;

3.    Backflow prevention assembly size, type and location; and

4.    Fire sprinkler system(s) service line, size and type of backflow prevention assembly.

a.    All fire sprinkling lines shall have a minimum protection of an approved double check valve assembly for containment of the system.

b.    All glycol (ethylene or propylene), or antifreeze systems shall have an approved reduced pressure principle backflow preventer for containment.

c.    Dry fire systems shall have an approved double check valve assembly installed upstream of the air pressure valve.

d.    In cases where the installation of a backflow prevention assembly or method will compromise the integrity of the fire sprinkler system the city will not require the backflow protection. The city will measure chlorine residual at the service connection once a month and perform periodic bacteriological testing at the site. If the city suspects water quality issues, the city will evaluate the practicability of requiring that the fire sprinkler system be flushed periodically. (Ord. 5-2017 § 5).


12.70.060 Inspection, testing and repair.

A.    Backflow prevention devices or methods shall be tested by a certified cross-connection control technician upon installation and tested at least annually thereafter. The tests shall be made at the expense of the customer.

B.    Any backflow prevention devices or methods that are nontestable shall be inspected at least annually by a certified cross-connection control technician. The inspections shall be made at the expense of the customer.

C.    As necessary, backflow prevention devices shall be repaired and retested or replaced and tested at the expense of the customer whenever the devices are found to be defective.

D.    Testing gauges shall be tested and calibrated for accuracy at least once annually. (Ord. 5-2017 § 6).


12.70.070 Reporting and recordkeeping.

A.    Copies of records of test reports, repairs and retests, and replacements shall be kept by the customer for a minimum of three years.

B.    Copies of records of test reports, repairs and retests shall be submitted to the city by mail, facsimile or e-mail by the testing company or testing technician.

C.    Information on test reports shall include, but may not be limited to:

1.    Assembly or method type;

2.    Assembly or method location;

3.    Assembly make, model and serial number;

4.    Assembly size;

5.    Test date;

6.    Test results including all results that would justify a pass or fail outcome;

7.    Certified cross-connection control technical certification agency;

8.    Technician’s certification expiration date;

9.    Test kit manufacturer, model and serial number; and

10.    Test kit calibration date. (Ord. 5-2017 § 7).


12.70.080 Right of entry.

A properly credentialed representative of the city shall have the right of entry to survey any and all buildings and premises for the presence of cross-connections for possible contamination risk and for determining compliance with this section. This right of entry shall be a condition of water service in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of customers throughout the city’s distribution system. (Ord. 5-2017 § 8).


12.70.090 Compliance.

A.    Customers shall cooperate with the installation, inspection, testing, maintenance, and as-needed repair and replacement of backflow prevention assemblies and with the survey process. For any identified uncontrolled cross-connections, the city shall complete one of the following actions within 120 days of its discovery:

1.    Control the cross-connection;

2.    Remove the cross-connection; and

3.    Suspend service to the cross-connection.

B.    The city shall give notice in writing to any owner whose plumbing system has been found to present a risk to the city’s water distribution system through an uncontrolled cross-connection. The notice and order shall state that the owner must install a backflow prevention assembly or method at each service connection to the owner’s premises to contain the water service. The notice and order will give a date by which the owner must comply with the order.

C.    In instances where a backflow prevention assembly or method cannot be installed, the owner must install approved backflow prevention devices or methods at all cross-connections within the owner’s water supply system. The notice and order will give a date by which the owner must comply with the order. (Ord. 5-2017 § 9).


12.70.100 Violations and penalties.

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in all applicable statutes, laws, and regulations. (Ord. 5-2017 § 10).


12.70.110 Conflict with other codes.

If a dispute or conflict arises between the Colorado Plumbing Code as adopted herein, and any plumbing, mechanical, building, electrical, fire or other code adopted by the city or state, then the most stringent provisions of each respective code shall prevail. (Ord. 5-2017 § 11).


Title 13 (Reserved)


Title 14 TECHNICAL CODES

Chapters:

14.10    Building Code

14.20    Mechanical Code

14.30    Fire Code

14.40    Property Maintenance Code

14.50    Repealed

14.60    Flood Damage Prevention Regulations


Chapter 14.10 BUILDING CODE

Sections:

14.10.010    Short title.

14.10.020    Adoption.

14.10.030    Amendments.

14.10.040    Penalties.

14.10.050    Appeal.


14.10.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be cited as the “building code of the city of Gunnison.” (Ord. 6-2017 § 2).


14.10.020 Adoption.

The city of Gunnison hereby adopts by reference the “International Building Code,” 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters E, I, J, and the Errata to the International Building Code, Third Printing, October 2015, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; and providing the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and the “International Residential Code,” 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters E, F, G, H, J, L, R, S, U, and the Errata to the International Residential Code, Second Printing, January 2016, regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal, and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; the “International Existing Building Code,” 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A and B, Fifth Printing, November 2015, regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as provided herein; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and the “International Energy Conservation Code,” 2015 Edition, Third Printing, January 2016, regulating and governing energy-efficient building envelopes and installation of energy-efficient mechanical, lighting, and power systems as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and the “International Mechanical Code,” 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapter A, Third Printing, November 2015, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, and use or maintenance of mechanical systems; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and the “International Fuel Gas Code,” 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, and D, Fourth Printing, January 2016, regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and the “International Fire Code,” 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters B, C, and D, Fourth Printing, January 2016, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion   hazards   arising   from   the   storage,   handling,   and   use   of   hazardous substances, materials, and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and the “International Property Maintenance Code,” 2015 Edition, Fourth Printing, December 2015, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. All of said codes are published by International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. (Ord. 6-2017 § 2).


14.10.030 Amendments.

The following amendments to the foregoing codes are hereby adopted:

INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE

CHAPTER 1

ADMINISTRATION

Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the “Building Code of the City of Gunnison,” shall be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this Code.”

Section 101.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 101.4 Referenced Codes. The other Codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.9 and referenced elsewhere in this Code shall be considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.

Section 101.4.1 Residential. The provisions of the International Residential Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one and two family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures.

Section 101.4.2 Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repairs, and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems.

Section 101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Colorado, shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs, and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances, where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of medical gas systems.

Section 101.4.4 Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in the Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories.

Section 101.4.5 Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the State of Colorado, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto.

Section 101.4.6 Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.

Section 101.4.7 Existing Buildings. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings.

Section 101.4.8 Property Maintenance. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall apply to existing structures and their premises, providing standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures.

Section 101.4.9 Fire Prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code as amended by the City of Gunnison, shall apply to all matters governing fire safety.

Section 105.2, Work Exempt from Permit, is hereby amended by adding the following Exceptions 14 and 15:

14. Re-roofing without alteration of roof deck structure.

15. Re-siding without alteration of wall structure.

Section 105.5, Expiration, is hereby amended by adding a new subsection 105.5.1 to read as follows:

Section 105.5.1 Expired Work. All below grade excavation done in advance of construction shall be filled and made safe within thirty (30) days of an abandoned project. Where construction has advanced beyond excavation, all foundation work and above grade construction shall be secured against the weather and the construction site shall be otherwise returned to that condition as existed before the permit was issued.

Section 109.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 109.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. For buildings, structures, additions, and/or alterations requiring a permit, a fee shall be determined in accordance with the attached permit fee schedule, Appendix L.

Section 109.3 is hereby amended to read as follows and by adding a new subsection 109.3.1:

Section 109.3 Building Permit Valuations. The Building Valuation Data Table of Square Foot Construction Costs, as published in the Building Safety Journal, by the International Code Council Inc., shall set the valuation for all site built buildings, structures, and additions. Valuation for any factory-built housing or factory-built non-residential unit shall be the actual cost, as those terms are defined in C.R.S. 24-32-703, plus the actual cost of the foundation. For all other construction subject to the provisions of this Code, the applicant shall provide an estimated project value at the time of application. The determination of value or valuation shall include the actual value of all work to be performed, including materials, labor, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and permanent systems, for which the permit is being issued.

If, in the opinion of the Building Official, the valuation is under/over-estimated on the application, a final determination of value shall be made by the Building Official.

Section 109.3.1 Plan Review Fees. When submittal documents are required by Section 107.1, a plan review fee shall be paid. Said plan review fee shall be 65 percent (65%) of the building permit fee for all multi-family and commercial projects and 30 percent (30%) of the building permit fee for projects that fall under the International Residential Code. If an applicant applies for a building permit for a building that falls under the International Residential Code, of which the building plans are identical to the plans of a building for which a plan review fee has been paid by the applicant within the prior twelve months, then in that event, the plan review fee for such identical building shall be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). When the submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 107.3.4.1, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate shown in the permit fee schedule Appendix L.

Section 109.4, Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance, is hereby amended by adding the following at the end of the last sentence:

The amount of the fee will be equal to the permit fee.

Section 109.6 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 109.6 Fee Refunds. The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which has been paid or collected. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 90 percent (90%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 90 percent (90%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

Section 109, Fees, is hereby amended by adding the following new subsection 109.7:

Section 109.7 Re-Inspection. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when correction called for is not made.

Section 110.3.5, Lath, Gypsum Board, and Gypsum Panel Product Inspection, is hereby amended to delete the exception.

Section 110.5, Inspection Requests, is hereby amended by adding the following at the end of the last sentence:

Inspection requests shall be made twenty-four (24) hours in advance.

Section 114.3, Prosecution of Violation, is hereby amended by adding the following at the end of the last sentence:

Violation penalties shall include payment of investigation fees. Such fees shall include all costs incurred by the City of Gunnison in investigating any violation of the building codes, including reasonable attorney fees.

CHAPTER 9

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

Section 903.2.8 Group R, is hereby amended by adding the following exception:

Exception: Single Family Dwellings as defined in the 2015 International Residential Code.

CHAPTER 15

ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES

Section 1503.4, Roof Drainage, is hereby amended by adding the following new subsection 1503.4.4:

Section 1503.4.4 Public and Private Property. To the greatest extent practicable, water, snow, or ice draining from a roof shall not be allowed to flow or shed over or onto public or private property or rights-of-way or any other area deemed to be a safety hazard.

CHAPTER 18

FOUNDATIONS AND RETAINING WALLS

Section 1805.1.2.1, Flood Hazard Areas, is hereby amended so that the exception therein reads as follows:

Exception: Under-floor spaces of Group R-1 through Group R-4 buildings that meet requirements of FEMA/FIA-TB-11.

PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE APPENDIX L  

	TOTAL VALUATION	FEE

	$1.00 to $500.00	$24.00

	$501.00 to $2,000.00	$24.00 for the first $500.00 plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00

	$2,001.00 to $40,000.00	$69.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $11.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $40,000.00 

	$40,001.00 to $100,000.00	$487.00 for the first $40,000.00 plus $9.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00

	$100,001.00 to $500,000.00	$1,027 for the first $100,000.00 plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00

	$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00	$3827.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00.

	$1,000,001.00 to $5,000,000.00	$6,327.00 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $5,000,000.00.

	$5,000,001.00 and over	$18,327.00 for the first $5,000,000.00 plus $1.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof.

Other Inspections and Fees:

1.    Inspections outside of normal business hours (two hours minimum charge)    $42.00 per hr.*

2.    Re-inspection fees assessed under provisions of Section 109.7 2009 IBC    $42.00 per hr.*

3.    Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated (one hour minimum charge)    $42.00 per hr.*

4.    Additional plan review required by revisions to plans (one hour minimum charge)    $42.00 per hr.*

5.    For use of outside consultants for plan review, inspections, or both    Actual costs**

*    Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is greatest. This cost shall include the supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the employees involved.

**    Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs

City of Gunnison Use Tax Formula = Valuation of project x 50% x .04 = Use Tax

INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE

CHAPTER 1

ADMINISTRATION

Section R101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the “Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings of the City of Gunnison”, shall be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this Code”.

Section R102.4, Referenced Codes and Standards, is hereby amended by the addition of a second exception to read as follows:

Exception: The State of Colorado shall provide electrical and plumbing inspection services until appropriate notice is provided to the State of Colorado Plumbing and Electrical Boards that City of Gunnison will perform either of the inspection services at a specified date.

Section R105.2, Work Exempt from Permit (Building), subsections 1 and 10 are hereby amended to read as follows:

1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, greenhouses, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet.

10. Decks, platforms, walkways, etc., that measure 30 inches or less from the standing surface to the adjacent grade.

Section R105.2, Work Exempt from Permit (Building), is hereby amended by adding the following subsections:

11. Re-roofing without alteration of roof deck structure.

12. Re-siding without alteration of wall structure.

Section R108.2 is hereby amended to read as follows and by adding a new subsection 108.2.1:

Section R108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. On buildings, structures, additions, and/or alterations requiring a permit, a fee shall be determined in accordance with the International Building Code, Sections 109.1, 109.2, 109.3, 109.4, and 109.5 as amended and adopted by the City of Gunnison.

Section R108.2.1 Calculation of Residential Floor Area. Calculation of square footage used to determine the valuation of Residential buildings, structures, and additions, shall be determined by the floor area within and including the perimeter of the exterior walls up to a thickness of six inches, without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns, or other features. Vent shafts, courts, and any additional exterior wall thickness beyond that first six inches shall not be considered in the square foot calculations.

Section R108.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section R108.5 Fee Refunds. The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 90 percent (90%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 90 percent (90%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

Section R109.1.1, Foundation Inspection, is hereby amended so that the last sentence of the section reads as follows:

The foundation inspection shall include all slabs except non-supporting unheated exterior walkways, patios and driveways.

CHAPTER 3

BUILDING PLANNING

Table R301.2(1) is hereby amended to add the following values in the spaces provided:

	Ground Snow Load:	57 lbs./sq. ft.

	Wind Speed:	90 mph, 3 sec. gust

	Seismic Design Category:	B

	Weathering:	Severe

	Frost Line Depth:	30 inches

	Termites:	Slight

	Decay:	Slight

	Winter Design Temp:	-20 degrees F

	Ice Barrier Underlayment Required:	In roof valleys and eaves

	Flood Hazards:	FIRM May 16, 2013

	Air Freezing Index:	4,000 (BF/days)

	Mean Annual Temp:	40 degrees F

Section R303.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section R303.3 Bathrooms. Bathrooms, water closet compartments, and other similar rooms shall be provided with mechanical ventilation that exhausts directly to the outside. The minimum ventilation rates shall be 50 cubic feet per minute (24L/s) for intermittent ventilation or 20 cubic feet per minute (10 L/s) for continuous ventilation.

Section R303.3, Bathrooms, is hereby amended so that the exception therein reads as follows:

Exception: Bathrooms that contain only a water closet, lavatory, or combination thereof and similar rooms may be ventilated with an approved mechanical re-circulating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air.

Section R311.2, Egress Door, is hereby amended by adding the following to the end of the last sentence:

Egress doors shall be provided with protection from ice and snow accumulation.

Section R312.1.3, Opening Limitations, is hereby amended by adding a third exception, to read as follows:

Exception 3. Cable, rope or similar type materials that do not maintain the rigidity necessary to meet the requirements of Section R312.1.3 are prohibited.

Section R313, Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, is hereby amended by deleting Sections R313.2 and R313.2.1 and re-wording Sections R313.1 and R313.1.1 to read as follows:

Section R313.1 Townhouse and two-family dwelling automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses and two-family dwellings.

Exception. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required where additions and alterations are made to existing townhouses and two-family dwellings that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.

Section R313.1.1 Design and installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems for townhouses and two-family dwellings shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section P2904 or NFPA 13D.

CHAPTER 11 [RE]

ENERGY EFFICENCY

Section N1101.14, Certificate, is hereby deleted in its entirety.

CHAPTER 24

FUEL GAS

Section G2406.2, Prohibited Locations, is hereby amended by deletion of Exceptions numbered 3 and 4.

Section G2425.8, Appliances Not Required to be Vented, is hereby amended by deletion of item number 7. 

Section G2445, Unvented Room Heaters, is hereby amended in its entirety to read as follows: 

Section G2445.1 Prohibited. Unvented room heaters are prohibited in all locations throughout all occupancies. 

INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE

CHAPTER 1

ADMINISTRATION

Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the “Energy Conservation Code of the City of Gunnison”, shall be cited as such and referred to herein as “this Code”.

CHAPTER 4 [CE]

COMMERCIAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY

Section C408.2, Mechanical Systems and Service Water-Heating Systems Commissioning and Completion Requirements, is hereby amended by changing Exception 1 to read as follows:

Section C408.2, Exception 1, Mechanical systems and service water heater systems in buildings where the total mechanical equipment capacity is less than 480,000 Btu/h (140.7 Kw) cooling capacity or 600,000 Btu/h (175.8 Kw) combined service-water heating and space-heating capacity. 

CHAPTER 4 [RE]

RESIDENTIAL ENERGY EFFICENCY

Section R401.3, Certificate, is hereby deleted in its entirety. (Ord. 6-2017 § 2).


14.10.040 Penalties.

Penalties for the violation of the terms of this chapter are as set forth in GMC 4.20.010. (Ord. 3-2010 § 2; Code 1997 § 14-1-4).


14.10.050 Appeal.

Chapter 2.80 GMC sets forth the appeal procedures. (Ord. 3-2010 § 2; Code 1997 § 14-1-5).


Chapter 14.20 MECHANICAL CODE

Sections:

14.20.010    Short title.

14.20.020    Adoption.

14.20.030    Amendments.

14.20.040    Penalties.

14.20.050    Appeal.


14.20.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be cited as the “mechanical code of the city of Gunnison.” (Ord. 3-2010 § 3; Code 1997 § 14-2-1).


14.20.020 Adoption.

The city of Gunnison hereby adopts by reference the “International Mechanical Code,” 2009 Edition, including Appendix Chapter A, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, and use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and the “International Fuel Gas Code,” 2009 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, and D, regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. Said codes are published by International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. (Ord. 3-2010 § 3; Code 1997 § 14-2-2).


14.20.030 Amendments.

The following amendments to the foregoing codes are hereby adopted:

INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE

CHAPTER 1

ADMINISTRATION

Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the “Mechanical Code of the City of Gunnison”, shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this Code”.

Section 106.5.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as set forth in the Mechanical/Fuel Gas Code fee schedule, attached hereto.

Section 106.5.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 106.5.3 Fee Refunds. The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee hereunder which has been paid or collected. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 90 percent (90%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 90 percent (90%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE

CHAPTER 1

ADMINISTRATION

Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the “Fuel Gas Code of the City of Gunnison”, shall be cited as such and referred to herein as “this Code”.

Section 106.5.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule. The fees for work shall be as set forth in the Mechanical/Fuel Gas Code fee schedule, attached hereto.

Section 106.6.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee hereunder which has been paid or collected. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 90 percent (90%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this Code. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 90 percent (90%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

Section 621, Unvented Room Heaters, is hereby amended by deletion of the entire section.

MECHANICAL/ FUEL GAS CODE 

FEE SCHEDULE  

	PERMIT REQUIRED	FEE

	For the issuance of each permit	$22.00

	For issuance of each supplemental permit for which the original permit has not expired	$6.50

	Note: the fees for the following items do not include the permit issuance fee	 

	Furnaces:

For the installation or relocation of each forced air or gravity type furnace or burner, including ducts and vents attached to such appliance	$13.25

	For the installation or relocation of each suspended heater, recessed wall heater or floor mounted unit heater	$13.25

	Appliance Vents:

For the installation, relocation, or replacement of each appliance vent installed and not included in an appliance permit	$6.50

	Repairs or Additions:

For the repair of, alteration of, or addition to each heating appliance, refrigeration unit, cooling unit, absorption unit, or systems comprised of these units, including installation of controls regulated by the Mechanical and/or Fuel Gas Codes	$12.25

	Boilers, Hot Water Heaters and Compressors:

For the installation or relocation of boilers, hot water heaters and compressors	$16.50

	Air Handler Equipment:

For the installation or relocation of each air handler	$16.50

	Evaporative Cooler:

For the installation or relocation of each evaporative cooler (except portable units)	$9.50

	Ventilation and Exhaust:

For the installation or relocation of each fan connected to a single duct	$6.50

	For each ventilation or exhaust system which is not part of a heating or air conditioning system authorized by a permit	$9.50

	For the installation or relocation of each hood which is served by mechanical exhaust, including duct work	$9.50

	Solid Fuel Burning Device:

For the installation or relocation of any chimney connected appliance that burns solid fuel for purposes of heating, cooking, or both	$20.00

	Miscellaneous:

For each appliance or piece of equipment regulated by the Mechanical and/or Fuel Gas Codes not otherwise listed in this fee schedule	$9.50

	Other Inspections and Fees:

Inspections outside of normal business hours (one hour minimum)	$42.00/hr

	Re-inspection fees pursuant to the provisions of the Mechanical and/or Fuel Gas Codes (one hour minimum)	$42.00/hr

(Ord. 6-2017 § 2).


14.20.040 Penalties.

Penalties for the violation of the terms of this chapter are as set forth in GMC 4.20.010. (Ord. 3-2010 § 3; Code 1997 § 14-2-4).


14.20.050 Appeal.

Chapter 2.80 GMC sets forth the appeal procedures. (Ord. 3-2010 § 3; Code 1997 § 14-2-5).


Chapter 14.30 FIRE CODE

Sections:

14.30.010    Short title.

14.30.020    Adoption.

14.30.030    Amendments.

14.30.040    Penalties.

14.30.050    Appeal.


14.30.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be cited as the “fire code of the city of Gunnison.” (Ord. 3-2010 § 4; Code 1997 § 14-3-1).


14.30.020 Adoption.

The city of Gunnison hereby adopts by reference the “International Fire Code,” 2009 Edition, including Appendix Chapters B, C, and D, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials, and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. Said code is published by International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. (Ord. 3-2010 § 4; Code 1997 § 14-3-2).


14.30.030 Amendments.

The following amendments to the foregoing code are hereby adopted:

INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE

CHAPTER 1

ADMINISTRATION

Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the “Fire Code of the City of Gunnison”, shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this Code”.

Section 108.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 108.1 Board of Appeals. Chapter 2, Article 8, entitled “Building Board of Appeals” of the City Code of the City of Gunnison sets forth the appeals procedure.

Section 109.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 109.3 Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used under the provisions of this Code, shall be liable for such violation. Penalties for violation of the terms of this ordinance are as set forth in Chapter 4, Article 2, of the City Code of the City of Gunnison.

Section 111.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 111.4 Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for such violation. Penalties for violation of the terms of this ordinance are as set forth in Chapter 4, Article 2, of the City Code of the City of Gunnison.

CHAPTER 2

DEFINITIONS

The definition of the Fire Code Official contained in Section 202 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Fire Code Official; The Fire Marshal or a duly authorized representative.

CHAPTER 6

BUILDING SERVICES AND SYSTEMS

Section 605.3 is hereby amended by the addition of subsection 605.3.2 to read as follows:

Section 605.3.2 Outside Disconnect Device. All electrical services inside the corporate boundaries of the City of Gunnison, Colorado, shall be equipped with an outside moisture resistant service disconnect device, adjacent to and following the meter, so situated as to be readily accessible and easily operable by fire personnel or for other emergency uses.

CHAPTER 8

INTERIOR FINISH, DECORATIVE MATERIALS, AND FURNISHINGS

Section 806.1.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 806.1.1 Restricted Occupancies. Natural cut trees shall be prohibited in Group E, I-1, I-2, I-3, and I-4 occupancies.

CHAPTER 9

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

Section 903.2.8, Group R, is hereby amended by adding the following exception:

Exception: Single Family Dwellings as defined in the 2015 International Residential Code.

CHAPTER 55

CRYOGENIC FLUIDS

Section 5504.3.1.1 is hereby amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 

Section 5504.3.1.1 Stationary Containers. The storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in permanent outside above ground containers is prohibited in all zone districts within the City of Gunnison except within (I) industrial zone districts as a conditional use. 

CHAPTER 57

FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS

Section 3404.2.9.6.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 5704.2.9.6.1 Location Where Above-Ground Tanks Are Prohibited. Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in all zone districts within the City of Gunnison, Colorado, except within (I) industrial zone districts as a conditional use. 

Exceptions:

(1) Existing outside above-ground fuel oil tanks used for heating may remain in any zone district within the City of Gunnison, Colorado, if the capacity or aggregate capacity does not exceed 500 gallons. 

(2) Bulk plants may be located in the (I) industrial zone districts within the City of Gunnison, Colorado, as a conditional use. 

Section 5706.2.4.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 5706.2.4.4. Location Where Above-Ground Tanks Are Prohibited. Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited in all zone districts within the City of Gunnison, Colorado, except within (I) industrial zone districts as a conditional use.

Exceptions:

(1) Existing outside above-ground fuel oil tanks used for heating may remain in any zone district within the City of Gunnison, Colorado, if the capacity or aggregate capacity does not exceed 500 gallons.

(2) Bulk plants may be located in the (I) industrial zone districts within the City of Gunnison, Colorado, as a conditional use. 

CHAPTER 58

FLAMMABLE GASES AND FLAMMABLE CRYOGENIC FLUIDS

Section 5806.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 5806.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited in all zone districts within the City of Gunnison, Colorado, except within (I) Industrial zone districts as conditional use.

CHAPTER 61

LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES

Section 6104.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 6104.2. Maximum Capacity Within Established Limits. Storage of liquefied petroleum gas with an aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of two thousand (2,000) gallons.

Exception: Bulk plants or plants of similar nature may be located in the (I) Industrial zone districts as a conditional use.

(Ord. 6-2017 § 2).


14.30.040 Penalties.

Penalties for the violation of the terms of this chapter are as set forth in GMC 4.20.010. (Ord. 3-2010 § 4; Code 1997 § 14-3-4).


14.30.050 Appeal.

Chapter 2.80 GMC sets forth the appeal procedures. (Ord. 3-2010 § 4; Code 1997 § 14-3-5).


Chapter 14.40 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE

Sections:

14.40.010    Short title.

14.40.020    Adoption.

14.40.030    Amendments.

14.40.040    Penalties.

14.40.050    Appeal.


14.40.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be cited as the “property maintenance code of the city of Gunnison.” (Ord. 3-2010 § 5; Code 1997 § 14-4-1).


14.40.020 Adoption.

The city of Gunnison hereby adopts by reference the “International Property Maintenance Code,” 2009 Edition, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. Said code is published by International Code Council, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, IL 60478-5795. (Ord. 3-2010 § 5; Code 1997 § 14-4-2).


14.40.030 Amendments.

INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE

CHAPTER 1

ADMINISTRATION

Section 101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the “Property Maintenance Code of the City of Gunnison”, shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this Code”.

Section 103.5 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 103.5. Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this Code shall be assessed based on an hourly charge as set forth in the permit fee schedule Appendix L (minimum charge one hour) or the total actual cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is greatest. This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the employees involved.

CHAPTER 3

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Section 304.14, Insect Screens, is hereby amended by the addition of the following dates in the spaces provided:

May 1 to October 15.

CHAPTER 4

LIGHT, VENTILATION, AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS

Section 403.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 403.2 Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms. Bathrooms, water closet compartments, and other similar rooms shall be provided with mechanical ventilation that exhausts directly to the outside. The minimum ventilation rates shall be 50 cubic feet per minute (24L/s) for intermittent ventilation or 20 cubic feet per minute (10 L/s) for continuous ventilation. Bathrooms that contain only a water closet, lavatory, or combination thereof and similar rooms may be ventilated with an approved mechanical re-circulating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air.

CHAPTER 6

MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS

Section 602.3, Heat Supply, is hereby amended by the addition of the following dates in the spaces provided:

January 1 to December 31.

Section 602.4, Occupiable Work Spaces, is hereby amended by the addition of the following dates in the spaces provided:

January 1 to December 31.

(Ord. 6-2017 § 2).


14.40.040 Penalties.

Penalties for the violation of the terms of this chapter are as set forth in GMC 4.20.010. (Ord. 6-2017).


14.40.050 Appeal.

Chapter 2.80 GMC sets forth the appeal procedures. (Ord. 6-2017 § 2).


Chapter 14.50 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE

(Repealed by 3-2005)


Chapter 14.60 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS

Sections:

14.60.010    Statutory authorization.

14.60.020    Findings of fact.

14.60.030    Statement of purpose.

14.60.040    Methods of reducing flood losses.

14.60.050    Definitions.

14.60.060    Lands to which this chapter applies.

14.60.070    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

14.60.080    Compliance.

14.60.090    Abrogation and greater restriction.

14.60.100    Interpretation.

14.60.110    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

14.60.120    Development permit.

14.60.130    Designation of the building official.

14.60.140    Duties and responsibilities of the building official.

14.60.150    Variance procedure.

14.60.160    General standards.

14.60.170    Specific standards.

14.60.180    Standards for critical facilities.

14.60.190    Floodways.

14.60.200    Penalty.


14.60.010 Statutory authorization.

The Legislature of the state of Colorado has, in Section 31-23-101, C.R.S., delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-1).


14.60.020 Findings of fact.

A.    The flood hazard areas of the city of Gunnison are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

B.    These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-2).


14.60.030 Statement of purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions to specific areas by provisions designed:

A.    To protect human life and health;

B.    To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C.    To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D.    To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E.    To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F.    To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

G.    To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H.    To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-3).


14.60.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.

In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

A.    Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

B.    Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

C.    Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

D.    Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E.    Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-4).


14.60.050 Definitions.

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the building official’s interpretation of any provisions of this chapter or a request for a variance.

“Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

“Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the elevation shown on a FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.

“Basement” means any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.

“Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)” means FEMA’s comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain.

“Critical facility” means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in GMC 14.60.180, Standards for critical facilities, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. See GMC 14.60.180.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or storage of equipment and/or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.

“Duct system” means all ducts, duct fittings, plenums, and fans assembled to form a continuous passageway for the distribution of air.

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) are completed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

“Expansion to existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or to the pouring of concrete pads).

“Flood or flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

1.    The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

2.    The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones.

“Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

“Floodplain development permit” means a permit required before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the community including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and the floodplain management ordinance codified in this chapter.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-half foot.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

1.    Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2.    Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3.    Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

4.    Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

a.    By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or

b.    Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

“Letter of map revision (LOMR)” means FEMA’s official revision of an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA).

“Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F)” means FEMA’s modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the original ordinance codified in this chapter, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of these floodplain management regulations.

“No-rise certification” means a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A no-rise certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado professional engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM).

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1.    Built on a single chassis;

2.    Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;

3.    Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

4.    Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled or roofed building or manufactured home that is principally above ground.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1.    Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2.    Any alteration of a “historic structure”; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 

“Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 8-2013 § 2; Ord. 1-2004 § 1; Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-5).


14.60.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard and areas removed from the floodplain by a FEMA approved LOMR-F within the jurisdiction of the city of Gunnison. (Ord. 8-2013 § 3; Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-6).


14.60.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study for the city of Gunnison, Gunnison County, Colorado,” dated November 16, 1982, with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and FIRM are on file at the city of Gunnison, Building Department, 201 W. Virginia Ave., Gunnison, CO 81230. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-7).


14.60.080 Compliance.

No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-8).


14.60.090 Abrogation and greater restriction.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-9).


14.60.100 Interpretation.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

B.    Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C.    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-10).


14.60.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Gunnison, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-11).


14.60.120 Development permit.

A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in GMC 14.60.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the building official and may include, but not be limited to:

A.    Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.

B.    Where base flood elevations are utilized, all new construction, substantial improvements and other development must comply with the requirements of GMC 14.60.140(B), Use of Other Base Flood Data. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-12).


14.60.130 Designation of the building official.

The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-13).


14.60.140 Duties and responsibilities of the building official.

Duties of the building official shall include, but not be limited to:

A.    Permit Review.

1.    Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

2.    Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;

3.    Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of GMC 14.60.180(A) are met.

B.    Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood data has not been provided in accordance with GMC 14.60.070, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from any federal, state, or other source. Where base flood elevation data are utilized, all new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A are administered in accordance with subsection (C) of this section, Information to Be Obtained and Maintained, and GMC 14.60.170, Specific standards.

C.    Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.

1.    Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

2.    For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:

a.    Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed.

b.    Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in GMC 14.60.170(B)(3).

3.    Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.

4.    Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter, including proper elevation of the structure.

5.    For waterways with base flood elevations for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half foot at any point within the community.

6.    Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community’s FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half foot; provided, that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval.

D.    Alteration of Watercourses.

1.    Notify adjacent communities, the District 10 regional planning commission and the Colorado Water Conservation Board prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

2.    Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.

3.    Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design.

4.    Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain.

5.    Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances.

6.    Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer or certified professional hydrologist.

7.    All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and city of Gunnison floodplain requirements and regulations.

8.    Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to the existing conditions floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision.

E.    Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in GMC 14.60.150. (Ord. 8-2013 §§ 4, 5; Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-14).


14.60.150 Variance procedure.

A.    Appeal Board.

1.    The zoning board of adjustments and appeals (ZBOA), as established by the city of Gunnison, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

2.    The ZBOA shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decisions, or determination made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

3.    Those aggrieved by the decision of the ZBOA, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decisions to the district court, as provided by law.

4.    In passing upon such applications, the ZBOA shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:

a.    The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

b.    The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

c.    The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners;

d.    The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

e.    The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

f.    The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

g.    The compatibility of the proposed use with the existing and anticipated development;

h.    The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

i.    The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

j.    The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

k.    The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, streets and bridges.

5.    Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (A)(4) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the ZBOA may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

6.    The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

B.    Conditions for Variances.

1.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subsections (A)(4)(a) through (A)(4)(k) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justifications required for issuing the variance increases.

2.    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

3.    Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

4.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

5.    Variances shall only be issued upon:

a.    A showing of good and sufficient cause;

b.    A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicants; and

c.    A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expenses, create nuisances, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

6.    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (Ord. 8-2013 § 6; Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-15).


14.60.160 General standards.

In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:

A.    Anchoring.

1.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads.

2.    All manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. Specific requirements may be:

a.    Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side;

b.    Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side;

c.    All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and

d.    Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.

B.    Construction Materials and Methods.

1.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

2.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

3.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

C.    Utilities.

1.    All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;

2.    New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and

3.    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

D.    Subdivision Proposals.

1.    All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

2.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;

3.    All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

4.    Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less). (Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-16).


14.60.170 Specific standards.

In all areas of special flood hazard including properties removed from the floodplain by fill (LOMR-F), where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in GMC 14.60.070, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, or GMC 14.60.140(B), Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following provisions are required:

A.    Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation.

B.    Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.

C.    Openings in Enclosures Below the Lowest Floor. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

1.    A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;

2.    The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and

3.    Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

D.    Manufactured Homes.

1.    Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with GMC 14.60.160(A)(2).

2.    All manufactured homes or those to be substantially improved shall conform to the following requirements:

a.    Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on a site:

i.    Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

ii.    In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

iii    In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

iv.    In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood;

    be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home and all of the duct system is elevated to one foot or more above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

b.    Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions that are not subject to the provisions in subsection (D)(2)(a) of this section be elevated so that either:

i.    The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or

ii.    The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

E.    Recreational Vehicles.

1.    Require that recreational vehicles either:

a.    Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;

b.    Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or

c.    Meet the permit requirements and elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes. (Ord. 8-2013 §§ 7, 8; Ord. 1-2004 §§ 2, 3, 4; Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-17).


14.60.180 Standards for critical facilities.

A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood.

A.    Classification of Critical Facilities. It is the responsibility of the city of Gunnison to identify and confirm that specific structures in their community meet the following criteria:

1.    Critical facilities are classified under the following categories: essential services, hazardous materials, at-risk populations, and vital to restoring normal services.

a.    Essential Services Facilities. Include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. These facilities consist of:

i.    Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and emergency operation centers);

ii.    Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and nonambulatory surgical structures but excluding clinics, doctor offices, and non-urgent-care medical structures that do not provide these functions);

iii.    Designated emergency shelters;

iv.    Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits);

v.    Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and

vi.    Air transportation lifelines (airports (municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures) serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars);

vii.    Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), nonpotable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances;

viii.    Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the {community governing body} that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the {community governing body} on an as-needed basis upon request.

b.    Hazardous Materials Facilities. Include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. These facilities may include:

i.    Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing);

ii.    Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;

iii.    Refineries;

iv.    Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and

v.    Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers;

vi.    Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the workplace, and the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either 500 pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the 356 chemicals listed under 40 CFR Section 302 (2010), also known as extremely hazardous substances (EHS); or 10,000 pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 CFR Section 1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation “Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification,” 40 CFR Section 302 (2010) and OSHA regulation “Occupational Safety and Health Standards,” 29 CFR Section 1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations.

c.    Specific exemptions to this category include:

i.    Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use.

ii.    Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public.

iii.    Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products.

iv.    These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in this section.

d.    At-Risk Population Facilities. Include medical care, congregate care, and schools. These facilities consist of:

i.    Elder care (nursing homes);

ii.    Congregate care serving 12 or more individuals (day care and assisted living);

iii.    Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving 12 or more children.

e.    Facilities Vital to Restoring Normal Services. Including government operations, these facilities consist of:

i.    Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers);

ii.    Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only).

f.    These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the city of Gunnison that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this chapter, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the city of Gunnison on an as-needed basis upon request.

2.    Protection for Critical Facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, protection shall include one of the following:

a.    Location outside the special flood hazard area; or

b.    Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two feet above the base flood elevation.

3.    Ingress and Egress for New Critical Facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the city of Gunnison, have continuous noninundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. (Ord. 8-2013 § 9).


14.60.190 Floodways.

Located within areas of special flood hazard established in GMC 14.60.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

A.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B.    If subsection (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of GMC 14.60.160, General standards, and GMC 14.60.170, Specific standards. (Ord. 8-2013 § 1; Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-18. Formerly 14.60.180).


14.60.200 Penalty.

Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined or imprisoned in accordance with GMC 4.20.010, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 8-2013 § 1; Ord. 9-2000 § 1; Code 1997 § 14-6-19. Formerly 14.60.190).

 


Title 15 LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE1

(Repealed by Ord. 1-2014)

 1

    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 1-2014 repealed GMC Title 15 in its entirety and adopted the city of Gunnison land development code as a separate, standalone document, which is available at the city clerk’s office or the community development department. 


Title 16 FEES

Chapters:

16.10    School District Capital Improvements Fee


Chapter 16.10 SCHOOL DISTRICT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FEE

Sections:

16.10.010    Short title.

16.10.020    Imposition of fee.

16.10.030    Payment of fee.

16.10.040    Transfer of funds.

16.10.050    Waiver of fee.

16.10.060    Fees in addition to other fees.


16.10.010 Short title.

This chapter may be known and may hereinafter be cited as the “Gunnison Watershed School District RE-1J capital improvements fee chapter.” (Code 1997 § 16-1-1).


16.10.020 Imposition of fee.

There is hereby imposed for each new dwelling unit or mobile home lot erected or constructed within the city a fee of $100.00 per dwelling unit or mobile home lot. The terms “dwelling unit” and “mobile home lot” are as defined in GMC Title 15, or of any successive zoning ordinance which may hereinafter be enacted.

The terms “dwelling unit” and “mobile home lot” shall not be construed to include hotels, motels, hospitals, or nursing homes licensed by the state. (Code 1997 § 16-1-2).


16.10.030 Payment of fee.

Payment of the fee required herein shall be made at the time a building permit is issued by the building department of the city based upon the determination of the number of dwelling units or mobile home lots included in the application, made by the building official for the city. Payment shall be made by check, warrant, or draft made payable to the Gunnison Watershed School District RE-1J, said payment to be receipted by the building official to the applicant. No building permit shall be issued until payment of said fee is made by the applicant. (Code 1997 § 16-1-3).


16.10.040 Transfer of funds.

The building official will submit any and all payments from the collection of fees imposed under this chapter to the finance director who shall duly report said fees to the Gunnison Watershed School District RE-1J and turn said fees over to the authorized representative of the school district. (Code 1997 § 16-1-4).


16.10.050 Waiver of fee.

The board of adjustment and zoning appeals may waive the fees required herein upon the written request of an applicant for a building permit, setting forth facts concerning the dwelling units or mobile home lots to be constructed showing that the same will have no impact upon the services to be provided by the Gunnison Watershed School District RE-1J, and supported by existing or proposed restrictive covenants or other guarantees of a similar nature, limiting the uses or purposes of said dwelling units or mobile home lots to those set forth in the application for waiver. The board of adjustment and zoning appeals of the city shall hold a public hearing after public notice, and notice to the Gunnison Watershed School District RE-1J, in the same manner as a request for variance from the city zoning ordinances, and shall determine whether or not the proposed development of the dwelling units and/or mobile home lots will impact upon the Gunnison Watershed School District RE-1J, and that said fact is assured by the proposed or existing restrictive covenants or other guarantees. Should the board of adjustments so determine, the fees imposed hereby may be waived. (Code 1997 § 16-1-5).


16.10.060 Fees in addition to other fees.

The fees imposed hereby are in addition to fees imposed by the building codes of the city or subdivision ordinances of the city. (Code 1997 § 16-1-6).



-----------------------------

The Gunnison Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 6-2019, passed April 9, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Clerk's Office has the official version of the Gunnison Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.cityofgunnison-co.gov/ City Telephone: (970) 641-8000

Code Publishing Company

Land Development Code
2014
City of Gunnison
This Land Development Code establishes the standards for the review of all proposed development of land within the City of Gunnison.
With Revisions per Ordinance #4, Series 2014, May 27, 2014; Ordinance #3, Series 2015, April 28, 2015; Ordinance #5, Series 2015, June 23, 2015; Ordinance #3, Series 2016, April 26, 2016; Ordinance #8, 2016, July 26, 2016; Ordinance #8, Series 2017, June 27, 2017
City of Gunnison
P.O. Box 239
Gunnison, CO 81230
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE I
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1. ADMINISTRATION 1-1
§1.1 TITLE ............................................................................................................................... 1-1
§1.2 AUTHORITY ...................................................................................................................... 1-1
§1.3 PURPOSES ........................................................................................................................ 1-1
§1.4 APPLICABILITY ................................................................................................................... 1-2
§1.5 REPEAL AND RE-ENACTMENT .............................................................................................. 1-3
§1.6 WORD USAGE AND CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE ................................................................. 1-3
§1.7 MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS ...................................................................................... 1-4
§1.8 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP ...................................................................................................... 1-8
§1.9 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS ................................................................................................ 1-9
§1.10 VIOLATIONS CONTINUE ...................................................................................................... 1-9
§1.11 PRESUMPTION OF VALIDITY .............................................................................................. 1-10
§1.12 SEVERABILITY .................................................................................................................. 1-10
SECTION 2. ZONING DISTRICTS 2-1
§2.1 ZONE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED ............................................................................................. 2-1
§2.2 ZONE DISTRICT PURPOSE STATEMENTS ................................................................................. 2-1
§2.3 DESIGNATED HOUSING TYPES ............................................................................................. 2-3
§2.4 PRINCIPAL USE TABLE ........................................................................................................ 2-5
§2.5 BASE PRINCIPLE USE CATEGORIES ........................................................................................ 2-9
§2.6 BASE ZONE DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS .................................................................. 2-11
§2.7 WESTERN STATE COLORADO UNIVERSITY STANDARDS ........................................................... 2-14
SECTION 3. SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS 3-1
§3.1 GENERAL ......................................................................................................................... 3-1
§3.2 RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES ............................................................................................ 3-2
§3.3 RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS ............................................................................................. 3-2
§3.4 PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES ............................................................. 3-12
§3.5 PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE STANDARDS ............................................................. 3-14
§3.6 ACCOMMODATIONS, RETAIL, SERVICE - COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES .................................. 3-14
§3.7 ACCOMMODATIONS, RETAIL, SERVICE - COMMERCIAL USE STANDARDS ................................... 3-16
§3.8 INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES ............................................................................................ 3-21
§3.9 INDUSTRIAL USE STANDARDS ............................................................................................ 3-23
§3.10 OTHER USE CATEGORIES .................................................................................................. 3-24
§3.11 OTHER USE STANDARDS ................................................................................................... 3-26
§3.12 NON-RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES ......................................................... 3-33
§3.13 TEMPORARY USES ........................................................................................................... 3-33
§3.14 MARIJUANA USE CATEGORIES ....................................................................................... 3-3336
§3.15 MARIJUANA USE STANDARDS ....................................................................................... 3-3337
SECTION 4. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-1
§4.1 ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES.............................................................................................. 4-1
§4.2 ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS ...................................................................................... 4-5
§4.3 GENERAL SITE ACCESS ...................................................................................................... 4-13
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING .................................................................................. 4-19
PAGE II CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
§4.5 PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION FACILITIES ................................................................................. 4-31
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING ........................................................................ 4-34
§4.7 OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND STORAGE ..................................................................................... 4-47
§4.8 SIGNS ............................................................................................................................ 4-48
§4.9 OUTDOOR LIGHTING ........................................................................................................ 4-71
§4.10 LARGE SCALE RETAIL ........................................................................................................ 4-73
§4.11 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS WAIVER .................................................................................. 4-82
SECTION 5. NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS 5-1
§5.1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ............................................................................................ 5-1
§5.2 SLOPE PROTECTION STANDARDS .......................................................................................... 5-1
§5.3 GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL ....................................................................................... 5-4
§5.4 WETLAND AND STREAMS CORRIDOR PROTECTION ................................................................ 5-10
§5.5 NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS WAIVER ........................................................ 5-13
SECTION 6. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES 6-1
§6.1 PURPOSE ......................................................................................................................... 6-1
§6.2 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW CATEGORIES .................................................................................... 6-1
§6.3 STAGES OF THE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS ................................................................... 6-1
§6.4 STAGE 1: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE .............................................................................. 6-3
§6.5 STAGE 2: SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION .......................................................... 6-4
§6.6 STAGE 3: STAFF REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION ........................................................ 6-5
§6.7 STAGE 4: PROVISION OF PUBLIC NOTICE ............................................................................... 6-6
§6.8 STAGE 5: REVIEW BY DECISION-MAKING BODY ...................................................................... 6-8
§6.9 STAGE 6: ACTIONS FOLLOWING DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL ...................................................... 6-9
SECTION 7. CONDITIONAL USES 7-1
§7.1 GENERAL ......................................................................................................................... 7-1
§7.2 PROCEDURE ..................................................................................................................... 7-1
§7.3 GENERAL CONTENTS OF A CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION ...................................................... 7-1
§7.4 APPLICATION CONTENTS - MOBILE HOME PARK OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK ...................... 7-2
§7.5 REVIEW STANDARDS .......................................................................................................... 7-2
§7.6 TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL USES STANDARDS. ....................................................................... 7-3
§7.7 COMMISSION AUTHORIZED TO IMPOSE CONDITIONS ............................................................... 7-3
§7.8 EXPIRATION OF CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL ........................................................................ 7-4
§7.9 INSUBSTANTIAL CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED CONDITIONAL USE ........................ 7-5
SECTION 8. VARIANCES 8-1
§8.1 GENERAL ......................................................................................................................... 8-1
§8.2 PROCEDURES .................................................................................................................... 8-1
§8.3 REQUIRED SHOWING – DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS VARIANCE .................................................. 8-1
§8.4 BOARD AUTHORIZED TO IMPOSE CONDITIONS ........................................................................ 8-2
§8.5 EXPIRATION OF APPROVED VARIANCE ................................................................................... 8-2
§8.6 AMENDMENT OF APPROVED VARIANCE ................................................................................ 8-2
SECTION 9. DEVELOPMENT STANDARD WAIVERS 9-1
§9.1 GENERAL ......................................................................................................................... 9-1
§9.2 APPLICATION CONTENTS .................................................................................................... 9-1
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE III
§9.3 PROCEDURES AND PROCESS ................................................................................................ 9-2
§9.4 REVIEW CRITERIA .............................................................................................................. 9-2
§9.5 DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY ........................................................................................... 9-7
§9.6 EXPIRATION OF APPROVED WAIVER ..................................................................................... 9-8
§9.7 APPEALS .......................................................................................................................... 9-8
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS ........................................................................................ 9-8
SECTION 10. AMENDMENTS TO THE LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 10-1
§10.1 GENERAL ....................................................................................................................... 10-1
§10.2 INITIATION ..................................................................................................................... 10-1
§10.3 PROCEDURE ................................................................................................................... 10-1
§10.4 APPLICATION CONTENTS .................................................................................................. 10-2
§10.5 REVIEW STANDARDS FOR TEXT AMENDMENTS ..................................................................... 10-3
§10.6 REVIEW STANDARDS FOR ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS ......................................................... 10-3
§10.7 ESTABLISHED REVIEW PROCESS, REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICTS .......................................................................................................... 10-3
SECTION 11. NONCONFORMITIES 11-1
§11.1 PURPOSE ....................................................................................................................... 11-1
§11.2 NONCONFORMING USES .................................................................................................. 11-1
§11.3 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES ........................................................................................ 11-2
§11.4 NONCONFORMING LOTS .................................................................................................. 11-2
§11.5 NONCONFORMING SIGNS ................................................................................................. 11-3
§11.6 NONCONFORMING MOBILE HOME PARKS ............................................................................ 11-3
SECTION 12. SUBDIVISION STANDARDS 12-1
§12.1 PURPOSE ....................................................................................................................... 12-1
§12.2 APPLICABILITY ................................................................................................................. 12-1
§12.3 OVERVIEW OF SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE ............................................................................. 12-1
§12.4 SUBDIVISION EXEMPTION ................................................................................................. 12-4
§12.5 SKETCH PLAN REVIEW ...................................................................................................... 12-6
§12.6 PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW .............................................................................................. 12-8
§12.7 FINAL PLAT REVIEW ....................................................................................................... 12-14
§12.8 SUBDIVISION REVIEW STANDARDS ................................................................................... 12-21
§12.9 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION REVIEW STANDARDS ........................................ 12-22
§12.10 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT ....................................................................... 12-22
§12.11 VACATION OF RECORDED PLAT, RIGHT-OF-WAY OR EASEMENT ............................................ 12-23
SECTION 13. INCENTIVES 13-1
§13.1 PURPOSE ....................................................................................................................... 13-1
§13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS ...................................................................................................... 13-1
§13.3 REVIEW PROCESS ............................................................................................................ 13-1
§13.4 PROCEDURE ................................................................................................................... 13-2
§13.5 APPLICATION CONTENTS .................................................................................................. 13-2
§13.6 GENERAL REVIEW STANDARDS .......................................................................................... 13-3
§13.7 SPECIFIC STANDARDS APPLIED TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES ..................................... 13-4
§13.8 TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS ................................................................................. 13-4
§13.9 OPEN SPACE AND NATURAL FEATURES ............................................................................... 13-4
PAGE IV CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
SECTION 14. LARGE SCALE RETAIL DESIGN REVIEW PROCEDURE 14-1
§14.1 PURPOSE ....................................................................................................................... 14-1
§14.2 APPLICABILITY ................................................................................................................. 14-1
§14.3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ................................................................................................. 14-1
§14.4 APPLICATION, REVIEW, AND DECISION ................................................................................ 14-2
§14.5 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS WAIVER .................................................................................. 14-4
§14.6 DESIGN REVIEW STANDARD OBJECTIVES .............................................................................. 14-4
SECTION 15. VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT 15-1
§15.1 ENFORCEMENT BY DIRECTOR ............................................................................................ 15-1
§15.2 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES ............................................................................................ 15-1
§15.3 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION ............................................................................................... 15-1
§15.4 REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS .............................................................................................. 15-2
§15.5 APPLICATION OF THE LAWS ............................................................................................... 15-2
SECTION 16. DEFINITIONS 16-1
§16.1 ABBREVIATIONS .............................................................................................................. 16-1
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED ................................................................................................ 16-1
SECTION 17. APPENDICES
APPENDIX A – PREFERRED PLANTING LIST
APPENDIX B - LANDSCAPE SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
APPENDIX C - PROTECTION OF TREES AND VEGETATION DURING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
FIGURES
Figure 1 Maximum Building Height .................................................................................................................... 1-5
Figure 2 Lot Depth and Width ............................................................................................................................ 1-6
Figure 3 Yard and Building Setbacks .................................................................................................................. 1-7
Figure 4 Driveway Extending Into Yard .............................................................................................................. 1-8
Figure 5 Two-Story Hip Roof Meeting Solar Access Standards ........................................................................ 2-12
Figure 6 Two-Story Gable-End Roof Meeting Solar Access Standards ............................................................. 2-12
Figure 7 Three-Story Meeting Solar Access Standards .................................................................................... 2-13
Figure 8 Zero Lot Line Development .................................................................................................................. 3-4
Figure 9 Small Wind Turbine Clearances .......................................................................................................... 3-28
Figure 10 Road Construction Standards ............................................................................................................... 4-6
Figure 11 Road Construction Standards (Continued)........................................................................................... 4-7
Figure 12 Other Driveway Construction Standards............................................................................................ 4-17
Figure 13 Intersection and Driveway Visibility ................................................................................................... 4-18
Figure 14 Parking Stall Dimensions .................................................................................................................... 4-25
Figure 15 Vehicle Stacking Areas ....................................................................................................................... 4-30
Figure 16 Buffering Requirements ..................................................................................................................... 4-39
Figure 17 Guide for Buffer Calculations ............................................................................................................. 4-40
Figure 18 Parking Lot Landscaping ..................................................................................................................... 4-43
Figure 19 Geometric Signs ................................................................................................................................. 4-58
Figure 20 Irregularly Shaped Signs ..................................................................................................................... 4-59
Figure 21 Signs with Multiple Elements ............................................................................................................. 4-60
Figure 22 Building Orientation for Multiple-building Development .................................................................. 4-76
Figure 23 Passenger Loading Zones ................................................................................................................... 4-77
Figure 24 Ground Floor Façades ........................................................................................................................ 4-78
Figure 25 Exterior Wall Plane ............................................................................................................................. 4-79
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE V
Figure 26 Secondary Façade .............................................................................................................................. 4-79
Figure 27 Architectural Elements ....................................................................................................................... 4-80
Figure 28 Buildings Entrances ............................................................................................................................ 4-80
Figure 29 Parapets ............................................................................................................................................. 4-81
Figure 30 Slope Protection Standards .................................................................................................................. 5-2
Figure 31 Limits on Changing Natural Grade ....................................................................................................... 5-5
Figure 32 Retaining Walls ..................................................................................................................................... 5-6
Figure 33 Detention and Stormwater Facilities ................................................................................................... 5-7
Figure 34 Limits of Disturbance ........................................................................................................................... 5-9
Figure 35 Wetland/Stream Setback ................................................................................................................... 5-12
Figure 36 Stages of the Development Review Process ........................................................................................ 6-2
Figure 37 Design Review Procedure................................................................................................................... 14-2
TABLES
TABLE 1-1 DENSITY .................................................................................................................................................. 1-6
TABLE 2-1 BASE ZONE DISTRICTS ................................................................................................................................ 2-1
TABLE 2-2 DESIGNATED HOUSING TYPES ...................................................................................................................... 2-3
TABLE 2-3 PRINCIPAL USE TABLE ................................................................................................................................ 2-6
TABLE 2-4 RESIDENTIAL DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS ...................................................................................................... 2-11
TABLE 2-5 NONRESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS .......................................................................... 2-14
TABLE 3-1 MINIMUM BUILDING WIDTH ....................................................................................................................... 3-3
TABLE 3-2 RV PARK DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS .......................................................................................................... 3-17
TABLE 3-3 SANITARY SERVICE BUILDING FACILITY REQUIREMENTS ................................................................................... 3-19
TABLE 3-4 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS ............................................................... 3-29
TABLE 4-1 RIGHT-OF-WAY AND SURFACING WIDTH ....................................................................................................... 4-8
TABLE 4-2 CURB RADII ............................................................................................................................................ 4-10
TABLE 4-3 SIGHT DISTANCES .................................................................................................................................... 4-10
TABLE 4-4 MINIMUM RADII OF CURVATURE ON CENTERLINE.......................................................................................... 4-11
TABLE 4-5 VEHICULAR ACCESS AND CIRCULATION GUIDELINES ....................................................................................... 4-13
TABLE 4-6 DRIVEWAY DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS ........................................................................................................ 4-15
TABLE 4-7 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS ........................................................................................................ 4-21
TABLE 4-8 DISABLED ACCESS PARKING ....................................................................................................................... 4-24
TABLE 4-9 PARKING STALL AND AISLE DIMENSIONS ...................................................................................................... 4-25
TABLE 4-10 REQUIRED OFF-STREET STACKING SPACES.................................................................................................... 4-30
TABLE 4-11 MINIMUM TREE AND SHRUB PLANTINGS ..................................................................................................... 4-37
TABLE 4-12 SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS ............................................................... 4-64
TABLE 4-13 SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR THE B-1 DISTRICT ..................................................................................... 4-66
TABLE 4-14 SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX ZONE DISTRICTS ............................................... 4-67
TABLE 4-15 SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY ZONE DISTRICTS ................................................ 4-68
TABLE 5-1 AREA AND FRONT YARD DIMENSIONS IN SLOPE PROTECTION AREAS ................................................................... 5-2
TABLE 6-1 LAND DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW ................................................................................................... 6-6
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS ................................................................................................................ 9-8
PAGE VI CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
§1.1 TITLE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-1
Section 1. Administration
TITLE
This document shall be officially known and cited as the City of Gunnison Land Development Code and will be referenced herein as “LDC”.
AUTHORITY
It is the intention of the City Council in adopting this LDC to fully exercise all relevant powers conferred on it by the laws of the State of Colorado, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. Home Rule Municipality. All of the powers reserved to the City as a home rule municipality under Article XX of the Colorado Constitution.
B. State Enabling Legislation. All of the powers granted to the City by:
1. Title 29, Article 20, Colorado Revised Statutes (C.R.S.). The provisions of the Local Government Land Use Control Enabling Act of 1974 (Title 29, Article 20, C.R.S.);
2. Title 31, Article 12, C.R.S. The provisions of the Colorado Municipal Annexation Act of 1965 (Title 31, Article 12 C.R.S.);
3. Title 24, Articles 65, 67, and 68, C.R.S. which, respectively, provide for the review of areas and activities of state interest, authorize the Planned Development Overlay approach to land development and provide for the establishment of vested property rights; and
4. Title 31, Article 23, C.R.S., which enables municipalities to adopt zoning regulations and subdivision requirements.
C. All Other Powers Authorized. All other powers authorized by statute or by common law for the regulation of land uses, land development and subdivision, including, but not limited to, the power to abate nuisances.
PURPOSES
General Purposes. General purposes of this LDC include the following.
1. Development Standards. Establish the standards for the review of all proposed development of land within the City of Gunnison.
2. Quality of Life. Protect and enhance the quality of life in the city and its environs so as to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city and to protect the environment.
3. Review Processes. Establish clear, consistent, predictable and efficient land development review processes.
4. Orderly Development. Provide for the efficient, well-ordered and safe development of the
§1.4 APPLICABILITY
PAGE 1-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
City of Gunnison and to accommodate a variety of desirable residential, commercial, industrial and public land uses in an appropriate, efficient and attractive development pattern.
5. Adequate Public Facilities. Ensure that all utilities, public facilities, and services needed to support development are in place and adequately designed and constructed to protect the community’s health, safety and welfare.
6. Property Values. Conserve the value of properties and to respect the rights of property owners and the interests of the citizens of the City.
Implement City of Gunnison Master Plan. To promote these general purposes, this LDC establishes regulations that implement the City of Gunnison Master Plan:
1. Natural and Visual Resources. Manage Gunnison’s water, air, land, wildlife, and visual resources.
2. Cultural and Social Resources. Encourage the provision and proper location of cultural and social facilities commensurate with the needs of the city’s multi-age population.
3. Public Facilities and Services. Ensure that adequate water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, solid waste disposal, electrical, road, park/recreation and trail and public safety facilities and services are provided to meet current needs, and that development provides for its fair share of the facilities and services demanded for growth.
4. Economic Development. Encourage continued growth and diversification of Gunnison’s economy, while preserving and strengthening the existing economic base, including the Central Business District and Western State Colorado University.
5. Safe and Efficient Transportation. Provide a safe and efficient multi-modal transportation system which provides safe, easy access to parcels while controlling access onto the road network and which offers choices in the method and manner of travel.
6. Adequate Housing Supply. Ensure an adequate housing supply which provides diverse housing types of good quality construction in a wide range of prices to support a wide range of incomes, and implement community housing policies established by the City of Gunnison.
7. Energy Resources. Utilize energy resources in the most efficient manner by encouraging innovations in the form and design of development.
APPLICABILITY
A. Conformance Provisions. No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied and no development shall be undertaken within the limits of the City of Gunnison, as now and hereafter established, unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this LDC, and other applicable laws and regulations. Structures and uses existing on the effective date of this LDC that do not conform to the LDC shall be permitted to continue, subject to the provisions of Section 11, Nonconformities. To the extent permitted by state and federal law, this LDC shall apply to all units and agencies of the federal, state, county and municipal government.
B. Exemption for Essential Services. Essential Services and their associated facilities, as defined
§1.5 REPEAL AND RE-ENACTMENT
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-3
herein, shall be exempt from this LDC with the exception that this LDC shall apply to the development, operations, and maintenance facilities used to support related providers.
C. Approved Existing Development and Pending Applications. The provisions of this LCD shall not abrogate, annul or affect the validity of any approved preexisting development or pending application thereof, including building permit, certificate of occupancy, subdivision, and development approval including conditional use, variance, zoning amendment, or Planned Unit Development (PUD) that was initiated and/or approved prior to the effective date of this LDC, notwithstanding specific PUD provisions that may require compliance to future amendments to the LDC. Pending permit applications, subdivision applications, or development applications are subject to the provisions of the LDC in effect at the time of application. Any applicant of a pending application may request to have the said application reviewed pursuant to the procedures and standards of this LDC.
REPEAL AND RE-ENACTMENT
Upon the adoption of this Land Development Code, the following are hereby repealed in their entirety: Land Development Code, Chapter 15 of the Municipal Code of the City of Gunnison originally effective on February 27, 1997, which is 30 days following the date of its adoption by the City Council with Ordinance #1, Series 1997; together with all amendments thereto; and any other ordinance, resolution or regulation inconsistent with this LDC.
WORD USAGE AND CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE
A. Headings, Illustrations and Text. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this LDC and any heading, drawing, table, figure, or illustration, the text shall control.
B. Lists and Examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms such as “including,” “such as,” or similar language are intended to provide examples; not to be exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
C. Computation of Time. Unless the terms of a specific provision of this LDC state otherwise (e.g. some provisions specify working days), the time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday observed by the City of Gunnison, that day shall be excluded.
D. References to Other Regulations, Publications and Documents. Whenever reference is made to a resolution, code, statute, regulation, or document, that reference shall be construed as referring to the most recent edition of such resolution, code, statute, regulation, or document or to the relevant successor document, unless otherwise expressly stated.
E. Delegation of Authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or another officer or employee of the City to perform an act or duty, that provision shall be construed as authorizing the department head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have authority.
F. Technical and Nontechnical Terms. Words and phrases shall be construed meaning according to the common and approved usage of the language. However, technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
§1.7 MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS
PAGE 1-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
G. Public Officials and Agencies. All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are made are those of the City of Gunnison, unless otherwise expressly provided.
H. Word Usage. For the purpose of this LDC certain words shall be interpreted as follows:
1. The word “Commission” means the City of Gunnison Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. The word “person” includes a firm, association, corporation, trust, and company as well as an individual.
3. The word “structure” shall include the word “building.”
4. The word “lot” shall include the words “plot,” “parcel” or “tract.”
5. The words “may” and “should” are advisory and the words “shall” and “will” are always mandatory.
6. Words not specifically defined in the LDC shall take their common dictionary meaning, except as modified by use as terms of art in planning or engineering.
I. Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
1. “and” indicates that all connected items apply, conditions apply, provisions apply, or events apply.
2. “or” indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply.
J. Tenses and Plurals. Words used in one tense (past, present, or future) include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS
A. Lot Reduction. Upon the effective date of this LDC, no lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record in single ownership, shall be reduced in size so that the lot area per dwelling unit, lot width, yard and lot coverage requirements, and other requirements of this LDC are not maintained. This prohibition shall not be construed to prevent the purchase or condemnation of narrow strips of land for public utilities or street right-of-way purposes.
B. Building Coverage. Building coverage shall be the maximum portion of the lot that is covered by buildings, including both principal structures and accessory buildings. Building coverage does not include paved areas such as driveways, uncovered porches or patios, decks, swimming pools or pool cages, or roof overhangs of less than three feet. Building coverage is expressed as a percentage of total lot area.
C. Impervious Surface. Impervious surface shall be the maximum portion of the lot that is covered by buildings, including both principal structures and accessory buildings, paved areas such as driveways, or other features that inhibit the percolation of water into the soil. Impervious surface
§1.7 MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-5
is expressed as a percentage of total lot area.
D. Building Width. Building width shall be measured by the distance along the front wall-plane of any building (as determined by the location of an entrance fronting on a street).
E. Building Separation. Building separation shall be the required separation between any two buildings located on the same lot or parcel of land. When building separation is regulated as a function of building height, the height measure shall be calculated as the average height (mean) of the two adjoining buildings in question.
F. Floor Area. Floor area of a building shall be a gross calculation measured from the exterior wall plane or the centerline of the common wall (party wall) separating two units in a building, but shall not include mechanical rooms, closet or storage areas and mechanical chases. Those areas are excluded from the floor area calculation. All attic space meeting International Building Code (IBC or IRC) ceiling height requirements and used for active residential or nonresidential space shall be calculated as floor area.
G. Height. Height shall be the vertical distances between the average grade of a structure and the highest point of the structure or to the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the highest ridge of a sloping roof. In the case of a building, the measure shall be established by using the four principle elevation views of the building plans.
H. Lot Area. Lot area refers to the total gross amount of horizontal land areas within lot lines and shall be measured in units of square feet or acres. Public and private right-of-way and streets shall not be included in the calculating lot area.
FIGURE 1MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
§1.7 MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS
PAGE 1-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
I. Lot Width. Lot width is the horizontal distance between the side lot lines as measured along a straight line parallel to the street right-of-way boundary. For any lot with a curved front lot line, the width is measured at the rear edges of the street yard (front building line), except for
lots abutting cul-de-sacs, which shall be measured as the arc length of the street yard at the right-of-way boundary.
J. Lot Depth. Lot depth shall be the distance of a straight line drawn between the mid-points of the street yard and rear yard.
K. Density
1. Net Land Area. Net land area shall be determined by subtracting from the gross land area, the following (as applicable).
a. Eighty percent of lands located in the 100-year floodplain;
b. All lands within private streets or dedicated public rights-of-way;
c. All dedicated open space or public easements dedicated on the plat of record unless exempted;
d. All lands subject to a ground lease that, because of the lease terms, would not be available for development of the proposed land use(s) on the subject property;
e. Fifty percent of the land located in any resource conservation area, other than steep slopes and floodplains; and
f. Net land area on steep slopes shall be determined by the following table;
TABLE 1-1 DENSITY
AVERAGE SLOPE (PERCENT)
ALLOWABLE DENSITY (PERCENT)
0 to 10
100
>10
80
>15
60
>20
40
>25
20
>30
10
2. Net Density. Net density shall be calculated by dividing the net land area by the minimum lot area or land area required for each unit.
FIGURE 2 LOT DEPTH AND WIDTH
§1.7 MEASUREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-7
3. When applying a density standard to the net land area of a parcel, resulting fractions with 0.65 or lower shall be rounded down to the lower whole number and resulting fractions that are 0.66 or higher shall be rounded up to the higher whole number (Ordinance #8, Series 2016).
4. The density reduction requirements of this Section do not apply to the development of single-family dwellings on lots created as a plat of record prior to the adoption of this LDC.
5. The number of dwelling or accommodation units allowed on a site is based on the presumption that all other applicable standards shall be met. The maximum density established for a zoning district is not a guarantee that such densities may be obtained, nor a valid justification for varying other dimensional or development standards.
L. Yard and Building Setbacks
1. Measurement. Setbacks shall be measured as the distance between the nearest lot line and the furthermost projection of the building wall-plane along a line at right angles to setback lines. Yard setbacks shall be unobstructed from the ground to the sky except as otherwise specifically allowed in
this Section.
2. Front Setbacks on Corner Lots. All street sides of a corner lot shall maintain a front yard setback.
3. Features Allowed within Building and Yard Setbacks.
a. Cornices, canopies, eaves or other similar architectural features may project 18 inches into a side or rear yard or setback. These same architectural features may project up to three feet into any setback that is at least 15 feet in dimension.
b. Signs may extend into required yards in conformance with standards found in §4.8.
c. Uncovered porches, slabs, patios, decks, walks and steps which do not exceed 30 inches above or below grade may project into a yard. Projections may exceed 30 inches below grade if required by the Building Official for window or other building egress.
d. Assemblies constituting covered porches which include, landings, steps and handrails that are greater than 30 inches in height may project the furthest extended component five feet into a street yard setback that is at least 15 feet in dimension.
e. Bay windows, entrances, balconies, and similar features that are less than 10 feet wide may
FIGURE 3 YARD AND BUILDING SETBACKS
§1.8 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
PAGE 1-8 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
extend up to 18 inches into any required yard, but shall remain at least five feet from the property line.
f. Driveways may extend into any required yard, provided that the edge of the driveway shall be setback at least three feet from an adjacent property line.
g. Planters, retaining walls, hedges, and other landscaping structures may encroach into any required yard and may be no closer than one foot from the property line subject to visibility restrictions.
h. Fences may be located in the yards, but are subject to site visibility distance standards found in §4.2 and §4.3.
i. Utility lines located underground and minor structures accessory to utility lines (such as hydrants, manholes, and transformers and other cabinet structures) may encroach into any
required yard.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
A. Zone District Boundaries. The boundaries of the zone districts are shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Gunnison, Colorado. The Official Zoning Map is a part of this LDC as fully as if it were set out in this LDC in detail. The Official Zoning Map is maintained in the office of the City Clerk and available for inspection during normal business hours. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zone districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the Community Development Director shall apply the following rules for determination.
1. Omitted Land. It is the intent of this LDC that every part of the incorporated City of Gunnison be included in one of the zone districts established by this LDC. Any land located now or in the future in the city not shown to be included in a zoning district shall be deemed to be classified in the R-1 Zone District, pending approval of a rezoning pursuant to the requirements of Section 10 (Amendments to the Land Development Code and Official Zoning Map).
2. Multiple Zone Districts. Whenever a lot of record is divided by a boundary, development of the lot shall conform to the standards of the zoning in place on that specific portion of the lot.
3. Zone District Boundaries. Unless otherwise specified, zone district boundaries are lot lines, street centerlines, or the center of river channels. The following rules govern interpretations regarding the location of zoning district boundaries.
a. Municipal Boundaries. Zone district boundaries shown as following or approximately
3’
FIGURE 4 DRIVEWAY EXTENDING INTO YARD
§1.9 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 1-9
following the limits of the municipal boundary shall be construed as following those limits.
b. Streets and Highways. Zone district boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets and/or highways shall be construed to follow the centerlines of those streets and/or highways.
c. Property Lines. Zone district boundary lines shown as following or approximately following property lines shall be construed as following those lines.
d. Section Lines. Zone district boundaries approximately following section lines, one-half section, or one-quarter-section shall be construed as following those lines.
e. Watercourses. Zone district boundaries approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing watercourses shall be construed as following the channel centerline of those watercourses taken at mean low water. In the event of a natural change in the location of those streams, rivers, or other watercourses, the zone district boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel centerline.
B. Interpretation. The Director shall be authorized to determine the precise location of any zone district boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map. The Director shall follow the rules of this Section in determining the location of zone district boundaries.
C. Amendment. Map Amendments approved by the City Council shall be entered on the map by the Director promptly following adoption.
D. Adoption of New Map. City Council may, by ordinance, adopt a new Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map shall contain the signatures of the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission and Mayor and be attested by the City Clerk.
CONFLICTING REGULATIONS
A. Conflict with State or Federal Regulations. If the provisions of this LDC are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the LDC shall control, unless preempted.
B. Conflict with Other City Regulations. If the provisions of this LDC are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions found in other adopted codes or regulations of the City, the more restrictive provision will control.
C. Conflict with Private Easements, Agreements, Covenants or Restrictions. This LDC is not intended to abrogate, annul, or otherwise interfere with any private easement, agreement, covenant, restriction, or other private legal relationship. However, private covenants are considered subordinate to this LDC. The City is responsible for enforcing this LDC; it does not enforce private agreements, easements, covenants, or restrictions except those specifically required for the administration and enforcement of this LDC.
VIOLATIONS CONTINUE
Any violation of the previous zoning, subdivision or other regulations of the City shall continue to be a violation under this LDC and shall be subject to penalties and enforcement under Section 15 (Violations, Penalties and Enforcement), unless the use, development, construction or other activity is consistent with the express terms of this LDC.
§1.11 PRESUMPTION OF VALIDITY
PAGE 1-10 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
PRESUMPTION OF VALIDITY
All provisions of this LDC are presumed to be valid and enforceable. In any challenge to the validity of any provision, the burden of proof shall rest with the person bringing the challenge.
SEVERABILITY
If any Court of competent jurisdiction rules any provision of this LDC invalid, that ruling shall not affect any LDC provision not specifically included in the judgment. If any Court of competent jurisdiction rules invalid the application of any provision of this LDC to a particular property, building, or other structure, or use, that ruling shall not affect the application of the LDC provisions to any property, building, other structure, or use not specifically included in the judgment. Furthermore, if any requirement(s) of this LDC is challenged in a Court of competent jurisdiction, any associated land use approval(s) shall be wholly repealed.
§2.1 ZONE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-1
Section 2. Zoning Districts
ZONE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
In order to implement the City of Gunnison Master Plan and promote the purposes of this Land Development Code, the following zone districts are established.
ZONE DISTRICT PURPOSE STATEMENTS
A. Residential Zone District Purposes
1. Single-Family Residential (R-1). This zone district is established to provide for orderly suburban residential development and redevelopment, and it maintains residential areas at low densities characterized by detached single-family dwelling units.
2. Single-Family Residential Modified (R-1M). This zone district is established to provide for residential neighborhoods comprised of detached single-family dwellings on smaller lots than are permitted in the R-1 zone district, allowing for slightly greater overall densities. Areas designated Modified Single-Family Residential (R-1M) includes relatively low density development areas.
3. Duplex Residential (R-2). This zone district is established to provide for moderate density residential areas comprised of single-family dwellings and duplex dwellings, with no more than two units permitted in any structure. Two detached single-family dwellings are not allowed on an individual lot, unless one of the dwelling units is an Accessory Dwelling Unit.
4. Residential Mixed Use (RMU). This zone district is established to provide for relatively high density single-family, duplex and multi-family residential areas, including primarily triplex, townhouse, and multi-family dwelling uses.
5. Multi-Family Residential (R-3). This zone district is established to provide for high density multi-family residential areas and mobile home parks.
TABLE 2-1 BASE ZONE DISTRICTS
SYMBOL
ZONE DISTRICT NAME
RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS
R-1
Single-Family Residential
R-1M
Single-Family Residential Modified
R-2
Duplex Residential
RMU
Residential Mixed Use
R-3
Multi-Family Residential
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS
B-1
Professional Business
CBD
Central Business
C
Commercial
I
Industrial
SPECIAL PURPOSE AND PLANNED ZONE DISTRICTS
WSCU
Western State Colorado University
PUD - O
Planned Unit Development - Overlay
PUD - M
Planned Unit Development - Mixed Use
§2.2 ZONE DISTRICT PURPOSE STATEMENTS
PAGE 2-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
B. Nonresidential Zone District Purposes
1. Professional Business Zone District (B-1). This zone district is established to provide for a transitional area between the commercial and residential zone districts, by allowing for relatively lower intensity commercial uses that are compatible with residential uses and maintain the architectural and urban design character of the existing residential neighborhood. Current areas designated Professional Business (B-1) are transitional neighborhoods located adjacent to the Central Business District (CBD) and Commercial (C) zone district.
2. Central Business Zone District (CBD). This zone district is established to provide for the business and civic functions that make up the city core. The Central Business District (CBD) has a strong pedestrian character and provides for concentrated commercial activity, with buildings covering the entire street frontage. It contains a mix of business, commercial and residential uses, and serves the needs of the entire community and those of visitors to the community.
3. Commercial Zone District (C). This zone district is established to provide locations for offices, service uses, hotel accommodations and businesses retailing durable and convenience goods. Upper-floor residential dwellings are allowed. The Commercial zone district is located along the city’s main entrance corridors and, therefore, businesses are accessible-to, and serve, the entire community. Site design and buffering mitigate traffic and operations impacts upon adjacent neighborhoods.
4. Industrial Zone District (I). This zone district is established to provide areas for a broad-range of manufacturing, production, product transport, and other industrial uses. These industries should be operated in a relatively clean and quiet manner, and should not be obnoxious to nearby residential or business districts, warehousing and wholesaling activities, and research facilities.
C. Special Zone District Purposes
Western State Colorado University (WSCU). The Western State Colorado University (WSCU) zone district contains the geographic extent of the university real property and campus, with facilities, activity areas, and open space that support related higher education functions. The City and university work together to ensure that the planning and development of the campus is compatible with adjacent municipal uses, that utility service needs are adequately addressed, and that pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation are designed to efficiently serve the university and community needs.
D. Planned Unit Development
1. A Planned Unit Development (PUD) is a land area such that varying land uses and innovative design and layout of the development provide significant benefits to both the developer and the City over those land use patterns developed and regulated under conventional zoning districts and development standards. Such benefits include the provision of open space for the benefit of the residents and other users, the conservation of natural landscape features, provision of affordable housing, employment opportunities, variety in land use patterns and more efficient provision of services and utilities.
§2.3 DESIGNATED HOUSING TYPES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-3
2. In a PUD, the various land use elements are designed so that they interrelate cohesively with each other; therefore, strict application of standard zone district regulations becomes unnecessary instead, other specific development and design requirements are included in the PUD. The boundary between the PUD and adjacent zone districts requires particular attention to ensure that land use patterns are compatible. To enable a more thorough analysis of a PUD, more information is required about the proposal than would be required if development were being pursued within conventional zoning districts.
3. The approval of a PUD constitutes a Zoning Amendment as described in Section 10 of the LDC and is established by rezoning an area in an existing zone district to a PUD zone or by initial zoning of newly annexed territory to PUD zoning.
DESIGNATED HOUSING TYPES
A. Definitions. The following housing types are established to provide a common terminology used in this LDC. All drawings are for illustrative purposes only.
TABLE 2-2 DESIGNATED HOUSING TYPES
Single-Family Detached or Manufactured Home
A detached dwelling unit located on a single lot with private yards on all four sides.
Zero Lot Line Dwelling
A detached dwelling unit located on a single lot with private yards on three sides. The unit has a single side yard on one side comprising the equivalent of two side yards of a single-family detached house. A zero lot line development shall be carried out for an entire block, as a row of units, or as a cluster in order to achieve an overall compatibility of design and so zero lot line dwellings are not situated immediately adjacent to traditionally sited dwellings.
§2.3 DESIGNATED HOUSING TYPES
PAGE 2-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Two-family Dwelling
Two attached dwelling units in a single structure on a single lot (often called a duplex). The two units can be located on separate floors or side-by-side.
Townhouse
Two or more attached dwelling units located on separately owned lots or on a single lot. The units are lined up in a row and share side walls. Dwelling units cannot be mixed vertically.
Multi-Family
Three or more attached dwelling units in a single structure on a single lot. A multi-family dwelling can vary in height from two to three stories. Dwelling units can be mixed vertically.
Upper-Story Residential
A dwelling unit located on a floor above a nonresidential use.
Accessory Dwelling Unit
A dwelling unit with a floor area between 300 and 720 square feet and is located on the same site as, but have a separate entrance from, a single-family dwelling.
B. Manufactured Housing. Manufactured homes are factory-built dwelling units, manufactured or constructed to comply with the standards of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. Manufactured homes shall meet the standards of §3.3 (Residential Use Standards). Any manufactured home which does not meet any of the standards of §3.3 shall be considered a mobile home, and shall comply with all standards of this LDC applicable to such use.
§2.4 PRINCIPAL USE TABLE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-5
C. Mobile Home. “Mobile home” means a dwelling which is eight feet or more in width and 40 feet or more in body length, is designed to be transported on its own permanent chassis after fabrication, and which is designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without permanent foundation, when the required plumbing, heating, and electrical facilities are connected. Mobile homes shall comply with one of the following circumstances.
1. Comply with HUD Code. New or used mobile homes installed after the effective date of this LDC shall comply with the standards of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (hereinafter referred to as “the HUD Code”). Such mobile homes shall have a roof capable of bearing a minimum 40-pound snow load.
2. Pre-date HUD Code. Mobile homes built prior to the HUD Code shall have a roof capable of bearing a minimum 30-pound snow load.
PRINCIPAL USE TABLE
A. Permitted Uses.A “P” indicates that a use is allowed by right in the respective zoning district and may be reviewed and approved by the Director. Permitted uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this LDC.
B. Conditional Uses. A “C” indicates that a use is allowed only if reviewed and approved as a Conditional Use, in accordance with the Conditional Use review procedures of Section 7 (Conditional Uses). Conditional Uses are subject to all applicable regulations of this LDC.
C. Uses Not Allowed. A blank cell indicates that a use is not allowed.
D. Specific Use Standards. The final column titled “Use Standards” contains a cross-reference to related standards established in Specific Use Regulations, of this LDC. Where no cross-reference is shown, no additional use standard shall apply.
E. Uses Not Listed. The Director shall use the criteria in §3.1 to determine how an unlisted use should be treated.
§2.4 PRINCIPAL USE TABLE
PAGE 2-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 2-3 PRINCIPAL USE TABLE
Use Categories
Specific Uses
RESIDENTIAL
ZONING
DISTRICTS
NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
R-1
R-1M
R-2
RMU
R-3
B-1
CBD
C
I
Use
Standards
Residential Use Categories (§3.2)
Household Living
Accessory Dwelling1
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
§3.3H
Duplex dwellings
P
P
P
C
C
§3.3C
Manufactured homes
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
C §3.3B
Mobile home parks
C
§3.3I
Multi-family dwellings
P
P
C
C
§3.3D
Single-family dwellings
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
C
§3.3 C
Townhouses
P
P
C2
§3.3F
Upper story residential1
P
P
P
P
§3.3G
Zero lot line dwellings
P
P
P §3.3E
Congregate Living
Assisted Living homes
C3
C3
C3
C3
C3
C3
§3.3J
Nursing home
C
C
C
C
§3.3J
Rooming and boarding houses, dormitories, fraternities or sororities
C
C
§3.3K
Home Occupation and Home Business
Home Occupation
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
§3.3L
Home Business
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
§3.3L
Marijuana
Personal Use of Marijuana
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
§3.3M
Public, Civic and Institutional Use Categories (§3.4)
Community
Service
Detention Center
P
--
Mausoleum, columbarium
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
--
Neighborhood or community centers
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
--
Public garage or shop
P
--
Educational Facilities
School, public or private
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
§3.4A
School, trade or business
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Day Care
Daycare Center
C
C
C
C2
§3.5A
Daycare Home
C
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
Daycare School
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Marijuana-Related Business
Marijuana Club or Vapor Lounge4
--
Medical
Hospitals
C
P
--
Parks and Open Space
Parks and recreational facilities
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
--
Religious Institutions
Churches or places of worship
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
§3.5B
Utilities
Major utilities (private only)
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
--
Minor utilities
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
--
Accommodation, Retail, Service - Commercial Use Categories (§3.6)
Entertainment Event, Major
Auditoriums
C
P
P
--
1 See special allowances in the Use Standards.
2 Ordinance 4, 2014
3 Conditional Use is limited to not more than eight developmentally disabled or eight mentally ill persons pursuant to CRS §31-23-304(4).
4 Ordinance 5, 2015
§2.4 PRINCIPAL USE TABLE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-7
TABLE 2-3 PRINCIPAL USE TABLE
Use Categories
Specific Uses
RESIDENTIAL
ZONING
DISTRICTS
NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
R-1
R-1M
R-2
RMU
R-3
B-1
CBD
C
I
Use
Standards
Fairgrounds
P
--
Office
Banks and financial institutions
C
P
P
--
Government offices
C
P
P
P
P
--
Medical clinic or dental office
P
P
P
--
Professional offices
P
P
P
C
--
Radio and television studios
P
P
P
--
Parking, Commercial
Commercial parking lots and garages
C
P
P
--
Retail Sales, Rental and Service,
Sales-Oriented
Art Galleries
P
P
P
--
Auto sales and rental
P
P
--
Automotive Supplies
P
P
--
Book stores
P
P
P
C
--
Convenience Stores, without gas pumps
P
P
P
--
Drive-in
C
C
C
C
§3.12B
Furniture and Appliance Stores
P
P
P
--
Greenhouse or nursery
C
C
P
P
--
Lumber and building material sales
C
P
--
Outside Sales or Display
C
P
P
§3.7 B.3.
Recreational Vehicle Sales
P
P
--
Retail Grocery Store
C
C
P
C
--
Retail Sales and Service,
Personal Service-Oriented
Athletic or Health Clubs
P
P
P
P
--
Barber and beauty shops
P
P
P
--
Drive-in
C
C
C
C
§3.12.B.
Dry cleaning drop-off/pick-up
P
P
P
P
--
Funeral homes and mortuaries
C
P
P
--
Kennels
C
P
--
Laundromats
C
P
P
--
Photography studios
P
P
P
P
--
Veterinary clinic
P
P
--
Marijuana5
Retail Marijuana
P
C
§3.15
Medical Marijuana Centers
P
C
§3.15
Accommodations
Bed and breakfasts
C
C
C
C
P6
§3.7 A.1.
Hostels
C
C
C
C
P
§3.7 A.2.
Hotels and motels
C
P
§3.7 A.3.
RV Parks
C
C
C
§3.7.A.4.
Retail Sales and Service,
Eating and Drinking –Oriented
Bars and taverns
P
P
C
--
Coffee shop/bakery
C
P
P
P
--
Drive-in
C
C
C
§3.12 B.
Restaurants
P
P
P
C
--
5 Ordinance 5, 2015
6 Ordinance 3, 2015
§2.4 PRINCIPAL USE TABLE
PAGE 2-8 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 2-3 PRINCIPAL USE TABLE
Use Categories
Specific Uses
RESIDENTIAL
ZONING
DISTRICTS
NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
R-1
R-1M
R-2
RMU
R-3
B-1
CBD
C
I
Use
Standards
Retail Sales and Service,
Entertainment-Oriented
Private lodges and clubs
P
P
C
--
Recreation, indoor
P
P
C
--
Theater
P
P
P
--
Retail Sales and Service,
Repair-Oriented
Appliance repair
C
P
P
--
Bicycle repair/rental
P
P
P
P
--
Locksmith
C
P
P
P
--
Vehicle Services, Limited
Car washes
P
P
--
Convenience stores, with gas pumps
C
P
P
§3.7 B.1.
Service stations
P
P
--
Industrial Use Categories (§3.8)
Industrial Sales and Service
Agricultural implement sales/service
P
P
--
Building and heating contractors
P
P
--
Chemicals or explosives manufacture
C
--
Dry cleaning/dyeing plant
C
P
P
--
Feed and grain sales
P
P
--
Manufactured home sales/service
C
P
--
Repair and service of industrial vehicles
C
P
--
Research laboratories
C
P
--
Salvage or wrecking yards, or junkyards
C
--
Sale, rental, leasing of heavy equipment
C
P
--
Truck Stop
C
P
--
Manufacturing and Production
Catering Services
C
P
P
P
--
Concrete or redi-mix plant
P
--
Firewood Production7
C
P
--
Greenhouse/nursery
C
P
P
--
Industrial Hemp Production
P
--
Manufacture or assembly of machinery, equipment, instruments
C
P
--
Meat Processing
C
--
Printing, publishing and lithography
C
P
P
P
--
Woodworking and cabinet shops
C
P
--
7 Ordinance 4, 2014
§2.5 BASE PRINCIPLE USE CATEGORIES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-9
TABLE 2-3 PRINCIPAL USE TABLE
Use Categories
Specific Uses
RESIDENTIAL
ZONING
DISTRICTS
NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
R-1
R-1M
R-2
RMU
R-3
B-1
CBD
C
I
Use
Standards
Marijuana
Manufacturing and Production8
Marijuana manufacturing
P
§3.15
Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing
P
§3.15
Marijuana cultivation
P
§3.15
Medical marijuana optional premises cultivation operation
P
§3.15
Marijuana testing facility
P
P
§3.15
Self-storage Warehouse
Mini-warehouses and mini-storage
P
--
Vehicle Repair
Auto body shops
C
P
§3.7.B.2
Auto, truck and boat repair
C
P
§3.7.B.2
Quick lube service
P
P
§3.7.B.2
Warehouse and Freight Movement
Air cargo terminal
P
--
Outdoor storage, general
C
P
§3.9B.
Post Office
P
P
P
--
Recreational vehicle storage
C
P
§3.9B.
Utility service yards or garages
C
P
§3.9B.
Warehouses and truck terminals
P
§3.9B.
Waste-Related
Transfer stations
P
--
Recycling centers
P
--
Wholesale Sales
Mail order houses
P
P
P
--
Wholesalers of food, clothing, and parts
C
P
--
Other Uses Categories §3.10
Adult entertainment
Sexually oriented businesses
C
§3.10 C.
Alternative Energy
Solar Voltaic and Wind Turbines
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
§3.11 D.
Aviation and Surface Transportation
Airports and related facilities, public
P
§3.11 A.
Mining
Processing of aggregate mineral or other subsurface resources
C
§3.11 E.
Asphalt Batch Plant
C
§3.11 E.
Telecommunications Facilities
Telecommunications facilities and towers
C
C
P
§3.11 B.
Temporary Commercial Activity
General retail sales or other commercial use operated outside of a building on a seasonal basis.
C
C
C
§3.13
BASE PRINCIPLE USE CATEGORIES
A. Authority. If an application is submitted for a use type not listed the Principal Use Table (§2.4),
8 Ordinance 5, 2015
§2.5 BASE PRINCIPLE USE CATEGORIES
PAGE 2-10 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
the Director shall be authorized to make a similar use interpretation, based on the following considerations:
1. the actual or projected characteristics of the activity in relation to the use category cited in the Principal Use Table (§2.4);
2. the relative amount of site area or floor space and equipment devoted to the activity;
3. relative amounts of transaction volume from each activity;
4. the customer type for each activity;
5. the number of employees in each activity;
6. hours of operation;
7. noise and odor generation;
8. architectural mass and form;
9. site design and arrangement;
10. parking demand;
11. vehicles used with the activity;
12. the relative number of vehicle trips generated by the use;
13. delivery volume;
14. signs;
15. how the use advertises itself;
16. whether the activity is likely to be found independent of the other activities on the site; and
17. effect of the proposed use on uses adjacent to the site.
B. Use Interpretation Standards
1. No use interpretation shall allow a use in a zone district when that use is a Permitted or Conditional Use in any other zone district.
2. No use interpretation shall permit any use in any zone district unless evidence is presented demonstrating that it will comply with all applicable requirements and standards of this LDC.
3. No use interpretation shall permit any use in a zone district unless said considerations cited above demonstrate that the use in question is roughly proportional to Permitted and Conditional Uses in the underlying zone district.
4. If the proposed use is more similar to a use allowed only as a Conditional Use in the zone district in which it is proposed to be located, then any similar use interpretation permitting that use shall require a Conditional Use Permit, as appropriate.
C. Use Interpretation Effect. No similar use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specific zone district shall authorize the establishment of such use or the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits
§2.6 BASE ZONE DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-11
and approvals that may be required by this LDC and ordinances of the City of Gunnison. Permits and approvals include, but are not limited to: Conditional Use permits, development permits, building permits, and building certificates of occupancy.
BASE ZONE DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
A. Intent. The base zone district dimensional standards establish maximum density and intensity, lot sizes, height standards, and lot coverage criteria for all development applications. These standards allow for variety in housing types while maintaining the overall character of neighborhoods and commercial areas of the city. Separate standards are established to regulate development in each base zone district. This approach to zone district development standards promotes development intensities that match existing and proposed infrastructure investments.
B. Dimensional Standards - Residential Zone Districts
1. Development Standards. Development applications shall comply with all applicable development standards as set forth in this LDC and other applicable laws.
2. Dimensional Standards. Development applications shall comply with the following dimensional and all other provisions in this LDC and other applicable laws.
TABLE 2-4 RESIDENTIAL DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Dimensional Standard
R-1
R-1M
R-2
RMU
R-3
Maximum density (units/acre)
3.5
6
14
16
30
Lot Size Single-Family (sq. ft.) 
8,000
6,250
6,250
6,250
6,250
Lot Size Duplex (per unit) (sq. ft.) 
3,125
3,125
3,125
Lot Size Townhouse (per unit) (sq. ft.)
2,250
2,250
Lot Size Multi-Family (per unit) (sq. ft.) 
Single Story
Two Story
Three Story
3,000
3,000
2,500
2,500
2,000
2,000
Maximum lot coverage structures
40%
40%
40%
45%
45%
Maximum lot coverage parking/access
10%
10%
15%
20%
40%
Minimum lot coverage landscape area
50%
50%
45%
35%
15%
Minimum lot frontage
Single-Family
Duplex (per unit)
Townhouse (per unit)
Multi-Family
Zero-Lot Line
50'
50'
50'
50'
50'
25'
25'
25'
20'
20'
100'
100'
50'
50'
50'
50'
50'
Minimum setback front2
15'
15'
15'
15'
15'
Minimum setback side
Provided that one additional foot of setback shall be required for each two and one-half feet
(a 1:2.5 ratio) of building height over 22.5 feet
10'
5'
5'
5'
5'
Minimum setback rear lot line: principal building
Provided that one additional foot of setback shall be required for each two and one-half feet
(a 1:2.5 ratio) of building height over 22.5 feet
10'
5'
5'
5'
5'
Minimum setback rear lot line: accessory building
10'
5'
5'
5'
5'
Maximum building height
35'
35'
35'
35'
35'
§2.6 BASE ZONE DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
PAGE 2-12 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 2-4 RESIDENTIAL DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Dimensional Standard
R-1
R-1M
R-2
RMU
R-3
Maximum building height for detached accessory structure
30'
30'
30'
30'
30'
Minimum building width
24'
24'
20'
20'
20'
Minimum floor area Principal Dwelling (sq. ft.)
480
480
480
300 efficiency
300 efficiency
480 multi-family
480 multi-family
Floor Area Thresholds Accessory Dwelling (sq.ft.)
720
Minimum storage area (sq.ft.)
32
32
32
Snow storage (% of parking and access coverage)
15%
15%
15%
15%
15%
1 Density calculations for residential development may be subject to Slope Protection Standards (§5.2) and Section 13.
2 Covered porches and the landings and steps of a covered porch may encroach into the front yard pursuant to §1.7.L.3.d
3 Ordinance #3, Series 2016
3. Solar Access Standards. In order to facilitate reasonable solar access for all residential properties, side and rear setback, and height standards in all residential districts are subject to certain limitations set forth herein.
Exception. Development which includes 25 percent or more affordable dwelling units as established in §13.7. D. of this LDC shall be exempt from solar access height limitations.
One- and Two-Story Dwellings. One- and two-story dwellings within any residential district shall be designed and constructed so as not to cast a shadow greater than a 22.5 foot-tall hypothetical wall located along the side and rear property lines, at noon MST on December 21st.
FIGURE 5 TWO-STORY HIP ROOF MEETING SOLAR ACCESS STANDARDS
FIGURE 6 TWO-STORY GABLE-END ROOF MEETING SOLAR ACCESS STANDARDS
§2.6 BASE ZONE DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 2-13
Three Story Dwellings. Three-story dwellings in any residential district shall be designed and constructed so as not to cast a shadow greater than a 22.5 foot-tall hypothetical wall located along the side and rear property lines, at noon MST on December 21st. Furthermore, any portion of such three story dwellings shall be setback from interior (side or rear lot line) north lot lines an additional 1 foot, beyond the minimum required, for each 2.5 feet or fraction thereof of exceeding
22.5 feet in height. For the purpose of application any side or rear lot line that has a bearing less than or equal to 30° from true east or west shall be considered a
north boundary.
Alternative Compliance. Upon request by an applicant, the Community Development Director may approve an alternative site layout that may be substituted in whole or in part for a plan meeting the standards of this Section.
i. Procedure. Alternative compliance plans shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with submittal requirements for plans as set forth in this Section. The plan shall clearly identify and discuss the modifications and alternatives proposed and the ways in which the plan will better accomplish the purpose of this Section than a plan which complies with the standards of this Section.
ii. Review Criteria. In approving an alternative plan, the Community Development Director shall find that the proposed alternative plan accomplishes the purposes of this Section equally or better than a plan which complies with the standards of this Section, or that site conditions including but not limited to lot size, lot configuration, topography are such that reasonable use of the property is precluded by the application of these solar access standards.
C. Dimensional Standards - Nonresidential Zone Districts
1. Development Standards. Development applications shall meet all applicable development standards as set forth in this LDC and all other applicable laws.
2. Nonresidential Dimensional Standards. Permitted nonresidential uses shall meet the following dimensional standards. Development applications for non-residential uses shall comply with all other provisions of this LDC and all other applicable laws.
3. Upper-Story Residential Dwellings. Upper-story residential units are permitted on the upper floors of nonresidential buildings, but shall conform to all lot, yard and bulk requirements of the principal building.
FIGURE 7 THREE-STORY MEETING SOLAR ACCESS STANDARDS
§2.7 WESTERN STATE COLORADO UNIVERSITY STANDARDS
PAGE 2-14 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
WESTERN STATE COLORADO UNIVERSITY STANDARDS
A. Applicability. Western State Colorado University (WSCU) zone district standards apply to related properties identified on the Official Zoning Map.
B. Allowed Uses. Uses allowed in the WSCU zone district are those pertinent to the operations of Western State Colorado University.
C. Zone District Standards. District standards applicable in the WSCU zone district shall be those established and regulated by the State of Colorado.
TABLE 2-5 NONRESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
STANDARD
B-1
C
CBD
I
DENSITY
Max. density (units/acre)
7
14
NA
7
LOT
Minimum lot size (sq. ft.)
6,250
8,000
--
6,250
Minimum lot frontage (ft.)
50
50
--
50
Maximum lot coverage: (%) structures
40
50
100
60
Maximum lot coverage: (%) Parking Access
15
40
N/A
30
Minimum landscape area (%)
45
10
--
10
BUILDING
Maximum building height (ft.)
35
35
35
35
Minimum building width (ft.)
24
--
--
--
Minimum floor area:
Multi-family (sq. ft.)
480
300 efficiency
--
--
480 multi-family
Minimum floor area:
Second story residence (sq. ft.)
300
300
300
300 min
700 max
Minimum storage area (sq. ft.)1
32
32
32
--
BUILDING SETBACKS
Minimum from side lot line (ft.)
5
52
no. req.
51
Minimum from rear lot line (ft.) principal building
5
52
no req.
52
Minimum from rear lot line (ft.) accessory building
5
52
N/A
N/A
Minimum from front lot line (ft.)
153
152
no req.
02
Other Standards
Snow Storage Area (% of parking and access coverage)
15
15
N/A
15
1Storage is required for multi-family dwellings) (§3.3D)
2 Uses adjacent to residential zone districts shall comply with Zone District Buffer Standards
(§4.6 F. 3).
3 Parking not allowed within front setback area in B-1 Zone District
§3.1 GENERAL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-1
Section 3. Specific Use Regulations
GENERAL
A. Section Structure. This Section is structured so that specific land use categories are described in general terms, and these descriptions are followed by specific regulations that apply to these land use categories.
B. General Land Use Categories. Use Categories shall be defined or otherwise interpreted in accordance with the following.
1. Basis for Classifications. Land use categories classify activities and uses based on common functions, product assembly and delivery, and/or physical characteristics. Characteristics include the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered and site conditions. Use categories, as established by Table 2-3, provide a systematic basis for assigning present and future land uses into appropriate zoning districts.
2. Principal Uses. Principal uses are assigned to the category that most closely describes their physical nature and function. The “Characteristics” subsection of each use category describes the common characteristics of each principal use.
3. Developments with Multiple Principal Uses. Principal uses may fall into one use category or there will be instances when several principal use classifications are considered simultaneously.
When all principal uses of a development fall within one use category, the entire development is assigned to that use category. A development that contains a department store, drug store and dry goods store, for example, is classified in the Retail Sales and Service category, Sales-Oriented because all of the development’s principal uses are in that category.
When the principal uses of a development fall within different use categories, each principal use is classified in the applicable category, and each use is subject to all applicable regulations for that category. A development including department store, drug store and coffee shop, for example, is classified as the Retail Sales and Service, Sales-oriented; however the coffee shop is classified as the Retail Sales and Service, Eating and Drinking-Oriented.
4. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses are allowed by right in conjunction with a principal use unless otherwise stated in the regulations. In addition, unless otherwise stated, accessory uses are subject to the same regulations as the principal use. Common accessory uses are listed as examples in the use category descriptions.
C. Use Regulations. This Section describes a series of regulations that apply directly to designated land use categories. These land use-specific regulations apply to both permitted and conditional uses. Additionally, these regulations do not abrogate these land uses from other standards set forth in this LDC.
§3.2 RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES
PAGE 3-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
RESIDENTIAL USE CATEGORIES
A. Household Living Characteristics. Household Living is characterized by the residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a single family. Tenancy is to be arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis. Shorter rental periods are considered to be a form of transient lodging rather than residential (see the Accommodations categories).
1. Household Living Accessory Uses. Accessory uses commonly associated with Household Living are recreational activities, hobbies, home occupations, swimming pools, garages, carports, greenhouses, and storage of household goods and equipment.
B. Congregate Living Characteristics. Congregate Living is characterized by the residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people who do not comply with the standards for Household Living. The size of the group may be larger than the average size of a household. Tenancy is arranged on a monthly or longer basis. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period are considered to be transient lodging. Generally, Congregate Living structures have a common eating area for residents. The residents may receive care, training, or treatment, and the caregivers may also reside at the site.
1. Congregate Living Accessory Uses. Accessory uses commonly associated with Congregate Living are recreational facilities, dining facilities, offices, and maintenance facilities and parking of vehicles for occupants and staff.
2. Examples. Congregate Living includes boarding houses, dormitories; fraternities and sororities; homeless shelters; monasteries and convents; nursing and convalescent homes; homes for more than eight resident clients who are physically disabled, mentally disabled, or emotionally disturbed; and may include temporary housing for battered women or homeless families.
3. Exceptions
Lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods of less than 15 days is classified in the Accommodations category.
Lodging where the residents comply with the definition of Household and where tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis or for a longer period is classified as Household Living.
Care-giving facilities where individual units meet the definition of a dwelling unit, and pursuant to §3.2 are classified as Household Living.
RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS
A. Applicability. The standards of this Section shall apply to all permitted, conditional uses, as set forth in the Principal Use Table found in §2.4 of this LDC. Residential development is also subject to all applicable General Development Standards (Section 4) and Natural Resource Protection Standards (Section 5).
§3.3 RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-3
B. Manufactured Housing. Manufactured housing shall meet the following specific standards.
1. Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Depending on the designated housing type or occupancy, manufactured housing may be subject to the installation of automatic fire sprinkler systems pursuant to standards required by adopted fire and building codes.
2. Foundation. Manufactured housing shall be permanently affixed to a foundation in a manner which complies with the current Building Code. The manufactured structure shall not be equipped with a permanent hitch, axle or wheels following its installation.
3. Manufactured Home Roof Pitch. The roof pitch of a manufactured home shall have a minimum pitch of three feet in 12 feet.
4. Overhang. The roof shall have an overhang of not less than one foot, measured from the vertical wall-plane of the buildings.
5. Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria. Manufactured housing shall be constructed to meet the climatic and geographic design criteria established in the adopted building codes. These criteria define values for snow load, wind speed, seismic category and other related engineering design values.
6. Energy Conservation Standards. Manufactured housing shall be designed and constructed so as to comply with the minimum insulation standards in the adopted Building Code.
7. Other Standards. Manufactured housing shall comply with additional standards in §3.3.C. through §3.3.H, along with all other applicable provisions of the LDC.
C. Single-Family Residential and Duplex Features
1. Foundation. All homes at the time of construction shall be permanently affixed to a foundation in a manner which complies with the current Building Code for residential structures.
2. Dimensions
a. Width. Each home shall comply with the following minimum width requirements on at least two non-opposing (not parallel) walls.
b. Size. The home shall comply with the minimum floor area standard of the zone district in which it is located, as specified in §2.6.
3. Multiple Detached Single-Family Units. No more than one single-family dwelling shall be permitted on any platted lot of record in the R-2 zone district unless one of the dwelling units is an Accessory Dwelling Unit. No more than one single-family dwelling shall be permitted on any platted lot of record in the RMU and R-3 zone districts unless the dwelling units are
TABLE 3-1MINIMUM BUILDING WIDTH
Zone District
R-1
R-1M
R-2
RMU
R-3
B-1
Minimum Building Width
24 ft.
24 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
24 ft.
§3.3 RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
part of a Common Interest Community and the development plan is found to be in compliance with the dimensional standards in §2.4 (Principal Use Table) of this LDC.
4. Exterior Materials. The side and roof covering materials shall be materials customarily used on conventional dwellings within the city. Reflective finishes shall not be permitted, but metals designed to oxidize quickly (patina) and create a non-metallic luster are permitted. Siding materials shall extend below the foundation mud-sill, or pursuant to Building Code requirements.
5. Porches. By relaxing setback criteria, residential dwellings are encouraged to have covered front porches and site-built steps, constructed with exterior materials matching the structure.
D. Multi-Family Dwellings
1. Parking. Parking spaces encroach on the rear yard only, but they shall not be located within three feet of the rear property line.
2. Site Access. Access for multi-family developments with 25 or more dwelling units is governed by the provisions of §4.3 and the International Fire Code.
3. Interior Accessways. Pedestrian access shall be constructed to link residential buildings with other on-site destinations such as parking, adjoining public sidewalks and streets, mailboxes, and trash dumpsters (see §4.5).
4. Building Separation. The minimum building separation in a complex shall be 10 feet, provided that one additional foot of setback shall be required for every two and one-half feet of the average building height over 22.5 feet on the basis of the average height of the two buildings.
5. Minimum Floor Area. Minimum floor area shall be 300 square feet for efficiency units and 480 square feet for all other multi-family dwellings.
6. Storage. Each dwelling shall have a minimum of 32 square feet of functional, enclosed area for the storage of residents’ personal belongings. The storage area may be contained within the principal building or an accessory building, but must be easily accessible from outdoors; the storage space shall have a minimum height of eight feet.
7. Trash Receptacles. Trash receptacles shall not be located in the front yard (see §4.6 I.).
E. Zero Lot Line Development
1. The site area designated for detached single-family zero-lot line development shall not be less than one acre or one-half block of traditional grid served by an alley.1 Zero lot line development shall be carried out for an
1 One half-block (12 lots) = 37,440 sq. ft.
FIGURE 8 ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT
§3.3 RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-5
entire block, as a row of units or as a cluster in order to achieve an overall compatibility of design. Zero lot line dwellings shall not be situated immediately adjacent to traditionally sited dwellings.
2. A single side yard shall be provided comprising the equivalent of two side yards of a conventional detached house, or 10 feet, whichever is more. This reduction shall not be allowed on the street yard or to the side yard adjacent to lots that are not part of the zero lot line development.
3. An easement on the lot adjacent to the zero lot line shall be required to allow for maintenance or repair, when the roof overhang or side wall of the house are within four feet of the adjacent property line. The easement on the adjacent property must provide at least six feet of unobstructed space. The easement shall be recorded on the subdivision plat.
4. The eaves on the side of a house with a reduced setback may project a maximum of 18 inches over the adjacent property line. In this case, an easement for the eave projection must be recorded on the deed for the lot where the projection occurs.
5. If the side wall of the house is on the property line, or within three feet of the property line, windows or other openings that allow for visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot shall not be allowed, unless required by the Building Code for emergency egress. Windows that do not allow visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot, such as a clerestory window or a translucent window, shall be allowed.
6. The exterior wall plane of a dwelling unit in a zero-lot line development shall not extend beyond the property line.
7. Corner lot / unit configurations must have a front and side yard.
F. Townhouses
1. Yards. Side yards are not required for interior townhouses, but street and rear yards shall be provided to all dwelling units.
2. Building Separation. The minimum building separation shall be 20 feet, provided that one additional foot of setback shall be required for every two and one half feet of the average building height over 22.5 feet. The average building height equals the average building height of the buildings under consideration.
3. Garages and Parking. All townhouse garages and parking areas are encouraged to be located to the rear of the building or within an interior courtyard area of a complex. Garages located in the front yard shall be setback a minimum of 22 feet. No more than one exterior parking space per unit shall be permitted in the street yard.
4. Maximum Number of Units. The maximum number of units allowed in a single building is eight.
5. Minimum Setback. The minimum 10 foot setback shall be maintained between townhouse complex and adjacent lots not considered part of the complex, provided that one additional foot of setback shall be required for every two and one-half feet of building height over 22.5 feet.
§3.3 RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
G. Upper-Story Residential
1. Such uses shall adhere to all dimensional standards of the nonresidential zone district.
2. Minimum floor area shall be 300 square feet.
3. Dwelling units shall be built in a pattern and of materials, complementary to the principal structure.
4. One off-street parking space shall be provided pursuant to Table 4-7 Off-Street Parking Requirements.
5. Upper-story residential dwelling units shall not be condominiumized or sold separately and shall not be rented to guests for periods of less than 30 days.
H. Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory dwelling units may be allowed in any zone district except the R-1 and the R-1M zone district. Accessory dwelling units are subject to compliance with the standards of this section.
1. An accessory dwelling unit may be allowed as an accessory use to an otherwise allowed single-family dwelling unit that is the principal use on a lot or parcel of at least 6,250 square feet.
2. Accessory dwelling units may be attached-to or detached-from the principal dwelling, provided:
if attached to the principal dwelling, no new entrance or other exterior modifications shall be visible from the street to suggest the presence of the accessory dwelling unit.
if detached from the principal dwelling, the accessory dwelling shall be located in the rear yard and comply with all setback requirements of the principal dwelling unit.
3. Detached accessory dwelling units not located over a garage shall be separated from the principal dwelling by up to 12 feet.
4. Minimum size shall be 300 square feet and maximum size shall be 720 square feet.
5. Maximum height of detached accessory dwellings shall be 30 feet.
6. Accessory dwellings shall be built in a pattern and of materials complementary to the principal structure.
7. One off-street parking space shall be provided in addition to other required parking.
8. Accessory dwelling units shall not be condominiumized or sold separately and shall not be rented to guests for periods of less than 30 days.
9. Accessory dwelling units will be allowed in the CBD and Commercial zone districts if not on the street frontage.
10. Must be an accessory use to commercial or industrial uses in the Commercial and Industrial zone districts.
§3.3 RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-7
I. Mobile Home Parks. Mobile home parks shall comply with the standards of this section.
1. Minimum Community Size. Mobile home parks shall be developed and operated on a lot containing a minimum of one-half acre.
2. Maximum Density. The maximum net density in mobile home parks shall be 12 dwellings per acre.
3. Minimum Space Size
Single-Section Unit. The minimum space size for a single-section or single-wide mobile home unit shall be 3,000 square feet.
Multi-Section Unit. The minimum space size for a multi-section or double-wide mobile home unit shall be 4,000 square feet.
Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for mobile homes and accessory structures shall be 45 percent of the total gross lot size or lot space.
4. Minimum Setbacks
Perimeter. See §3.3. I.7.e.
Internal Roads. Each mobile home and accessory structure within manufactured home parks shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any interior roadway, with such measurement being taken between the edge of the roadway and the wall of the mobile home.
Side. Each mobile home shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from any other mobile home. Accessory attached or detached structures shall be setback a minimum of five feet from side lot lines.
Rear. Each mobile home within a mobile home park shall be setback a minimum of seven and one-half feet from any rear unit space line. Accessory structures shall be setback a minimum of five feet from rear space lines.
5. Building Height. The maximum permitted height of structures, including principal or accessory buildings and uses, shall be that established by the underlying zoning district.
6. Recreation Area
a. Minimum Standard. A usable area or areas amounting to not less than 10 percent of the gross area of the community shall be designated and improved by the developer for recreational use. The recreation area(s) shall not include any area designated as a roadway, unit space, or storage area, shall be conveniently located and free from all natural hazards. The recreation area shall count toward the minimum landscape area standard of the underlying zone district. The recreation area requirement may be waived by the Commission in the Conditional Use process if it is determined that sufficient public recreation facilities are available in the immediate vicinity of the community.
b. Assurances. As part of the application for the manufactured home park, the developer shall
§3.3 RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-8 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
submit assurances acceptable to the City that the recreation area will be improved in a timely manner so as to be suitable for active recreation use in accord with the approved plan and adequately maintained for as long as the community is in existence.
7. Landscaping
General. Landscaping shall be required for an area amounting to not less than 15 percent of the gross area of the community. The landscape area may include the recreation area and common landscape areas. The required landscape area shall comply with §4.6, Landscaping, Buffering and Screening.
Project Boundary Buffer. A non-arterial street frontage buffer shall be provided along all project boundaries of a mobile home park (see §4.6 F.), unless the boundary is adjacent to an Arterial Street in which case the buffer shall comply with §4.6.F.4.e.
8. Utilities Installation and Connection
Connection Required. No mobile home shall be occupied within any mobile home park unless it is properly placed on an approved unit space and is connected to all utility services, including the city water system, a public sewage disposal system, and electrical lines. Utility connections shall be located on the lot served.
Code Compliance. Utility installations and connection taps shall be installed to comply with all state and local codes. Fire hydrants shall be installed to comply with City standards and Fire Codes.
Underground. All utilities, except major power transmission lines, shall be placed underground.
9. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided in compliance with the standards of §4.9, Outdoor Lighting.
10. Site Conditions. Mobile home parks shall be drained, graded, and surfaced as necessary to facilitate drainage and prevent erosion and shall be free from depressions in which water collects and stagnates, other than approved on-site retention facilities.
11. Storm Drainage.Mobile home parks shall be provided with adequate storm drainage facilities pursuant to §5.1 B. and be connected to the City’s storm drainage system if such system as required as part of the development application approval.
12. Snow Removal. All mobile home parks shall be designed so that all internal streets and sidewalks can be cleared and so that the cleared snow can be stored within the community off the roadways and walkways. Snow storage shall comply with §4.4.F.9.
13. Off-street Parking. There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces provided for each mobile home space. A minimum of one of these parking spaces shall be provided on the mobile home space, while one may be located in a common parking area located no further than 300 feet from the mobile home space. Guest parking shall also be provided in a common parking area, with one guest space provided for every four mobile home spaces in the community.
§3.3 RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-9
14. Roadways and Walkways
a. Private. Internal roadways and walkways within the mobile home park shall be privately owned, built and maintained.
b. Walkways. Concrete walkways of not less than three feet in width shall be provided from unit spaces to all service buildings and recreation areas and on at least one side of all roadways within the mobile home park.
c. Access Management. Private roads, access-ways, driveways and parking for mobile home parks shall be comply with the applicable provisions contained in Section 4. Private roads shall be designed as a sub-local street.
15. Location of Unit
a. Obstruction Prohibited. No mobile home shall be parked so that any part of such unit will obstruct any roadway or walkway.
b. Located on an Approved Space. No unit shall be occupied in a community unless the unit is located on an approved unit space.
16. Outdoor Storage
a. Individual Buildings Required. Individual outdoor storage buildings shall be provided on each unit space for the personal use of the occupants of said space. Such storage buildings shall have a minimum floor space of 48 square feet and shall be not less than six feet or greater than 18 feet in height. Space beneath the mobile homes shall not fulfill this requirement.
b. Outdoor Storage Prohibited. No outdoor storage, other than that accommodated in individual outdoor storage buildings, boats, trailers and vehicles when stored on separate and additional parking spaces, shall be allowed on mobile home spaces, except cut and stacked firewood.
17. Mobile Home Park Storage. Storage is allowed in mobile home parks, subject to the following standards:
a. Use. An enclosed area or building may be provided within a mobile home park to be used for the storage of materials incidental to maintenance and management of the mobile home park, including but not limited to goods, materials, equipment, and vehicles belonging to the owners, tenants and/or managers of the mobile home park.
b. Size. Mobile home park storage areas in aggregate shall not exceed 15 percent of the gross area of the mobile home park. This maximum limit of 15 percent shall pre-empt minimum and maximum dimensional standards set forth in §2.6. For purposes of this Section, mobile home park storage is considered a structure.
c. Materials. Materials to be stored must be incidental to the maintenance and management of the mobile home park, and may not fall within the definition of hazardous materials as defined in the International Building Code or International Fire Code as adopted by the
§3.3 RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-10 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
City.
d. Fencing. All storage areas not enclosed by a surrounding building shall be fenced according to the following standards:
i. Fencing shall be permanent and a minimum height of six feet, unless heavy equipment is stored within the manufactured home park storage area, in which case the minimum height of the fencing will be eight feet.
ii. Fencing must be opaque material to prevent visual impacts on the neighborhood.
iii. Fencing shall, at all times, be maintained in good condition.
iv. Fencing shall be subject to the standards set forth in §4.6. H, Fences and Walls.
18. Public Easements. No mobile home park storage shall be permitted on public easements or public rights-of-way.
19. Accessory Storage. Mobile home park storage is only permitted, and shall remain, as an accessory use to a mobile home park. If the principal use of a mobile home park is ended, the use of the property for mobile home community storage must also end.
20. Unit Space Numbering. Each space in the mobile home park shall have its space number displayed in a fashion to make it readily visible from the street during the day and night.
21. Carbon Monoxide and Smoke Detectors. Every mobile home shall be equipped at all times with carbon monoxide and smoke detectors in good working order of such type, size, and number and located within each mobile home as prescribed by the Fire Marshal.
J. Assisted Living Homes. Assisted Living Homes, which are classified as a Conditional Use in related zone districts, shall comply with the standards of this section.
1. Neighborhood Density. No Assisted Living Home shall be located closer than 750 feet to another Assisted Living Home.
2. Health and Safety Codes. Assisted Living Homes shall comply with all applicable local, state or federal health, safety, fire, and building codes.
K. Rooming and Boarding Houses, Dormitories, Fraternity or Sorority Houses. Rooming and boarding houses, and fraternity or sorority houses shall comply with all applicable county and state health codes and sanitation requirements. These houses are classified as a Conditional Use in related zone districts.
L. Home Occupations and Home Businesses. Home occupations shall be permitted as an accessory use to otherwise allowed dwelling units in all zone districts and shall comply with the standards of this Section.
§3.3 RESIDENTIAL USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-11
1. Uses Subordinate. The use of a dwelling for a home occupation or home business shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes and shall not change its basic residential character.
2. Activity Conducted Indoors. All activities associated with a home occupation or home business shall be conducted indoors. Materials and equipment used in the home occupation shall be stored in a building.
3. Employment. Home occupations shall be conducted only by persons residing on the premises. Home businesses shall be conducted by persons residing on the premises and no more than one employee residing off-premises.
4. Patrons. Home occupations shall not serve patrons on the premises, except in an incidental manner. A home business may serve patrons on the premises, provided all other standards of this Section are met.
5. Parking. One off-street parking space shall be required for each home business employee. This space shall be provided in addition to the parking required for the principal residential use of the property.
6. Sales. Incidental sale of supplies or products associated with the home occupation shall be permitted on the premises. A home occupation whose primary activity is retail sales shall be prohibited, except if the function of the home occupation is catalogue sales.
7. Nuisance. A home occupation or home business shall not produce noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibrations, heat, glare, odors, fumes, smoke, dust, traffic, or parking demand, and shall not operate at such hours or in such as manner as to create a public nuisance, disturb neighbors or alter the residential character of the premises.
8. Equipment, Materials or Vehicles. There shall be no visible storage of equipment, materials or vehicles that have more than two axles.
9. Codes. Buildings used for home occupations shall comply with all applicable City building, fire, and safety codes for the particular business.
10. Advertising. No outdoor advertising of the home occupation shall be permitted, except as provided in §4.8.
M. Personal Use of Marijuana. Possessing, growing, or processing marijuana in any residential district and any structure with residential dwelling units shall be governed by the following standards:
1. Applicability. Any person or family member for the purposes of this Section and consistent with Article XVIII, Section 16(3)(b) of the Colorado Constitution, who is twenty-one years of age or older that is cultivating marijuana plants for their own use, may only do so within their primary residence or associated accessory structure.
2. Possession, growing and processing of such marijuana plants must not be perceptible from the exterior of the primary residence or accessory structure, including, but not limited to:
Common visual observation, including any form of signage;
§3.4 PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES
PAGE 3-12 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Unusual odors, smell, fragrances, or other olfactory stimulus; or
Light pollution, glare, or brightness that disturbs the repose of another.
3. Marijuana plants shall not be grown or processed in the common areas of a multi-family or attached residential development.
4. The use of compressed gases, including, but not limited to butane, propane, and hexane, in the cultivation, production, growing and possessing of marijuana plants shall be prohibited.
5. Cultivation, production, growing and possessing of marijuana plants shall be limited to the following space limitations:
Within a single-family dwelling unit, which is defined as Group R-3 in the International Building Code, the aggregate area used for the production and growing of marijuana plants shall be confined to a contiguous 25 square-foot secure area.
6. Notwithstanding the standards established herein, the possession, growing and processing of marijuana shall comply with all adopted City building and life-safety codes and regulations as the same may be amended from time-to-time.
7. The Community Development Director shall have the authority to inspect any primary residence or associate accessory structures used for the possession, growing and processing of marijuana plants, following the provisions of §15.1 of the LDC.
PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES
A. Educational Facilities
1. Characteristics. This category includes public and private schools at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high, high school and post-secondary education level.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses at schools include play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, auditoriums and before- or after-school day care. Accessory uses at the post-secondary level include offices, housing for students, food service, laboratories, health and sports facilities, theaters, meeting areas, parking, maintenance facilities, and support for commercial activity.
3. Examples. Examples include public and private daytime schools, boarding schools, military academies, universities, liberal arts colleges, community colleges, nursing and medical schools not accessory to hospitals and seminaries.
4. Exceptions
a. Preschools are classified as Day Care uses
b. Business and trade schools are classified as Retail Sales and Service
c. Western State Colorado University
§3.4 PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CATEGORIES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-13
B. Community Service
1. Characteristics. Community Services are uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature generally providing a local service to people of the community. The use may provide special counseling, education, or training of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices; meeting areas; food preparation areas; parking, health, and therapy areas; and athletic facilities.
3. Examples. Examples include libraries, museums, neighborhood or community centers, senior centers, penal or correctional facilities, community recreation centers, youth club facilities, garages, shops and storage yards.
4. Exceptions
a. Private lodges and clubs, and private or commercial athletic or health clubs are classified as Retail Sales and Service.
b. Public parks and recreation are classified as Parks and Open Space.
C. Daycare Facilities
1. Characteristics. Daycare uses provide care, protection, and supervision for children or adults on a regular basis for less than 24 hours per day.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include offices, recreation areas, and parking.
3. Examples. Examples include adult daycare programs (for seven or more individuals), daycare centers, daycare homes, daycare schools, nursery schools, and preschools (§16.2).
4. Exceptions. Daycare facilities do not include public or private schools; facilities operated in connection with an employment use; shopping center or other principal use, where children are cared for while parents or guardians are occupied on the premises or in the immediate vicinity. Daycare for three or fewer individuals cared for in a residential dwelling at any one time is considered as an accessory home occupation.
D. Religious Institutions
1. Characteristics. Religious Institutions primarily provide meeting areas for religious activities.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include Sunday school facilities, parking, parsonage, and caretaker’s housing.
3. Examples. Examples include places of worship, churches, temples, synagogues, and mosques.
4. Exceptions
a. Preschools are classified as Daycare uses
b. Schools are classified as Schools
§3.5 PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-14 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE STANDARDS
The standards of this Section shall apply to all permitted, conditional uses, as set forth in the Principal Use Table (§2.4).
A. Daycare Home, Daycare School and Daycare Center. Daycare Homes, Daycare Schools and Daycare Centers (facilities) shall comply with the standards of this Section.
1. Parking. Facilities shall include one off-street parking space per non-resident employee. This space shall be provided in addition to any parking required for the principal use of the property.
2. Drop-off/Pick-up Area. One designated on- or off-street drop-off/pick-up space shall be provided per four children. The space shall be available during operating hours for loading and unloading of children. If the space is located on-street, it shall be located on the same side of the street as the daycare facility and shall not be used by the owner or employees.
3. Outside Play Areas
a. Daycare Home. A play area shall be provided on-site for a daycare home with a minimum size of 60 square feet per child.
b. Daycare School and Daycare Center. A play area shall be provided on-site for a Daycare school or a Daycare center which meets State standards for facilities of this size, as specified by the Colorado State Board of Human Services.
c. Fencing. All required play areas shall be fenced or screened to prevent children from exiting on their own. The required play area shall not be located in the property’s front yard.
4. Local and State Codes. The day care facility shall comply with all applicable State and local health, safety, fire, and building codes.
B. Religious Assembly
1. Caretaker Quarters. A single-family dwelling unit, located on the same lot as the religious assembly use, and occupied by the facility’s pastor, minister, rabbi or similar leader, may be permitted as an accessory use to the facility. See §3.3.H for additional regulations applicable to accessory caretaker quarters.
2. Special Review Required. Any religious assembly facility is subject to Conditional Use approval, except in the Commercial zone district.
3. Organized Outdoor Activities. Organized outdoor activities shall be limited to occur between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and if the religious assembly is located in a residential zone district, outdoor activity time constraints may be further limited.
ACCOMMODATIONS, RETAIL, SERVICE - COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES
A. Accommodations
§3.6 ACCOMMODATIONS, RETAIL, SERVICE - COMMERCIAL USE CATEGORIES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-15
1. Characteristics. Units may be efficiency dwellings or sleeping accommodations arranged for short term stays for rent, lease, or interval occupancy. Recreational Vehicle Parks are characterized by short term or seasonal occupancy but are not intended for year-round occupancy. Recreational Vehicle Parks provide for a commercially-run recreational vehicle resort which offers for-sale and rental RV sites and cabins on individual sites, and other camping options, along with associated land uses in common areas that are both service-oriented (e.g.: laundromat, spa, clubhouse, lodge, etc.) as well as recreation-oriented (e.g.: pool, miniature golf, water park, etc.).
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include pools and other recreational facilities, limited storage, offices and check-in facilities. Ancillary uses in common areas that support the Recreational Vehicle Park include community buildings and uses; game room; indoor amusement and entertainment buildings; parks and recreation facilities; athletic club facilities; waste dump station; satellite or electronic reception devices; self-service laundromat.
3. Examples. Examples include bed and breakfast establishments, hotels, motels, inns, hostels, and interval occupancy facilities.
B. Retail and Service
1. Characteristics. Retail Sales and Service firms are involved in the sale, lease, or rent of new or used products to the public. They may also provide personal services or entertainment, or provide product repair or services for consumer and business goods.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, storage of goods, manufacture, or repackaging of goods for on-site sale and parking.
3. Examples. Examples include uses from the five following groups:
a. Sales-Oriented. Art supply stores, auto sales, appliance sales, art gallery, bakeries (retail), bicycle shops, book stores, electronic equipment stores, hardware stores, home improvement stores.
b. Personal Service-Oriented. Animal grooming, branch bank, drive-in bank, barber shop, beauty shop, business school, martial arts school, trade school, dance or music classes, dry cleaning drop-off/pick-up, emergency medical care, health clubs, hair salon, laundry drop-off, laundromats, photocopy services, photography studios, tailors and clothing repair, travel agency.
c. Eating- and Drinking-Oriented. Restaurants with or without drive-through service, bars and taverns, lounges, coffee shop/bakery and stands, fast food establishments, yogurt or ice cream shops.
d. Entertainment-Oriented. Entertainment establishments include amusement arcades, billiard parlors, bowling alleys, commercial casinos, coin-operated arcades, dance halls, indoor archery ranges, nightclubs, pool halls, private clubs and putt-putt golf. Entertainment-oriented does not include adult entertainment, which is addressed in §3.11.C.
§3.7 ACCOMMODATIONS, RETAIL, SERVICE - COMMERCIAL USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-16 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
e. Repair-Oriented. Appliance repair, bicycle repair, locksmith, shoe repair, television repair, upholsterer, furniture repair, furniture refinishing.
4. Exceptions
a. Convenience stores with gas sales are classified as Retail, Service and Commercial; Vehicles, Limited.
b. Lumberyards and other building material sales that sell primarily to contractors and do not have a retail orientation are classified as Wholesale Sales.
c. Repair and service of consumer motor vehicles, motorcycles and light and medium trucks is classified as Vehicle Service/Repair. Repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment and heavy trucks is classified as Industrial Sales and Service.
d. Sales, rental, or leasing of heavy trucks and equipment, and mobile and manufactured home sales are classified as Industrial Sales and Service.
e. Hotels, restaurants and other services that are part of a truck stop are considered accessory to the truck stop, which is classified as Industrial Sales and Service.
ACCOMMODATIONS, RETAIL, SERVICE - COMMERCIAL USE STANDARDS
The standards of this Section shall apply to all permitted Conditional Uses, as set forth in the Principal Use Table (§2.4).
A. Accommodations
1. Bed and Breakfast. All bed and breakfast inn uses shall be subject to the following standards.
a. Structures shall not be altered in a way that changes the general residential appearance.
b. If four or more off-street parking spaces are provided, visual screening from adjacent residential uses shall be required.
c. Other than registered guests, no meals shall be served to the general public. No cooking or kitchen facilities shall be allowed in the guest rooms.
2. Hostels
a. If four or more off-street parking spaces are provided, visual screening from adjacent residential uses shall be required.
b. Other than registered guests, no meals shall be served to the general public. No cooking or kitchen facilities shall be allowed in the guest rooms.
3. Hotels. All hotel uses shall be subject to the following standards:
a. Up to 15 percent of the gross floor area of a hotel may be in nonliving-quarters accessory uses, including management/employee offices, meeting rooms, banquet halls, retail services such as newsstands and gift shops, and similar accessory uses, provided that any
§3.7 ACCOMMODATIONS, RETAIL, SERVICE - COMMERCIAL USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-17
incidental business is conducted primarily as a service to guests, and there is no entrance to such places of business except from inside the building.
b. In addition to the accessory uses allowed in 3.a. above, up to an additional 25 percent of the gross floor area of a hotel may be devoted to eating/drinking establishments as an accessory use.
4. Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks. All RV Park uses shall be subject to the following standards:
a. General Provisions. RV Parks shall be developed and operated pursuant to following minimum standards, and any other provisions applied as a part of the Conditional Use approval. RV Parks are subject to the provisions found in the General Development Standards (Section 4) and Natural Resource Protection Standards (Section 5) of this LDC.
b. Dimensional Standards. RV Parks shall be developed pursuant to the RV Park Dimensional Standards (Table 3-2).
c. General Operation Standards
i. RV Parks shall be kept in a clean, orderly, litter free and sanitary condition at all times.
ii. No more than one recreational vehicle and one tow vehicle will be allowed on any one site at any one time.
iii. Garbage and trash must be properly disposed of in the trash receptacles as required by these regulations and trash areas must be kept in a neat and sanitary condition at all times.
iv. All landscape areas must be maintained.
TABLE 3-2 RV PARK DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
Camp Sites
Minimum space dimensions
20 feet x 60 feet: Small Site
35 feet x 70 feet: Large Site
RV - Minimum setback
front: 10 feet
side: seven feet; No less than 14 feet between adjacent units
rear: 10 feet
RV - Minimum site size
(Small Site) 1,200 square feet: pop-up campers, truck campers, camper vans and tents
(Large Site) 2,450 square feet: travel trailers, motor homes, motor coach, trailer, camper
Maximum Impervious Site Coverage
50 percent
Minimum Landscaping
50 percent
Maximum Height
35 feet
Maximum Outside Storage
five percent
(1) Additional width required for Low Impact Design (LID) bio-swales determined at Subdivision Review
§3.7 ACCOMMODATIONS, RETAIL, SERVICE - COMMERCIAL USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-18 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
v. No operable or inoperable vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, machinery, equipment or parts thereof are kept or stored in the RV Park.
vi. All private roads must be maintained for safe travel and provide adequate access for emergency vehicles. Seasonal closure of some portions of the facility shall be permitted so long as necessary vehicular and emergency access is maintained.
vii. RV Parks shall provide adequate fire protection as required by the City of Gunnison Municipal Code.
d. Camp Site Standards
i. All recreational vehicle sites shall be provided paved surface parking pads of bituminous mix or concrete. Small Sites shall be provided a minimum 12 foot x 24 foot paved surface parking pads. Large Sites shall be provided a minimum 12 foot x 50 foot paved parking pads plus one automobile parking space.
ii. Service Building. RV Parks shall be provided a centrally located service building and recreational area containing the following: management office, storage areas, sanitary facilities, laundry facilities (two washer/dryer combinations per 50 sites), and recreation facilities.
iii. Refuse Areas. RV Parks shall provide an adequate number of animal proof covered trash receptacles located within centralized trash areas. Trash areas shall be screened from public view by a minimum six foot high enclosure and shall be dispersed throughout the park for ease of accessibility.
iv. All motor vehicles parked on camp sites shall be operable and have current license plates. Removal of wheels from motor vehicles is prohibited.
e. Sanitary Facilities Standards/Service Building(s). One or more service buildings shall be installed in the RV Park. The number and type of facilities required to be contained in the building shall be as shown in Table 3-3, Sanitary Service Building Facility Requirements. The service building(s) shall also meet the following standards:
i. Sanitary Facilities. Sanitary facilities shall be provided within one or more service buildings and shall be located at a distance not greater than 400 feet from any space.
ii. Private Compartments. Each water closet, bath or shower shall be in a private compartment and shall meet the requirements of the local plumbing code.
iii. Sound-Retardant Wall. A sound-retardant wall shall separate the toilet facilities for each gender when provided in a single building.
iv. Utility Sink. A minimum of one utility sink shall also be provided for disposal of liquid wastes and for cleanup and maintenance of the service building.
v. Construction. The service building shall be of permanent construction and be provided with adequate light, heat, and positive ventilation in shower and bathing areas. Interior construction of the service building shall use cleanable, moisture-
§3.7 ACCOMMODATIONS, RETAIL, SERVICE - COMMERCIAL USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-19
resistant materials on walls, ceilings, and floors, and use slip-resistant materials on floors.
vi. Openings Screened. All windows, doors, or other openings shall be screened to keep out insects.
vii. Plumbing. All plumbing shall conform to the most recently adopted version of the International Plumbing Code and the local plumbing code. Hot and cold running water shall be provided in the service building(s).
f. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required for an area amounting to not less than 40 percent of the gross area of the park. The landscape area may include the recreation area and common landscape areas and shall include a landscape area provided within the required perimeter setback to effectively screen or buffer the park from surrounding properties. The required landscape area shall comply with §4.6, Landscaping, Screening and Buffering.
g. Access Management. Private roads, access-ways and driveways for recreational vehicle parks shall comply with the applicable provisions contained in Section 4, General Development Standards.
i. Privacy Gates. Gated access shall be permitted for RV parks, provided that local fire prevention, police, and any other emergency services agency approve the design to ensure appropriate emergency access.
ii. Emergency Vehicle Access. Access easements shall be granted to the City for the purposes of emergency vehicle access and for the installation, maintenance and repair
TABLE 3-3 SANITARY SERVICE BUILDING FACILITY REQUIREMENTS
Number of RV Sites
Toilets
Urinals
Lavatories
Showers
Ind.
Dep.
Ind.
Dep.
Ind.
Dep.
Ind.
Dep.
15
1
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
16-30
1
2
3
1
3
2
1
3
1
3
2
31-45
1
3
3
1
4
3
1
4
1
4
4
46-60
1
4
4
1
5
4
1
5
1
5
5
61-80
1
4
4
1
5
5
1
6
1
5
6
81-100*
1
5
5
1
6
6
1
6
1
6
6
WOMEN
* For development of sites beyond one hundred, use the figures for a 100-site resort, and add the number of fixtures for the appropriate additional increment as shown above.
MEN
§3.7 ACCOMMODATIONS, RETAIL, SERVICE - COMMERCIAL USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-20 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
of public and private utilities.
iii. Private Maintenance. A private road shall be maintained by the owner(s) of the development in which the road is located.
h. Speed Limits. All private roads shall be posted with speed limit signs with appropriate speeds, in compliance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
B. Retail Sales Establishment. Goods may be produced on a small scale within a retail sales establishment and be sold in the local area; provided that: a) production shall be limited to no more than 50 percent of the area of the retail establishment, and b) production shall not pose any safety or environmental hazards to the public in the retail production area.
1. Convenience Stores
a. If fuel is sold as part of the convenience store operation, the conditions for service stations related to fuel pump location and bulk fuel storage shall apply.
b. Parking areas for retail sales and fuel service shall be separated from each other, and circulation within the property to each parking area shall be separate and clearly marked.
2. Vehicle Services and Repair
a. Incidental sale of vehicles will be allowed.
b. A zone district boundary buffer (§4.6.F.3.c.ii.) shall be established along any side of the property adjacent to a residential use.
c. Service bay doors shall not be oriented toward the road or any residential use, unless such bays are screened from view from the road and residential uses.
d. All repair or service operations, excluding washing, shall be conducted entirely within a fully-enclosed building. The term “fully-enclosed building” shall not be construed to limit open bay doors during hours of operation.
e. Operable vehicles may be parked on-site during business hours. All vehicle parking shall be accomplished on the site, and in no case shall a parked vehicle encroach into the right-of-way.
f. The outdoor overnight storage of vehicles may be allowed subject to Commission approval (§3.9 B.).
g. There shall be no dismantling of vehicles for salvage.
h. The storage of impounded vehicles shall not be permitted.
i. Fuel pump location shall comply with the following requirements:
§3.8 INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-21
i. Fuel pumps shall be located at least 30 feet from the edge of the street curb of a public street or alley.
ii. Subject to the setback in paragraph i.i. above, except on corner lots, fuel pumps shall be located in no more than one yard. For example, if fuel pumps are located in the front yard of the lot, they may not be also located in the side or rear yard.
iii. On corner lots, fuel pumps may be located in either or both of the yards adjacent to a street lot line provide that safe vehicular access to the pumps is available, and they comply with setback requirements in paragraph i.i., above.
j. Bulk Storage tanks containing fuel, oil, waste oils and greases or similar substances shall be placed at least 25 feet from any property line and constructed and vented in accordance with Colorado State Department of Public Health and Environment requirements.
k. A canopy over the fuel pumps may be erected, provided the following conditions are met.
i. The canopy structure shall comply with all minimum building setback standards applicable to the principal structure.
ii. The canopy shall be constructed to meet the Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria established in the adopted International Residential Code (Table R301.2 (1). These criteria define values for snow load, wind speed, seismic category and other related engineering design values.
3. Outdoor Retail Displays. Display of merchandise shall comply with the requirements of §4.7, Outdoor Display and Storage.
INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES
A. Industrial Sales and Service
1. Characteristics. Industrial Sales and Service firms are engaged in the sale, repair or servicing of industrial, business or consumer machinery, equipment, products or by-products. Firms that service consumer goods do so by mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory activities may include offices, parking, and storage.
3. Examples. Examples include agricultural implement sales and service; building contractors; bulk and wholesale fuel sales; heating contractors; plumbing contractors; electrical contractors; electric motor repair; exterminators; feed and grain sales; fuel oil sales; furnace and water heater sales; gas, butane and heavy machinery sales; building materials sales; janitorial and building maintenance services; landscape contractor’s storage yard; machine shops; manufactured and mobile home sales; repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment tool repair; towing service and vehicle storage; truck stops; heavy truck sales, repair, or rental; welding shops, and well drilling services.
§3.8 INDUSTRIAL USE CATEGORIES
PAGE 3-22 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
4. Exceptions
a. Contractors and others who perform services off-site are included in the Office category if major equipment and materials are not stored at the site and fabrication, or similar work is not carried on at the site.
b. Hotels, restaurants and other services that are part of a truck stop are considered accessory to the truck stop.
B. Manufacturing and Production Category
1. Characteristics. Manufacturing and production firms are involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, man-made, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or consumers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on-site, but if so, they are a subordinate part of sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory activities may include offices, cafeterias, parking, employee recreational facilities, warehouses, storage yards, repair facilities, truck fleets, and caretaker’s quarters.
3. Examples. Examples include asphalt, concrete or redi-mix plant; bakery; custom building; catering service; food and related products processing; food processing and packing; manufacture or production of chemical, rubber, leather, clay, bone, plastic, stone, wood or glass materials or products; manufacture or assembly of machinery, equipment, instruments, including musical instruments, vehicles, appliances, precision items and other electrical items; manufacture, production or fabrication of metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing; manufactured housing unit production and fabrication; monument works; ornamental iron work; printing, publishing and lithography; sawmills and other wood products manufacturing; sign making; and production of textiles or apparel.
4. Exceptions
a. Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on-site and to the general public is classified as Retail Sales and Service.
b. Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic material (e.g., fertilizer) is classified as Waste-Related Uses.
C. Warehouse and Freight Categories
1. Characteristics. Warehouse and Freight Movement firms are involved in the storage, or movement of goods for themselves or other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer, except for some will-call pickups. There is little on-site sales activity with the customer present.
2. Accessory Uses
a. Accessory uses may include offices, truck fleet parking, and maintenance areas.
§3.9 INDUSTRIAL USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-23
b. Examples include machinery storage yard; recreational vehicle storage; utility service yard or garage; bulk materials storage; bus barns; cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers; freight terminals: truck, air, motor or rail terminals; grain elevators; moving companies and general freight storage; outdoor storage yards; parcel services; post offices; warehouse; warehouses (separate from retail business) used by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores; and wholesale distribution centers.
3. Exceptions
a. Uses that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes are classified as Waste-Related uses.
b. Mini-warehouses are classified as Self-Service Storage uses.
D. Wholesale Sales
1. Characteristics. Wholesale sales firms are involved in the sale, lease, or rental of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or order taking and often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, product repair, warehouses, parking, minor fabrication services, and repackaging of goods.
3. Examples. Examples include auction houses; mail order houses; and wholesalers of food, clothing, auto parts, and building hardware.
4. Exceptions
a. Firms that engage primarily in sales to the general public or on a membership basis are classified as Retail Sales and Service.
b. Firms that are primarily storing goods with little on-site business activity are classified as Warehouse and Freight Movement.
INDUSTRIAL USE STANDARDS
A. Prohibited Uses. The standards of this Section shall apply to all permitted, conditional uses, as set forth in the Principal Use Table (§2.4). Additionally, the following uses are specifically prohibited in all zoning districts.
1. Feed Lots
2. Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing. All establishments falling within the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) Subsector 324, Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing, as identified in the North American Industry Classification System—United States Manual (OMB 1997).
3. Primary Metal Manufacturing. All establishments falling within the North American Industry
§3.10 OTHER USE CATEGORIES
PAGE 3-24 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Classification System (NAICS) Subsector 331, Primary Metal Manufacturing, as identified in the North American Industry Classification System—United States Manual (OMB 1997).
B. Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage yards shall comply with the requirements of §4.7, Outdoor Storage and Display.
OTHER USE CATEGORIES
The standards of this Section shall apply to all permitted Conditional Uses, as set forth in the Principal Use Table (§2.4).
A. Aviation and Surface Transportation Facilities
1. Characteristics. Aviation and Surface Transportation Facilities include facilities for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, and public transit facilities including loading and unloading areas. Aviation facilities may be improved or unimproved. Aviation and Surface Transportation Facilities also include passenger terminals for aircraft and regional bus service.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include freight handling areas, concessions, offices, parking and maintenance and fueling facilities.
3. Examples. Examples include airports, bus terminal, and helicopter landing facilities.
4. Exceptions. Bus stops supporting the Gunnison Regional Transportation Authority operations or City public transit functions which, are classified as Minor Utilities.
B. Telecommunications Facilities
1. Characteristics. Telecommunications Facilities are signal distribution systems used or operated by a telecommunications carrier under a license from the FCC consisting of a combination of improvements and equipment including (i) one or more antennas, (ii) a supporting structure and the hardware by which antennas are attached; (iii) equipment housing; and (iv) ancillary equipment such as signal transmission cables and miscellaneous hardware.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include transmitter facility buildings.
3. Examples. Examples include broadcast towers, telecommunications facilities; telecommunications support towers and point-to-point microwave towers.
4. Exceptions
a. Amateur radio facilities and antennas that are owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator are considered an accessory use to other permitted uses.
b. Radio and television studios are classified in the Office category.
C. Adult Entertainment
§3.10 OTHER USE CATEGORIES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-25
1. Characteristics. Entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
2. Accessory Uses. There are no accessory uses contemplated by Adult Entertainment uses.
3. Examples. Examples include adult bookstores, adult photo studios, adult cabaret, adult theaters, and massage parlors.
4. Exceptions. “Massage parlor” means an establishment providing massage, but it does not include training rooms of public and private schools accredited by the State Board of Education or approved by the division charged with the responsibility of approving private occupational schools, training rooms of recognized professional or amateur athletic teams, and licensed health care facilities. A facility that is operated for the purpose of massage therapy performed by a massage therapist is not a massage parlor. “Massage therapist” has the meaning set forth in §12-35.5-103 C.R.S. A massage therapy school may include an equivalency program approved by the state educational board or division charged with the responsibility of approving private occupational schools.
D. Renewable Energy Systems
1. Characteristics. Renewable Energy Systems include photovoltaic arrays (solar electric panels) small wind energy conversion systems, and geothermal heating and cooling systems. Photovoltaic arrays convert sunlight into electricity. Wind energy conversion systems are turbines that convert wind energy into electricity. Small wind energy conversion systems are rated for not more than 20kW of generation capacity.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include towers, fences, and/or buried pipes.
3. Examples. Examples include solar panels, wind turbines, geothermal heating and cooling systems.
4. Exceptions. Renewable Energy Systems do not include the manufacture of renewable combustible fuels.
E. Mining. Mining includes the extraction of aggregate and other subsurface resources to include the processing of aggregate on-site for new subdivision or development applications.
1. Location. Gravel and other mineral extraction, washing, crushing, cement batch plants, asphalt plants, and processing activities should be located and conducted in sufficiently sized parcels where extraction and rehabilitation can be undertaken while still protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the area and the city. In cases where the location of the proposed mining use abuts other zoning or land uses, or structures, mineral excavation, extraction, processing and rehabilitation may be restricted in order to be compatible with and protect the adjoining uses.
2. Water Quality. Extraction of aggregate and other subsurface resources shall be subject to water quality best management practices as defined by City of Gunnison Stormwater Management Manual and is subject to state permitting policies.
3. Procedure for Extraction and Rehabilitation Requests. The extraction of commercial mineral deposits with necessary accessory uses shall be considered only in the Industrial zone district as a Conditional Use, or in a new subdivision under development, upon Conditional Use approval by the Commission and in conformance with an approved excavation and
§3.11 OTHER USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-26 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
rehabilitation plan. A plan shall contain, in addition to those relevant requirements outlined for a Conditional Use application, the requirements cited in §3.11 E. Any change in the approved excavation and rehabilitation plan shall be prohibited unless amended by approval of the Commission.
OTHER USE STANDARDS
A. Aviation and Surface Transportation. The Gunnison Crested Butte Regional Airport Master Plan provides general provisions for the existing and future operations, services and development functions of this land use.
B. Telecommunications Facilities
1. Height Standards. The placement of such towers and facilities shall comply with all height standards of the underlying zone district.
2. Setback Standards. Towers and guy wires shall be located behind the principal buildings (either in the rear yard or in the building envelope) and setback one foot for each one foot of tower height from the building envelopes of abutting properties and all overhead utilities.
3. Danger. The installation of such towers and facilities shall not cause any increased danger to neighboring property in the event of collapse or failure of the structure. Cables or wires necessary for its operation shall be placed underground.
4. Visibility. The visibility of such towers and facilities from the public right-of-way and from neighboring properties shall be minimized to the maximum degree practical, such as by location, fencing, landscaping, use of neutral colors or materials or other means.
C. Adult Entertainment
1. No such use shall be located within 300 feet (measured in a straight line) of a place of worship, a public, private or charter elementary or secondary school, public park or playground, library or any land zoned or used for residential purposes.
2. There shall be no more than one such use on the same property or in the same building or structure.
3. Except for permanent signage as permitted in §4.8, there shall be no advertisement, promotional materials, displays, or temporary signs visible to the public from public rights-of-way.
4. All sexually-oriented businesses must comply with all applicable requirements of Colorado state law.
D. Alternative Energy Sources
1. Photovoltaic Arrays. The following standards apply to photovoltaic arrays:
Roof-Mounts. Photovoltaic arrays may be roof-mounted on principal and accessory buildings in all zone districts, as long as the building is conforming to height and setback
§3.11 OTHER USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-27
standards.
Ground-Mounts. Ground or structure-mounted photovoltaic arrays (not mounted on buildings) shall be setback as if they were detached accessory buildings if the highest point on the panels is more than six feet above grade.
Carports and Covered Walkways. Carports and walkways in multi-family developments may be covered with photovoltaic arrays regardless of their location on the parcel proposed for development.
2. Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems Applicability. These standards apply to wind energy conversion systems which consist of a turbine or similar kinetic system designed to produce electricity by turning a generator. Turbine systems considered under these standards are mounted on either a tower or building structure.
3. Tower-Mounted Turbine Setbacks
Towers shall be located behind the principal buildings in the rear yard area. All towers shall be setback one foot for each one foot of tower height from the building envelopes of abutting properties and all overhead utilities. Guy wires shall not be located within 20 feet of any overhead utility. Anchor points shall not encroach into the designated setback. Tower structures and guy wires shall not encroach into any designated easements.
Towers may be located in private common open space areas if it is demonstrated if they meet the minimum setback of one foot per one foot of height and towers are:
i. setback at least 100 feet from rights-of-way, all residential buildings property lines, and all overhead utilities; or
ii. screened from view outside the development by buildings, topography, and/or landscaping.
In Figure 9, the tower is setback from the building envelopes of abutting lots. The tower is located in the rear yard of the parcel proposed for development (the applicant’s property) and does not have to be setback from its building envelope.
§3.11 OTHER USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-28 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
FIGURE 9 SMALL WIND TURBINE CLEARANCES
4. Roof-Mounted Turbine Setbacks. Roof-mounted systems may be located on a principal or accessory building. Systems shall be located in the back one-half of the building footprint, unless the applicant demonstrates that system function is enhanced by an alternative roof area. However, in all cases roof-mounted systems shall be located in a manner that complies with Turbine Blade Clearance standards established in §3.11 D.5.
5. Turbine Blade Clearance. Turbine blade clearance shall be applied to lot setbacks, trees and overhead utilities, structures on adjacent lots or any other potential physical feature or obstruction. Turbine blades shall maintain a 15 foot setback from all related features or obstructions. Tower-mounted horizontal axis turbines shall be not less than 15 feet when the blades are at their lowest point.
6. Tower System Access. Climbing access shall be limited by either:
a six-foot tall fence around the base of the tower with a locking gate; or
a design that does not allow for tower climbing at heights lower than 12 feet.
7. Noise. Documentation provided by the manufacturer shall demonstrate that noise will not exceed 50 dBa at any property line at peak generation, based on the proposed location of the turbine.
8. Reflections and Shadows. Turbine blades shall be coated to minimize reflection. Turbines
§3.11 OTHER USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-29
shall be installed in locations that will prevent flickering shadows from being cast into the windows of buildings on nearby properties.
9. System Height and Screening. The maximum height of tower- and roof-mounted systems and the required screening for towers is set forth in Table 3-4. Height shall be measured as follows:
For horizontal axis systems, to the highest point on the rotor blade at its highest point of rotation.
For vertical axis systems, to the highest point of the tower or turbine, whichever is higher.
10. Durability Requirements. Small wind energy conversion systems that become inoperable shall be repaired or removed within 45 days.
11. Geothermal Heating and Cooling Systems. Geothermal heating and cooling systems are systems that use buried pipes to exchange heat with the ground, cooling buildings in the summer and warming them in the winter. Closed loop systems (horizontal loop systems and vertical loop systems) are permitted, provided that the loops are contained entirely within the lot and are setback five feet from property lines. Lake loop systems are permitted if the water body is entirely within the property lines of the parcel proposed for development. Open loop systems are not permitted.
E. Mineral Extraction and Mining Operations. Mining and necessary accessory uses shall be subject to the following conditions and to the approved excavation and rehabilitation plan:
1. Additional Application Contents. In addition to the application contents for a Conditional Use, the following application contents shall be required for mineral extraction and mining operations:
A detailed description of the method of operation of extraction, processing and rehabilitation to be employed, including any necessary accessory uses such as, but not limited to, crushers, washers, batch plants and asphalt plants.
TABLE 3-4MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
LOT AREA AND ZONING DISTRICT
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
REQUIRED SCREENING
Lot area greater than 2 acres
120 ft1
Continuous evergreen hedge around sides of base that face lot lines. Existing vegetation, fencing or garden walls that provide comparable screening may be substituted for this requirement.
All lots within the Meadow Village subdivision
Subject to Avigation Easement
Lot area less than two acres but equal to or greater than 20,000 sq. ft.
75 ft1
Lots less than 20,000 sq. ft.
40 ft1
None
1 No tower shall be constructed or altered in a manner resulting in any permanent encroachment within 50 feet of the FAA-established approach paths (See Figure F2, Gunnison-Crested Butte Regional Airport Master Plan Update, June 2006). Maximum tower height is subject to setback standards defined §3.11.D
§3.11 OTHER USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-30 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
An extraction plan showing the areas to be mined, location of stockpile areas, location of structures, and general location of processing equipment, with accompanying time schedules, fencing if applicable, depth of deposit, estimated quantity of the deposit, and other pertinent factors.
A reclamation rehabilitation plan showing proposed rehabilitation with time schedule, finish contours, grading, sloping, types, placement and amount of vegetation, soil stabilization techniques and any other proposed factors. The reclamation plan shall meet the application requirement for a reclamation plan as required by the Colorado Department of Natural Resources, Division of Reclamation, Mining and Safety.
Topography of the area with contour lines of sufficient detail to portray the direction and rate of slope of the land covered in the application.
Type, character, and amount of proposed vegetation.
The operator’s estimated cost at each of the following segments of the rehabilitation process, including where applicable, backfilling, grading, reestablishing top soil, planting, re-vegetation management, and protection prior to vegetation establishment and administrative costs.
An erosion and sediment control plan developed in accordance with stormwater discharge mitigations standards established by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE), Water Quality Control Division.
A drainage report and drainage basin plan prepared by a registered engineer in the State of Colorado with consideration of natural drainage, drainage during excavation including erosion and sedimentation controls, drainage after rehabilitation, such that proposed excavation will have no adverse effects in excess of natural conditions—where applicable the report shall include a flood plain permit.
A traffic impact analysis which reviews road and safety conditions in the pit area and in the vicinity of the pit area. This shall include ingress/egress, parking and loading areas, on-site circulation, estimate of the number of trucks per day and the average and maximum number of trucks per day (ranges are acceptable). The analysis shall include the times and location of school bus stops in the vicinity of the haul route and mitigation measures, such as staggering hours of operation, to avoid conflicts between hauling and school children on the haul route.
The operator shall submit a haul route plan to the Director of Community Development and the Director of Public Works and receive permission to use public rights-of-way not designated for such haulage by reason of load limit, dust, right-of-way or pavement width or other relevant factors. Haul routes are prohibited through residential development. The Director of Public Works may place reasonable restrictions on such right-of-way use. Alternative haul routes shall be developed where hauling impacts the health, safety, and welfare of the local area.
Additional information as may be required by the Community Development Department.
§3.11 OTHER USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-31
2. Mineral Extraction and Mining Operation Standards. All mineral extraction and mining operations shall comply with the following standards.
a. A permit to extract minerals issued by the Colorado Division of Minerals and Geology (DMG) in conformance with the Open Mining Land Recovery Act and other applicable State laws.
b. A Conditional Use application approval by the Commission.
c. No excavation involving the use of rock crushers, washers, asphalt plant, cement batch plant and other similar equipment shall take place within 300 feet of a residence, public rights of way or designated trail alignment.
d. At a minimum, a 100 foot setback will be provided from wetlands and streams, irrigation ditches, and ponds.
e. Haulage roads within the premises shall be maintained in a reasonably dust free condition. Dust retardant measures may include the use of watering, application of magnesium chloride, oiling, or paving.
f. Unless otherwise approved, the hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. normally; shorter hours of operation may be imposed in urbanized areas as part of the conditional use permit.
g. In no event shall a slope of less than 2:1 be left for dry pits, or the slope of 3:1 for pits deeper than ten feet. In a wet pit, in no event shall a slope be less than 2:1 except as provided herein.
h. The floor of excavation pits, whether wet or dry, shall be left in a suitable condition.
i. The operator shall not store, overburden, or excavate materials or construct dikes or levies in such a manner as to increase any drainage or flooding on property not owned by the operator, or damage public facilities.
j. Prior to starting excavation, where the operation is adjacent to subdivided and/or developed commercial, residential, or industrial property, fencing may be required to prevent the visibility of the mining operation, and buffering and screening may be required if deemed necessary by the Commission as part of the Conditional Use permit. The operator may be required to fence and/or buffer and screen the entire parcel or fence only areas of excavation as it proceeds. None of these fences shall be removed until rehabilitation has been completed.
k. Where the operation is adjacent to subdivided property, and/or developed commercial or residential property, once mining has been completed, the site shall not be used as an area to stockpile mineral and/or gravel resources, unless otherwise permitted by the Conditional Use permit. The mining operator shall reclaim mined areas as rapidly as possible.
l. Operations shall comply with noise, vibration, and other standards of the City of Gunnison and the noise standards contained in Sections 25-12-101, C.R.S., as amended.
§3.11 OTHER USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-32 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
m. All air emissions shall comply with standards established by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. An air emissions permit shall be obtained prior to commencing the mining operation.
n. All water uses and discharges shall conform to standards established by the State Water Quality Control Commission and the water laws of the State of Colorado.
o. Erosion and sedimentation controls will be practiced throughout the life of the pit including the maintenance of vegetative buffers, use of straw bales in drainage ways and mulching and re-seeding exposed areas adjacent to the active mining area. Existing trees and ground cover along public street frontage and drainage ways shall be preserved, maintained and supplemented, if necessary, for the depth of the setback to protect against and reduce noise, dust and erosion.
p. All slopes shall be stabilized and revegetated pursuant to standards of the CDPHE, Water Quality Control Division. Land shall be reformed to most closely resemble the natural contours of the land before mining commenced. Lakes created as the result of mining in the river bottom shall have undulating surfaces, shallow and deep areas, established wetlands, and natural riparian vegetation. Other areas shall be revegetated with plant material indigenous to the area.
q. After revegetation of the area, the area must be maintained for a period of three years, or until all vegetation is firmly established in the reclamation area.
r. A time limit for reclamation will be included in each Conditional Use permit. This time limit will be dependent upon the type of reclamation effort.
s. A development schedule shall be submitted describing the life span of the plan in months and years (ranges are acceptable) and, if applicable, the months and years per phase. Diligence in meeting this schedule is required. Extensions of time may be granted by the Commission with proper justification.
t. Extensions of time in the development schedule may be granted by the Commission if a written request is submitted outlining the factors and reasons for the extension. New or changed conditions, if any, will be considered.
i. If no material has been extracted within three years of obtaining the Conditional Use permit for mineral extraction and a request for extension has not been received and approved by the Commission, the Conditional Use permit will expire. A new application and extraction plan shall then be submitted and reviewed in the manner described in this Section.
ii. An extension request shall provide information concerning the factors and reasons for the request. The Commission will consider these factors and reasons as well as the extent conditions have changed in the area, if any, in granting extensions of the Conditional Use permit.
u. The applicant shall deposit with the City a performance and payment bond, an irrevocable letter of credit, line of credit, cash, and/or other acceptable means which is sufficient in the judgment of the Commission to assure the ongoing maintenance of sediment and erosion control mitigation and permanent reclamation of the affected area of the mining operation.
§3.12 NON-RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-33
The financial guarantee amount shall be equal to 125 percent of the cost of supplying and installing improvements depicted on the approved Final Plat.
v. Revocation of Conditional Use Permit. The Commission shall have the power after hearing to revoke the Conditional Use permit for violation of this Section or conditions imposed by the Commission. Upon at least ten days’ notice to the owner and the operator, the Commission may hold a hearing to determine the nature and extent of an alleged violation, and shall have the power, upon a showing of good cause, to revoke the Conditional Use permit and to require that immediate reclamation measures be commenced.
NON-RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
A. General. Principal uses allowed by §2.4 shall be deemed to include accessory uses and structures that are customarily associated with and appropriate, incidental and subordinate to otherwise allowed principal uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be subject to the same regulations as principal use and structures unless otherwise stated.
B. Drive-In Facility. Drive-in facilities may be allowed by Conditional Use Permit approved pursuant to the requirements of Section 7 in the CBD and C zone districts as an accessory use to otherwise allowed uses, and shall comply with the standards of this section.
1. Circulation. Drive-through lanes shall be separated from circulation lanes required to enter or exit the property. Drive-through lanes shall be marked by striping, pavement markings, or barriers.
2. Screening. Drive-through lanes shall be screened in accordance with the requirements of §4.6.
C. Outside Sales and Display. Outdoor display of goods and merchandise shall comply with the standards of §4.7 Outdoor Display and Storage.
D. Manufacturing and Production, Small Scale. Goods may be produced on a small scale within a retail sales establishment and be sold in the local area, provided that:
1. Area Limited. Production shall be limited to no more than 50 percent of the area of the retail establishment.
2. Safety and Environmental Hazards Prohibited. Production shall not pose any safety or environmental hazards to the public in the retail or production area.
E. Satellite and Electronic Reception Devices and Support Structures. Satellite or electronic reception devices and support structures shall comply with the standards of this Section.
1. Maximum Size. Satellite reception devices shall not exceed a diameter of four feet.
2. Dimensional Standards. The placement of the device shall comply with all dimensional standards such as height, setback, etc. of the underlying zone district.
TEMPORARY USES
A. Temporary Use Defined. A general retail sales or other commercial use operated outside of a
§3.13 TEMPORARY USES
PAGE 3-34 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
building on a seasonal basis.
B. Use Permit Required. Conditional Use permits are required for all “temporary commercial activities” excluding farm stands, farmers’ markets, holiday tree sales, rafting and similar recreational operations, carnival, circus or temporary private events, construction field offices, and model homes units.
C. Compliance Criteria and Standards. All temporary uses, except temporary commercial activities which are established by a Conditional Use Permit, shall function under a Temporary Use Permit issued by the Community Development Director. All temporary uses shall meet the following minimum criteria and standards:
1. no lighting or electrical service shall be provided without an electrical permit;
2. temporary use structures shall be subject to the International Building Code and International Fire Code as deemed applicable by staff;
3. no temporary use structure shall block fire lanes or pedestrian or vehicular access;
4. the site of the temporary use shall be cleared of all debris at the end of the temporary use;
5. all temporary structures shall be cleared from the site within five days after the use is terminated;
6. written permission of the property owner for the temporary use shall be provided;
7. adequate parking shall be provided for the use, as determined by the Community Development Director;
8. required parking for other uses shall remain available;
9. adequate traffic control measures shall be provided;
10. adequate provisions for trash disposal and sanitary facilities shall be provided; and
11. when appropriate, adequate provisions for crowd control shall be provided.
D. Additional Conditions. The Community Development Director shall impose such other conditions as are deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section, this LDC and the City of Gunnison Master Plan.
E. Revocation of a Temporary Use Permit.A Temporary Use Permit shall be revoked if the Director finds that the terms of the permit have been violated or that there is a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare.
F. Carnival, Circus or Temporary Private Events. Temporary carnivals and circuses shall comply with the standards of this Section.
1. Minimum setback (all sides): 15 feet from all lot lines. The minimum setback shall apply to
§3.14 MARIJUANA USE CATEGORIES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-35
all equipment, displays, tables and other items associated with the business, from any adjacent lot with a residential use.
2. Length of Permit. The maximum length of the permit shall be 10 days.
3. Parking. The applicant must provide adequate parking.
4. Security. The applicant must provide for protection, security guards and crowd control.
5. Cleanup. The applicant must guarantee cleanup of the premises.
6. Bond. The applicant may be required to post a bond in a reasonable amount as determined by the Community Development Director to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section.
7. Health and Safety Codes. The use must comply with all applicable health and safety codes and a permit for the use shall be obtained from the Building Official.
8. Location. The use shall be situated such that it does not block any required access or egress from the site and is not located on any required parking.
G. Construction Field Offices, Temporary. Temporary construction field offices shall comply with the requirements of this Section.
1. A temporary building for use as a construction field office is permitted on a 12-month basis. One construction field temporary building shall be allowed for each builder in a subdivision in which that builder has the authority to construct structures.
2. If the operation of the temporary building used as a construction field office violates any City ordinances, the certificate of occupancy shall be revoked, unless satisfactory compliance is achieved.
H. Sales Offices and Model Homes, Temporary. A temporary sales office and model home may be located within any zoning district provided such use shall comply with the standards of this Section.
1. Temporary residential sales offices and model homes may be located within a residential zone district as part of an on-going residential development.
2. Any temporary residential sales office or model home shall be removed or converted to a use permitted within the zone district when Certificates of Occupancy have been issued to 80 percent of the associated residential units or when use as a sales office or model home has ceased.
3. Model homes for new subdivisions shall only be occupied for residential habitation after all business activities have ceased and upon sale of the home and shall comply with the applicable residential parking standards at that time.
MARIJUANA USE CATEGORIES
A. Retail Marijuana and Medical Marijuana Center Standards (retail marijuana
§3.14 MARIJUANA USE CATEGORIES
PAGE 3-36 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
establishment).
1. Characteristics. A licensed retail marijuana sales facility is authorized to sell retail or medical marijuana or manufactured marijuana products.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, secured indoor storage areas and sale of marijuana accessories.
3. Examples. Retail marijuana stores and medical marijuana centers are licensed in compliance with all local and state regulations. Retail marijuana establishments sell marijuana and marijuana products manufactured for consumption to the general public, under the provisions of state and local government regulations. Facilities have restricted access areas designated for merchandise displays and conducting transactions, and limited access areas which are prohibited for public access. Generally, marijuana testing establishments are classified in the International Building Code as Business Group M, Mercantile.
B. Marijuana Manufacturing and Medical Marijuana-Infused Products Manufacturing (marijuana product manufacturing establishment).
1. Characteristics. Manufacturing and production facilities serve to prepare, manufacture and package marijuana byproducts. Typically, the manufacturing process includes the distillation of plant materials. The distilled byproducts are generally oils, tinctures, and edible products made from the distilled product. Products may be any part of the plant or a finished product for the wholesale market or other facilities. Goods are not sold on the site.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, warehouses, truck fleets and secured indoor storage areas.
3. Examples. Marijuana manufacturing and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing are licensed in compliance with all local and state regulations. Marijuana product manufacturing establishments process marijuana into various consumable products, under the provisions of state and local government regulations. Processes often involve distillation of marijuana using various types of equipment. Commercial kitchen equipment meeting the standards of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment are required. Facilities are limited areas for which public access is prohibited. Generally, Marijuana product manufacturing establishments are classified in the International Building Code as Factory Industrial, F-1, Moderate Hazard Occupancy.
C. Marijuana Cultivation and Medical Marijuana Optional Premises Cultivation Operation (licensed marijuana cultivation establishment).
1. Characteristics. Marijuana cultivation incorporates facilities with specific climate controls; ventilation and mechanical systems; equipment for watering and fertilizing plants; and storage of various gases, materials, and equipment required for the growing of marijuana plants. Cultivation facilities cannot cohabitate with any other uses not licensed and permitted as a marijuana establishment.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, warehouses, truck fleets and fully enclosed and secured storage facilities. Open storage yards are not permitted.
§3.15 MARIJUANA USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-37
3. Examples. Marijuana cultivation establishments are licensed in compliance with all local and state regulations. Licensed marijuana cultivation establishments grow and produce marijuana. There are numerous process types that may be used the cultivation of marijuana. Processes may include the injection of compressed gas (generally Carbon dioxide) or using nutrient rich media to enhance plant growth. Primary life-safety concerns include depleted oxygen levels within the facilities, wastewater discharges with elevated nutrient levels from fertilizers, phosphates, odor nuisances, and wastewater discharge of pesticides and other constituents which affect the state and federal licensing compliance provisions related to the City’s sewer system and sewer plant. Public access to facilities are prohibited. Generally, licensed marijuana cultivation establishments are classified in the International Building Code as Factory Industrial, F-1, Moderate Hazard Occupancy.
D. Testing Facilities.
1. Characteristics. Testing facilities are laboratory facilities licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana.
2. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, and secured storage areas.
3. Examples. Marijuana testing facilities are independent of all other licensed marijuana establishments staffed with technicians and equipped with various types of instruments and laboratory equipment. Generally, marijuana testing establishments are classified in the International Building Code as Business Group B, Laboratories (Testing and Research).
MARIJUANA USE STANDARDS
A. Site Development Application Required. A Site Development Application is required to be submitted and approved by the Community Development Director.
Exception. Retail Establishments (Medical Marijuana Center and Retail Marijuana Stores) proposed to be located in the city’s Industrial District zone, are subject to Conditional Use approval pursuant to Table 2-3 (Principal Use Table).
B. General Compliance Criteria and Standards. All city licensed marijuana establishments shall meet the following minimum criteria and standards.
1. Marijuana establishments shall not be located within 1000 feet of a public school; private or charter school; daycare school, center, or home; and mental health facilities. The measure is established as a straight line drawn between any points of the respective property boundaries and is designated by the Marijuana Establishment Buffer Map adopted by the City Council. If any portion of deeded real property is intersected in any manner by a designated buffer boundary the entire deeded property is prohibited from being licensed as a marijuana establishment.
2. Licensed marijuana establishments shall not be located on real property that fronts, abuts or is adjoining to any Residential District zone (R-1,R-1M, R-2, RMU, R-3, PUD-Residential).
§3.15 MARIJUANA USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-38 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
3. Licensed Marijuana establishments are subject the district zone location standards as set forth in Table 2-3 (Principal Use Table) of this LDC.
4. Marijuana establishment signage shall include only the registered business or trade name, address, and telephone number of the marijuana establishment. Display of graphic/images of any portion of a marijuana plant on signage associated with marijuana establishments shall be prohibited. Sign standards for marijuana establishments shall comply with all provisions of this LDC or other applicable city laws and regulations.
5. Except for permanent signage as permitted in Section 4.8, Signs of this LDC, it shall be unlawful for any person licensed by the City of Gunnison, or any other person to advertise any marijuana or retail marijuana product anywhere in the city where the advertisement is visible to members of the public from any street, sidewalk, park or other public place, including advertising utilizing any of the following media: billboard, Off-Premise Sign, or other outdoor general advertising device as defined in this LDC; any sign mounted on a vehicle, any hand-held or other portable sign; or any handbill, leaflet or flier directly handed to a person in a public place, left upon a motor vehicle or posted upon any public or private property. The prohibition set forth in this paragraph shall not apply to:
a. Any sign located on the same deeded parcel as a licensed marijuana establishment which exists solely for the purpose of identifying the location of the marijuana establishment;
b. Any advertisement contained within a newspaper, magazine or other periodical of general circulation within the city or on the internet;
c. Any products marked with the name logo of the licensed marijuana establishment, including wearable or non-consumable merchandise, packaging in which marijuana is sold, or on recreational marijuana accessories sold; and,
§3.15 MARIJUANA USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-39
d. Advertising that is purely incidental to sponsorship of a charitable event by the licensed marijuana establishment.
6. Licensed marijuana establishments shall comply with all provisions, standards and regulations of this LDC.
7. Licensed marijuana establishments shall be served by city water, wastewater, and electrical utility services and shall comply with all provisions, standards and regulations specified in the Utilities (Title 12), City of Gunnison Municipal Code.
8. All licensed marijuana establishments shall comply with all applicable requirements of Colorado State Law.
9. Licensed marijuana establishments shall comply with Code of Colorado Regulations, Medical Use of Marijuana and the Code of Colorado Regulations, Retail Marijuana Code.
10. Marijuana-related odors shall not be discharged or emanate from any licensed marijuana establishment. Licensed marijuana establishments involved in the sale, transfer, packaging, processing, cultivation, production, extraction or destruction of plants and their parts, devices, designed for the use of marijuana and marijuana products, or other marijuana related operations and activities, shall provide an approved source capture system capable of removing particulate and odors as required to achieve levels that do not constitute a nuisance to adjacent occupants, structures and properties.
11. Building Standards. Licensed marijuana establishments shall be located in buildings that comply with the International Code Council codes adopted by the City and in effect at the time of the license application submittal.
12. Hours of Operation. Licensed marijuana establishments shall not sell, distribute, or initiate the transport of Marijuana or Marijuana Products at any time other than between the hours of 8:00 am and 10:00 pm, Mountain Standard Time, Monday through Sunday, except that Retail Marijuana Establishment hours are limited on Sunday to the hours of 1:00 pm to 6 pm, Mountain Standard Time.
13. Director or designee shall perform inspections of all licensed marijuana establishments at their discretion. Inspections shall include review of operations and maintenance records.
C. Retail Marijuana and Medical Marijuana Center Standards (retail marijuana establishments). A licensed retail marijuana establishment shall comply with the general criteria and standards (Section 3.15 B.) in addition to the following standards:
1. Building Standards. Licensed retail establishments shall be located in buildings that comply with occupancy standards established in the International Code Council codes adopted by the City and in effect at the time of the license application submittal.
2. Licensed retail establishments shall be located on lots in buildings that comply with the regulations in the LDC including, but not limited to, landscape standards, buffer standards, lighting standards, screening standards and parking standards.
3. Store front window glazing shall not be painted or covered with opaque material, but non-reflective tinted glazing is permitted on the building fenestration.
§3.15 MARIJUANA USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-40 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
4. Off-premises retail marijuana establishment storage facilities are prohibited.
D. Retail Marijuana Products Manufacturing and Medical Marijuana-Infused Products Manufacturing (marijuana product manufacturing establishment). A licensed marijuana product manufacturing establishment shall comply with the general criteria and standards (Section 3.15 B.) in addition to the following standards:
1. Building Standards. Licensed marijuana product manufacturing establishments shall be located in buildings that comply with the International Code Council codes adopted the City and in effect at the time of the license application submittal.
2. Equipment used in the licensed marijuana product manufacturing establishment shall be tested and approved by Underwriters Laboratories (UL) or equivalent standards testing laboratory. In the absence of a testing laboratory certification, the design and construction of said equipment may be by a mechanical engineer registered and holding a current license in the State of Colorado. In the case where equipment is approved by a licensed engineer, documents pertaining to specific material specifications, pressure, temperature thresholds, specific operating procedures, and other related details shall be provided in a report signed and stamped by the engineer of record.
3. Licensed marijuana product manufacturing establishments shall, if necessary, be equipped with a commercial kitchen that complies with all related standards, operation procedures, and food service protection provisions promulgated by the Marijuana Product Manufacturing Facilities standards (R 600 Series) of the Colorado Department of Permanent Rules Related to Retail Marijuana Code, as they may be amended.
Licensed marijuana product manufacturing establishments shall, on an annual basis, be inspected. The Community Development Director shall be provided an inspection report demonstrating compliance with established standards, operation procedures and food service protection provisions. Said report shall be the product of a professional who is certified by the American Board of Industrial Hygiene. The licensed manufacturing establishment shall pay all costs for related inspections and reports. The Community Development Director may order an industrial hygiene inspection without notice, and all costs for city ordered inspections and reports shall be the responsibility of the licensed manufacturing establishment.
4. Toxic Pollutants and Hazardous Waste. Licensed marijuana product manufacturing establishments shall, on an annual basis, provide the Gunnison Fire Marshal a list of hazardous material types and quantities used. Disposal of hazardous and chemical waste must be conducted in a manner consistent with federal, state and local laws pertaining to the proper disposal of related materials.
5. Sewer System Discharge.
a. Wastewater discharged from a marijuana licensed product manufacturing establishment is subject to city regulations (Municipal Code, 12.10.040.2, et al.) established to ensure that industrial wastewater discharge complies with state and federal regulations prior to the actual connection to the city’s wastewater facilities.
b. Testing Requirements. The Public Works Director may order a wastewater discharge inspection without notice, and all costs for city ordered inspections and reports shall be the
§3.15 MARIJUANA USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-41
responsibility of the licensed marijuana product manufacturing establishment. The licensed marijuana cultivation establishment shall pay all costs for related inspections and reports established by an independent testing laboratory acceptable to the Public Works Director.
E. Marijuana Cultivation and Medical Marijuana Optional Premises Cultivation Operation (licensed marijuana cultivation establishment). A licensed marijuana cultivation establishment shall comply with the general criteria and standards (Section 3.15 B.) in addition to the following standards:
1. Outdoor cultivation of marijuana is prohibited.
2. Equipment used in the licensed marijuana cultivation establishment shall be tested and approved by Underwriters Laboratories (UL) or equivalent standards testing laboratory. In the absence of a testing laboratory certification, the design and construction of said equipment may be by a mechanical engineer registered and holding a current license in the State of Colorado. In the case where equipment is approved by a licensed engineer, documents pertaining to specific material specifications, pressure, temperature thresholds, specific operating procedures and other related details shall be provided in a report signed and stamped by the engineer of record.
3. Toxic Pollutants and Hazardous Waste. Licensed marijuana cultivation establishments shall, on an annual basis, provide the Gunnison Fire Marshal a list of hazardous material types and quantities used. Disposal of hazardous and chemical waste must be conducted in a manner consistent with federal, state and local laws pertaining to the proper disposal of related materials.
4. Sewer System Discharge. Wastewater discharged from a licensed marijuana cultivation establishment is subject to city regulations (Municipal Code, 12.10.040.2, et al.) established to ensure that industrial wastewater discharge complies with state and federal regulations prior to the actual connection to the city’s wastewater facilities.
a. The applicant for a licensed marijuana cultivation establishment shall provide an Industrial Pretreatment Plan developed by a licensed engineer in the State of Colorado. The Industrial Pre-Treatment Plan shall be included with the Site Development Plan and shall provide the following specific information:
i. A narrative and graphic plan description of the type of irrigation system to be used.
ii. An estimate of the quantity of total discharge into the wastewater collection system in gallons per day.
iii. The quantity of phosphorous and nitrogen in the discharge, to be established in pounds per day.
b. Discharge Conformance Standards. Licensed marijuana cultivation establishments shall conform to the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment –Water Quality Control Commission, Regulation #85, Nutrients Management Control Regulation (5CCR 1002-85), nutrient discharge limitation, and subject to change to conform to future nutrient discharge limitations promulgated by the State of Colorado. Nutrient discharge shall not exceed the following levels: Total phosphorous 0.015 pounds per day; Total nitrogen 0.088
§3.15 MARIJUANA USE STANDARDS
PAGE 3-42 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
pounds per day. Facilities with projected discharges exceed this threshold are subject to demonstrating compliance the City of Gunnison Municipal Code, Section 12.10.040.2 (Interceptors and Pretreatment).
c. Testing Requirements. The Public Works Director may order a wastewater discharge inspection without notice, and all costs for city ordered inspections and reports shall be the responsibility of the licensed marijuana cultivation establishment. The licensed marijuana cultivation establishment shall pay all costs for related inspections and reports established by an independent testing laboratory acceptable to the Public Works Director.
F. Marijuana Testing Facilities. A licensed Marijuana Testing Facility shall comply with the general criteria and standards (Section 3.15 B.). (Ordinance 5, 2015)
§3.15 MARIJUANA USE STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 3-43
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

§4.1 ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-1
Section 4. General Development Standards
ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES
A. Purpose. The purpose of these adequate public facilities regulations is to ensure that all utilities and other facilities and services needed to support development are available concurrently with the impacts of such development. No building permit shall be issued unless such public facilities and services are in place or the commitments described in this Section have been made, and facilities exist to ensure the community’s health, safety and general welfare.
B. Applicability. Adequate public facilities requirements apply to all new development and subdivisions subject to this LDC, except development on lots created and supported by public facilities that have been accepted by the City.
C. General Requirements
1. Approval Conditioned Upon Adequate Public Facilities. The approval of all development shall be conditioned upon the provision of adequate public facilities and services necessary to serve the new development.
2. Level of Service Standards
a. This Section establishes level of service standards for the following public facilities: sewage disposal, water, drainage, transportation, fire protection, electricity, and irrigation.
b. No development plan or building permit shall be approved or issued in a manner that will result in a reduction in the levels of service below the adopted level of service standard for the affected facility.
D. Sewage Disposal
1. Level of Service. All development shall provide adequate and functional sewage service to each lot pursuant to this subsection. Public central sewer service is required pursuant to Chapter 12.10 (Sewer System) of the City of Gunnison Municipal Code, as it may be amended.
2. Criteria for New Development. Developments shall be served by the City of Gunnison; however, the formation of Special Districts may be permitted under the provisions of the City of Gunnison Municipal Code, Title 10, as it may be amended.
3. Minimum Approval Requirements. Adequate sewage disposal facilities and services to support the proposed development shall be available concurrently with the impacts of such development. In this regard, the City shall require that, at the time of issuance of any building permit, all necessary sewage disposal facilities and services, as required by Chapter 12.10 (Sewer System) of the City of Gunnison Municipal Code, are in place and available to serve the new development in accordance with the approved utility plan for the development.
E. Water
§4.1 ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES
PAGE 4-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
1. Level of Service. All development shall provide adequate and functional domestic water service to each lot pursuant to this subsection. Public water service is required pursuant to Chapter 12.20 (Water Works System) of the City of Gunnison Municipal Code, as it may be amended.
2. Minimum Approval Requirements. Adequate domestic water facilities and services to support the proposed development shall be available concurrently with the impacts of such development. In this regard, the City shall require that, at the time of issuance of any building permit, all necessary water facilities and services are in place and available to serve the new development in accordance with the approved utility plan for the development.
F. Drainage/Water Quality Management
1. Level of Service. All development shall provide adequate surface, subsurface, and road storm drainage facilities and appurtenances as required by the City of Gunnison Stormwater Management Plan, as it may be amended. Either open or closed drainage systems may be required, depending upon terrain, development density and other considerations.
2. Minimum Approval Requirements. Adequate stormwater drainage facilities and services to support the proposed development shall be available concurrently with the impacts of such development. At the time of issuing a building certificate of occupancy, the City shall require that all necessary drainage facilities and services are in place and available to serve the new development in accordance with the approved drainage and erosion control report and plan for the development.
G. Fire Protection
1. Level of Service. All development shall provide sufficient fire suppression facilities and adequate accessibility to emergency fire protection services.
2. Criteria for New Development. New development shall provide adequate fire flows and hydrant distribution as required by Chapter 12.20 of the City of Gunnison Municipal Code and/or by the adopted International Fire Code, as they may be amended.
3. Minimum Approval Requirements. Adequate fire protection facilities and services to support the proposed development shall be available concurrently with the impacts of such development. In this regard, the City shall require that, at the time of issuance any building permit, all such facilities and services as described in §4.1 G.2. above, are in place and available to serve the new development.
H. Transportation
1. Levels of Service (LOS)
a. General Standard. All developments shall be required to demonstrate that there will be no significant adverse impact on existing transportation levels of service, access and vehicular movement on any arterial or collector street or intersection within one-quarter mile of the site or that any such adverse impact has been mitigated to the maximum extent feasible.
b. Waiver. The City may waive these requirements upon a showing by the Applicant that the impact of the proposed development on adjacent roads and intersections will be minimal
§4.1 ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-3
and insignificant.
c. Access to Development in All Zone Districts. All development shall have safe and adequate access to the nearest paved road. “Safe and adequate access” shall mean that a paved access road is available to provide access to the nearest paved road on the City’s street system prior to the issuance of the first building permit for the development. Access to county roads from development located in the City is subject to issuance of a Gunnison County Access Permit.
2. Thresholds for Traffic Impact Analysis. Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) may be required to be submitted with applications for development review and approval of:
a. any subdivision or multi-family residential development with twenty (20) or more dwelling units;
b. any nonresidential development that exceeds fifty peak hour trips based on traffic generation estimates of the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers’ Trip Generation Manual;
c. any application for a Zoning Map Amendment (rezoning) that may increase trip generation by more than 200 trips per day;
d. any Major Subdivision with frontage along a state or federal highway or numbered county road; or
e. proposed new access proposed on Highway 50 and Highway 135.
3. Traffic Impact Analysis Contents. The TIA shall contain the following information:
a. Traffic Impact Area. Identification of the precise boundaries of the Traffic Impact Area, which shall be approved in advance by staff.
b. Current Level of Service. The current projected average daily traffic volumes (level of service) on the segments and intersections of the road system in the Traffic Impact Area based upon existing conditions and factoring in already approved developments.
For purposes of these transportation facility standards, “approved development” shall mean developments that have received preliminary or final approvals from the City and that have not been completed.
c. LOS Including the Proposed Development. The projected average daily traffic volumes (levels of service) of the segments and intersections on the road system in the Traffic Impact Area based upon existing conditions, the demands from approved development, and the proposed development.
d. Study Findings. A summary outlining the study findings on the traffic impacts of the proposed development, including a detailed description of proposed improvements and mitigation measures necessary to maintain the adopted level of service standard.
e. Other Information. Other information as may reasonably be required by the City to determine compliance with the applicable level of service standards.
§4.1 ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES
PAGE 4-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
4. Minimum Approval Requirements. At a minimum, the City shall require that at the time of Final Plat or development plan approval, all necessary transportation facilities and services to meet the applicable level of service are:
a. currently in place and available to serve the new development; or
b. guaranteed by an enforceable development or improvement agreement that ensures that the public facilities will be in place at the time that the impacts of the proposed development will occur.
5. Pedestrian Circulation
Level of Service. All development shall provide adequate and functional circulation facilities for non-motorized transportation.
Criteria for New Development or Redevelopment. Any development or redevelopment within the City shall meet current standards defined in §4.5 of this LDC.
Minimum Approval Requirements. Adequate walkways, accessways, and multi-use trails shall be available concurrently with the impact of development. In this regard, the City shall require that development improvement agreements include the capital cost of developing pedestrian circulation facilities.
I. Electricity
1. Level of Service. All development shall provide adequate and functional electric service to each lot pursuant to this subsection.
2. Criteria for New Development. The development shall be served by the City and shall meet current standards defined in Chapter 12.30 (Electrical System) of the City of Gunnison Municipal Code, as it may be amended.
3. Minimum Approval Requirements. Adequate electric services to support the proposed development shall be available concurrently with the impacts of such development. In this regard, the City shall require that, prior to issuance of the first building permit, all necessary electric services are in place and available to serve the new development or subdivision in accordance with the approved utility plan for the development, i.e., all electric service shall be installed up to and including mains and distribution boxes such as transformers and secondary pedestals.
J. Irrigation System
1. Level of Service. All development shall provide adequate and functional irrigation water either from a domestic water source or the City’s irrigation ditch system, which is the preferred service method.
2. Criteria for New Development. Improvements in all new subdivisions shall include an irrigation ditch system serving all proposed lots. Proposed developments will include the installation of an irrigation ditch system unless it is waived by staff. A waiver from the installation of an irrigation ditch system may only be granted in the event that the extension of
§4.2 ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-5
the irrigation ditch system is impractical due to terrain or other constraints; a waiver may not be granted if irrigation ditch water is not physically available at the time of development but an irrigation system is contemplated in the future.
3. Minimum Approval Requirements. The irrigation system shall be designed to be compatible with adjacent irrigation systems and development if possible, and shall comply with the City of Gunnison Construction Standards. The developer shall provide sufficient capacity in existing ditches or additional right-of-way as required by the City in order to provide irrigation water to the development and to other properties.
ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
A. General Road Construction Standards
1. Applicability. These standards shall apply to all subdivisions and development in the City of Gunnison. The City of Gunnison Construction Standards, as amended, is also incorporated herein by reference.
2. Submittal Requirements. Engineering plan submittals for proposed site-specific development shall conform to the submittal requirements found in Section 6, (Development Review Procedures) and/or as required by Section 12, (Subdivision).
3. Construction Details and Quality Control. Refer to the City of Gunnison Construction Standards for as-built, material testing and professional engineer certification requirements.
4. Other Standards of Construction. All required improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Gunnison Construction Standards (Construction Standards), Title 14, Municipal Code (Technical Codes), the City of Gunnison Stormwater Management Plan, and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Where such standards do not specifically address a design or construction issue, the Community Development Director shall have the authority to enforce other nationally recognized standards. Where a roadway is maintained by CDOT, the roadway and any intersections with such roadway shall be constructed in conformance with the Construction Standards or CDOT standards and specifications, whichever is more stringent.
5. Construction Approval. All subdivisions shall be designed and improvements made by the developer consistent with the requirements in this LDC. Construction plans for subdivisions shall be approved in conjunction with Final Plat approval.
6. Typical Cross-Sections. Design and construction shall conform to the typical cross sections as portrayed in Figure 10 and Figure 11 on the pages that follow.
§4.2 ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
PAGE 4-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
FIGURE 10 ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§4.2 ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-7
FIGURE 11 ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS (CONTINUED)
§4.2 ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
PAGE 4-8 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
7. Terrain Classification. Terrain shall be classified “mountainous” when the average natural existing grade being developed exceeds eight percent.
8. Street Designations. (Local, Collector, et al.) shall be in accordance with the City of Gunnison Master Plan as it may be amended, except in the cases of new streets or existing streets facing significantly increased traffic volumes as a result of map amendments, new subdivisions or other land use changes. In those cases the Commission shall recommend street designations through the review process to the City Council.
9. Repairs and Restoration. Developers of all sites and subdivisions shall be required to repair or restore any off-site damage that occurred during development, including, but not limited to, street repair, revegetation of disturbed areas and final grading.
B. Streets
1. Street Construction and Design Specifications. All new development or subdivisions shall comply with the street construction and design specifications contained herein. Additional design details related to material specifications, design and construction are found in the City of Gunnison Construction Standards, as amended.
2. Sub-local Streets. Sub-local streets are subject to development review by the Commission and City Council approval and shall be designated as such following the provisions of §4.2 A.8., above, and may only be approved for streets with projected trip generation less than 500 trips per day, and in conjunction with site-specific development plans that integrate off-street parking accessed by shared driveways and/or alleys into the site design.
3. Street Sections and Rights-of-Way Width
TABLE 4-1 RIGHT-OF-WAY AND SURFACING WIDTH
Classification
Right-of-Way Width
Surfaced Width
Shoulder Width
With Curbs
Other
Mountainous
Other
Each road side without curb and gutter
Arterial Street
Meet Colorado Department of Transportation Standard
Major Collector Street
100 ft.
84 ft.
40 ft.
52 ft.
4 ft.
Minor Collector Street
100 ft.
84 ft.
32 ft.*
32 ft.*
4 ft.
Local Street
60 ft.
70 ft.
24 ft.*
32 ft.
2 ft.
Local Street
70 ft.
70 ft.
24 ft.*
32 ft.
2 ft.
Sub local Street
60 ft.
70 ft.
22 ft.*
22 ft.
2 ft.
* On-street parking is prohibited
4. Shoulders. Shoulders on streets without curb and gutter shall have a minimum of three inches
§4.2 ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-9
of compacted road base that matches finished grade and crown of the street or conform to storm drainage design and the application of structural stormwater best management facilities.
5. Bike Lanes. Arterial and collector streets shall require bike lanes in each travel direction, which shall be a minimum of six feet in width, unless this requirement is waived by the City.
6. Street Sub-Grade and Asphalt Standards. All streets, whether public or private, shall be constructed in accordance with the geometric design standards herein and standards cited in the City of Gunnison Construction Standards as amended at the time. When warranted by existing soil conditions or proposed traffic loadings the Public Works Director, or designee, may require thickness of the street sub-grade materials and/or asphalt to be designed based on a report prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Colorado.
7. Lane Separations. In order to reduce cut and fill on steep slopes, travel lanes may be separated. The lane width, shoulder widths and curb and gutter requirements must be met.
8. Private Streets. Where private streets are used, they shall meet all design and construction standards of this Article, including right-of-way widths, surface widths, and engineering material design and construction. The entire street width shall be deed restricted for right-of-way purposes. When private streets are used, the subdivider shall submit a recordable document specifically defining private maintenance responsibilities acceptable to the City that ensures the streets will be properly maintained in perpetuity. The recorded plat of any subdivision that includes a private street shall clearly state that each street is a private street. Private streets shall not be allowed where a public street connection to adjacent property may be required for existing or future access and traffic flow purposes.
C. Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-End Streets
1. Where Allowed. Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets shall only be allowed where the terrain, streams, wetlands or other natural features preclude the connection to a grid or modified grid street system layout. In the event that cul-de-sac or dead end streets are proposed, they shall only be approved if the Commission and City Council makes a finding that terrain, streams, wetlands or other natural site features preclude the inter-connective to a grid or modified grid street system layout.
2. Length. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac or dead-end street shall be 400 feet, measured from the center of the nearest intersection to the center of the cul-de-sac turnaround.
3. Number of Vehicle Trips per Day. A cul-de-sac or dead-end street may provide access for uses not generating more than 250 vehicle trips per day.
D. Street Intersections. Whenever possible, streets shall intersect at right angles. Minimum centerline offset shall be 150 feet. Edge radii of asphalt at intersections shall be as follows.
1. Curb Radii. Edge Radii shall conform to the following intersection types and conform to obstruction standards as stated in §4.3.J.4. (Intersection Driveway Visibility) of this LDC.
§4.2 ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
PAGE 4-10 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 4-2 CURB RADII
INTERSECTION TYPE
EDGE RADIUS
Sub-Local/local
20 feet
Sub-local/collector
25 feet
Sub-local/arterial
30 feet
Local/local
20 feet
Local/collector
25 feet
Local/arterial
30 feet
Collector/collector
25 feet
Collector/arterial
30 feet
2. Sight Distance. Intersection sight distance shall be as follows:
TABLE 4-3 SIGHT DISTANCES
DESIGN SPEED
SIGHT DISTANCE
55+ mph
650 feet
50 mph
515 feet
45 mph
465 feet
40 mph
415 feet
35 mph
365 feet
30 mph
310 feet
25 mph
260 feet
20 mph
210 feet
3. Intersection Grade Standards. Streets shall be leveled to a grade of less than four percent for a distance of at least 50 feet approaching all intersections and, at the intersection, a grade of three percent shall be the maximum.
E. Vertical Alignment
1. Vertical Street Alignment. Vertical street alignments should relate to the natural topography insofar as is practical so as to minimize the need for cuts or fills while being consistent with safe geometric design.
2. Street Grade. Street grades shall be more than one percent but less than six percent for local and sub-local streets and less than seven percent for collector and arterial streets. Maximum grade limits may be exceeded by up to one percent in mountainous terrain or for stretches not exceeding 200 feet where necessitated by field conditions. Minimum grades may be less than one percent if predicated by drainage plan requirements, which must be approved by the City Engineer.
3. Street Grade Changes. All changes in street grade of greater than one-half of one percent for arterials and one percent for collectors, local, and sub-local shall be connected by curves of such length to provide for the following minimum stopping site distance.
Collector Streets 275 feet
Local Streets 200 feet
Sub-Local Street 175 feet
§4.2 ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-11
F. Horizontal Alignment
1. Street Horizontal Alignment. Horizontal alignments shall be directed in large measure by the intended or existing land use of adjacent properties. Where possible, however, horizontal street alignments should relate to the natural contours of the site insofar as is practical while being consistent with safe geometric design.
2. Minimum Radii of Curvature. Minimum radii of curvature on the centerline shall be as follows:
TABLE 4-4MINIMUM RADII OF CURVATURE ON CENTERLINE
STREET TYPE
HORIZONTAL CURVE RADII
Arterial
400 feet
Collector
200 feet
Local and sub-local
100 feet
Alley
35 feet
Lesser radii may be used in mountainous terrain and in other cases in which sufficient evidence is presented to show that the above requirements are not practicable.
3. Clear Visibility Measure. Clear visibility measure along the center line shall be provided for at least 200 feet on collector and at least 150 feet on local and sub-local streets.
4. Reverse Curve Tangent. Reverse curves shall be separated by tangent sections as follows:
Local and sub-local streets 50 feet
Arterial and collector streets 100 feet
G. Cross Slope. All street pavement sections shall have a normal crown with a typical cross slope of 2 percent. Pavement cross slope on street intersections or in special cases shall not exceed three-one-hundredths foot per foot.
H. Curb and Gutter.When curb and gutter is proposed it shall be required on both sides of the street, the entire length, for all subdivisions and developments requiring development plan review. Asphalt curb shall not be allowed. Permanent stormwater catch basins are required, pursuant to §5.1 for all on-street drainage facilities and the design shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer prior to construction. Refer to the City of Gunnison Construction Standards for curb and gutter construction details.
I. Street Dedication
1. Dead End Streets. All streets that dead-end at the developer’s property line, but will not connect with a street dedicated to public use, shall be dedicated to public use to the property line.
2. Street Construction and Right-of-Way Connections. All subdivisions shall provide for street construction and right-of-way connections to adjoining properties.
3. Rights-of-Way Abutting Unincorporated Property. All rights-of-way dedications abutting real property in unincorporated Gunnison County for the purpose of streets shall be in
§4.2 ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
PAGE 4-12 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
accordance with all City standards.
J. Acceptance of Public Dedicated Streets and Other Public Utilities
1. Acceptance Timing and Season. The City shall not accept street and utility improvements for maintenance between November 1st and May 1st since deficiencies noted on inspection cannot usually be determined or corrected during this period.
2. Maintenance. Until such time that the developer receives written final acceptance for full maintenance of the streets by the City, the developer shall be responsible for all maintenance, to include snowplowing, and repairs to the street improvements. Maintenance responsibilities are subject to financial guarantees under the Subdivision Improvements Agreement.
3. Preliminary Inspection. Upon completion of street and utility construction, the developer shall notify the City Engineer in writing and request inspection. Within fifteen working days, the City Engineer shall inspect all public improvements and notify the developer in writing of preliminary acceptance or non-acceptance. If non-acceptance is determined, then corrective measures shall be outlined in the letter of notification.
4. Final Inspection. Eleven months after preliminary acceptance and upon due notice from the developer, the City Engineer will conduct a final inspection of the public improvements and will furnish a written list of any deficiencies noted. The City Engineer will base any determination upon satisfactory completion of all construction in accordance with the approved plans, profiles, and specifications and receipt of reproducible as-built drawings and satisfactory test results. Thereafter, the City Engineer may authorize final acceptance or non-acceptance by a letter of notification.
K. Partial-Width Street. In case of a partial-width street, a minimum of 50 feet along and adjacent to a boundary of the subdivision shall be dedicated as public rights-of-way, except in cases in which a proper deed or instrument of dedication to the City is filed with the map or plat of the subdivision, granting sufficient land to make a street of the required full width. “Partial-Width Street” shall be lettered on the map or plat following the name of the street. Whenever a dedicated or platted partial-width street or alley exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half (minimum 50 feet) shall be platted.
L. Additional Rights-of-Way. When required for the advancement of a public need, such as instances where geometric road design, utilities, trail alignments, irrigation ditches or other facilities that warrant more area, additional rights-of-way in connection with streets shall be provided.
M. Street Paving and Signs. The subdivider shall install and pave all streets in accordance with design and construction requirements established by the City, and subject to the approval and acceptance of the City. The developer shall provide and install all street signs, which shall comply with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). Street name signs shall comply with City standards and are subject to City approval.
N. Roadside Delineators. On Designated Mountain Roads the subdivider shall provide and install roadside delineators (steel posts with white reflector), at all points of tangency and points of curvature, or as directed by the Public Works Director or designated representative.
O. Erosion Control. An erosion control plan sheet shall be required with the construction plan for
§4.3 GENERAL SITE ACCESS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-13
subdivision or development. The plan shall be in accordance with the Stormwater and Erosion Control Standards as adopted (§5.3).
P. Clustered Mail Box. U.S. Postal Service policies require that cluster mail box service locations be provided as necessary to serve residential and nonresidential developments. The developer will coordinate with the Postal Service to ensure that clustered mailboxes shall be within street rights-of-way, where possible, or on private property. All locations required pursuant to requirements of this Section shall be in conformance with Postal Service specifications and shall be provided by the developer.
GENERAL SITE ACCESS
A. Access to Public Roads. All new lots, however created, shall have access to a dedicated public road. If the approved plat provides for indirect access (i.e., over intervening private drives), access easements and driveway/drainage maintenance agreements benefiting all lots with indirect access, shall be provided and recorded at the same time the plat is recorded. Refer to §4.2 , Road Construction Standards.
B. Driveway Access - General Standards
1. Limits on Number of Driveway Curb Cuts
a. Minimize Curb Cuts. To the maximum extent feasible, the number of new curb cuts shall be minimized by consolidation, shared driveways or other means.
b. Access to State Highways. No driveway openings or curb cuts shall be allowed on State Highways except with an approved access permit from the Colorado Department of Transportation.
c. Access to Arterial Streets. Direct access onto arterial streets shall be permitted only when no other reasonable access is available. When direct access must be provided, arterial street frontages shall be limited to one driveway opening per lot.
d. Guidelines for Vehicular Access. Refer to Table 4-5 for guidelines for vehicular access.
TABLE 4-5 VEHICULAR ACCESS AND CIRCULATION GUIDELINES
Zoning District
“A” = Applicable “─” = Not Applicable
CBD
B-1
C
R-2M
R-3
Curb Cuts
No new mid-block curb cuts should be permitted along Tomichi Avenue between Adams Street and 10th Street
A
─
A
─
─
To the maximum extent feasible, the number of curb cuts should be minimized by consolidation, shared driveway or other means
A
A
A
A
A
Direct access from alleys
A
A
A
A
A
Lot widths of 200 feet or less should be limited to no more than 1 driveway curb cut per lot.
A
A
A
A
A
§4.3 GENERAL SITE ACCESS
PAGE 4-14 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 4-5 VEHICULAR ACCESS AND CIRCULATION GUIDELINES
Zoning District
“A” = Applicable “─” = Not Applicable
CBD
B-1
C
R-2M
R-3
Curb Cuts
Lot widths of more than 200 feet shall be limited to no more than 2 driveway curb cuts per lot.
A
A
─
A
A
Driveway Spacing
Arterial Streets: All driveways accessed from an arterial street should be spaced at least 250 feet from the pavement edge or any other driveway or public street intersection.
A
A
A
A
A
Collector Streets (Major and Minor): All driveways accessed from a Collector Street should be spaced 200 feet from the pavement edge of any other driveway or public street intersection.
A
A
A
A
A
Local and Sub-Local Streets: All driveways accessed from a Local or Sub-local Street should be spaced 200 feet from the pavement edge of any other driveway or public intersection.
A
A
A
A
A
Requirement for the Location of Service and Loading Docks
Loading and service docks shall be developed in accordance with §4.4
A
A
A
A
A
Non-Residential Uses-Driveways and Interconnected Access for Shared Parking
Parking lots may be interconnected with nonresidential parking lots on adjacent properties to the maximum extent practicable. Cross-access easements or other acceptable agreements for adjacent lots with interconnected parking lots shall be submitted in language acceptable to the Community Development Director to ensure availability of interconnected parking to users.
C. Backing Prohibited. All multi-family and nonresidential off-street parking spaces shall be accessible without backing into or otherwise reentering a public right-of-way. Parking areas with greater than eight spaces shall be not designed for backing into alley rights-of-way adjacent to the property. Vehicles exiting from a parking space for a single-family or duplex dwelling unit may back onto a road designated by the City as a Local Street and alley rights-of-way.
D. Shared Driveways
1. Shared Driveways Encouraged. Shared driveways are strongly encouraged.
2. Property Line. Shared driveways may be used on adjoining properties and be on or directly adjacent to a property line.
3. Maintenance. Shared driveways require submittal of a maintenance agreement for recordation.
4. Single-Family Driveways. Single-family driveways may be shared by up to four single-family residential units.
5. Multi-Family Access. Driveways may be shared by two or more principal nonresidential uses.
E. Corner Lots. A driveway or curb cut on a corner lot shall be setback a minimum of 15 feet from
§4.3 GENERAL SITE ACCESS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-15
the property line at the corner or shall be a minimum of 30 feet from the cross-street curb line, whichever is greater.
F. Property Lines. Driveways and sidewalks shall be setback at least three feet from an adjacent property line.
G. Driveway Alignments. To the maximum extent feasible, new driveways shall align directly across from existing driveways.
H. Driveway Opening Requirements. Driveways shall have the following minimum and maximum widths at the gutter line, plus a minimum of one foot additional clearance on each side of a vertical obstruction that exceeds two feet in height. If there is a conflict between the specified driveway opening standards identified herein and the International Fire Code, provisions of the International Fire Code shall prevail.
I. Driveway Spacing. Unless otherwise limited or allowed by the applicable zoning district regulations, the following driveway spacing requirements shall apply.
1. Arterial Streets
a. Spacing from Other Driveways. To the maximum extent feasible, all driveways shall be spaced at least 250 feet from any other driveway on either side of the street.
b. Spacing from Intersections. To the maximum extent feasible, all driveways shall be spaced at least 250 feet from the pavement edge of arterial street intersections.
2. Collector Streets
a. Spacing from Other Driveways. To the maximum extent feasible, all driveways shall be spaced at least 150 feet from the pavement edge of any other driveway.
b. Spacing from Intersections. To the maximum extent feasible, all driveways shall be spaced at least 20 feet from the pavement edge of a non-arterial street intersection.
3. Local and Sub-Local Streets
a. Spacing of Driveways. Residential driveways shall be spaced at least 20 feet from adjacent driveways.
TABLE 4-6 DRIVEWAY DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
USE SERVED
NUMBER OF SPACES
WIDTH (FEET)
Residential
4 or less
10
Greater than 4 to 19
12 if one-way
20 if two-way
Non-residential
Greater than 19
15 if one-way
24 if two-way
§4.3 GENERAL SITE ACCESS
PAGE 4-16 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
b. Setback from Lot Line. Driveways shall be setback a minimum of four feet from any lot line except where residential dwelling units share a common access located on the property line.
J. Driveway Design Standards
1. Surface Material Standards
a. Driveway Construction for 5+ Parking Spaces. All driveways serving five or more parking spaces shall be paved and constructed with a minimum edge radius of five feet on both sides, and shall be surfaced with at least two inches of bituminous paving material or four inches of concrete. Porous pavement material designed specifically for stormwater infiltration may be allowed at the discretion of the City Engineer.
b. Driveway Construction for 20+ Parking Spaces. All driveways serving 20 or more parking spaces shall be paved, designed and constructed meeting the standards applicable to a public street.
c. Apron Length. Where garages are used to satisfy parking requirements, the driveway apron shall be at least 20 feet in length unless it is demonstrated the design will not interfere with adjoining traffic movements or pedestrian circulation on adjacent public sidewalks.
2. Geometric Design Standards
a. Maximum Grade for Residential Driveways. Residential driveways shall have a maximum grade of eight percent, except that the Community Development Director may allow a greater maximum grade, provided that health and safety concerns and the need for adequate access for service providers are adequately addressed.
b. Maximum Grade for Nonresidential Driveways. Driveways serving nonresidential uses shall have a maximum grade of six percent.
c. Grades for Driveways within Twenty Feet on Intersection. Driveway grades within 20 feet of any intersection with streets and roads shall not exceed six percent for single-family residential driveways and four percent for multi-family residential and nonresidential driveways.
d. Contour. Driveways shall, to the maximum extent feasible, follow natural contour lines.
e. Stacking Space. Non-residential driveways shall have unobstructed stacking space to accommodate four vehicles at 23 feet per vehicle. The amount of unobstructed stacking space may be reduced by the Community Development Director if the applicant can demonstrate by a study established by a traffic engineer that the stacking space is not warranted.
§4.3 GENERAL SITE ACCESS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-17
3. Other Driveway Construction Standards
a. Alignment with Property Line. Any portion of a driveway that is not on the subject property shall be contained within the area between the street and the subject property. See Figure 12.
b. Angle at Intersection. Whenever possible driveways shall intersect streets at right angles.
c. Grading. Driveway openings shall be graded and drainage facilities provided where necessary to prevent stormwater from ponding or running across
any sidewalk or other pedestrian way.
d. Drainage. All driveways shall be constructed in a manner that shall not cause water to enter onto the street and shall not interfere with the drainage system within the right-of-way.
e. Pavement. Where curbs exist or are required, driveways shall be paved for their full width from curb to property lines.
f. Concrete Pan. Where curb and gutter exists, a concrete pan shall be provided to carry the flow line.
g. Sidewalk Depth for Single-Family Driveway. Where a single-family driveway crosses a sidewalk, the sidewalk shall be a minimum depth of four inches of concrete.
h. Sidewalk Depth for Commercial or Multi-Family Driveways. Where a multi-family or commercial driveway crosses a sidewalk, the sidewalk shall be a minimum of four inches of concrete.
i. Access Standards. Driveways serving parking areas with eight or more stalls are subject to these driveway access standards; such parking facilities shall not be designed to back onto any street or alley rights-of-way.
j. Culverts. Driveways crossing a drainage ditch require a culvert installed by the property owner at a diameter size according to the ditch capacity based on the City of Gunnison Stormwater Management Manual, but in no case less than 15 inches. The minimum length of any culvert shall be five feet greater than the driveway width or 16 feet, whichever is greater.
k. Replacement Standards for Sidewalks. Where sidewalks are removed for the construction of a driveway or entrance, they shall be replaced with a concrete apron from the edge of the street to the back of the remaining sidewalk. Said concrete apron shall be
FIGURE 12 OTHER DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§4.3 GENERAL SITE ACCESS
PAGE 4-18 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
constructed in conformance with applicable driveway approach details set forth in the City of Gunnison Construction Standards.
l. Replacement Standards for Curb and Gutter. Where curbs are removed for the construction of a driveway or entrance, they shall be replaced with a concrete apron to be constructed in conformance with curb and gutter detail set forth in the City of Gunnison Construction Standards.
m. Standards for New Construction Abutting Existing Sidewalks and Asphalt. Where new driveway construction abuts existing sidewalks and asphalt, the work shall be accomplished so that no abrupt change in grade between the old and new work results. All edges of the old sidewalk or asphalt shall be saw cut. No irregular angles or jagged edges shall be left on the match line.
n. Standards for Gated Access. An access that has a gate across it shall be designed so that the longest vehicle using the access can completely clear the traveled way when the gate is closed.
4. Intersection and Driveway Visibility. Intersections and driveways shall maintain unobstructed safe visibility by conforming to the following standards:
a. Intersection. No fence, wall, hedge, landscaping, sign or other material or structure that will obstruct vision between a height of three feet and 11 feet shall be erected, placed or maintained within the sight visibility triangle formed by a straight line starting at the point of intersection of the curb line and extending 30 feet from their point of intersection, as shown in Figure 13. Visibility triangle requirements may be increased by the Community Development Director when deemed necessary for traffic safety.
b. Driveway Sight Visibility. No fence, wall, hedge, landscaping, sign or other material or structure that will obstruct vision between a height of three feet and eight feet shall be erected, placed or maintained within the sight visibility triangle, as shown in Figure 13.
The provisions of this Section may be waived by the Community Development Director if it can be shown that visibility will not be restricted either because of a turnaround driveway or a center median (tree lawn) greater than eight feet.
c. Driveways serving 20 or more parking spaces shall have not less than 250 feet of visibility
FIGURE 13 INTERSECTION AND DRIVEWAY VISIBILITY
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-19
in each travel lane entering an arterial street and not less than 100 feet of visibility on other streets.
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
A. Purpose. This Section establishes parking standards for land uses in the City. The standards are intended to lessen congestion on the streets and to ensure an adequate supply of parking spaces within a reasonable distance of uses.
B. Applicability
1. Requirements for Certificate of Occupancy. Unless specifically exempt, all existing and proposed development shall provide off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with this Section. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until these parking requirements and regulations have been met.
2. Modifications Must Conform. With the exception of a restriping of a parking area or other vehicular use area which does not result in a reconfiguration of the parking spaces, any modification to existing off-street parking and loading facilities shall conform to the requirements of this Section.
3. Site Plan Required. No land with more than four parking spaces shall be developed as a parking area or parking garage without an approved site plan issued.
4. When Existing Off-Street Parking and Loading may be Grandfathered. Buildings and uses lawfully existing as of the effective date of this LDC may be redeveloped, renovated or repaired without providing additional off-street parking and loading facilities, if there is no increase in gross floor area or change in use of existing floor area that would increase parking demand.
5. When Additional Off-Street Parking and Loading is Required. These Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards shall apply when an existing structure is enlarged or the change in use requires additional parking. Additional off-street parking spaces will be required only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building or use, provided that in all cases the number of off-street parking spaces approved for the entire use (pre-existing plus expansion) must equal at least 75 percent of the minimum requirements established in this Section.
6. Off-Street Parking and Loading in the CBD. Uses in the CBD zone district are exempt from the parking space demand (minimum number of spaces) and loading requirements set forth in this Section of the LDC excluding upper story residential units and bed and breakfasts in an approved Conditional Use application developed in the CBD. However, any use in the CBD proposing off-street parking facilities are subject to all Standards of this Section, with the exception of minimum number of space requirements (§4.4 D.)
C. Parking Calculation Provisions
1. For Developments Containing More than One Use. Developments containing more than one use shall provide parking spaces in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses.
2. Floor Area Calculation. The method of measuring floor area shall be as described in §1.7 F.
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
PAGE 4-20 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
3. Fractional Spaces. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the next highest whole number.
4. Uses Not Listed. The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed in the table below shall be the same as for the listed use deemed most similar to the proposed use by the Community Development Director. The Community Development Director shall use the criteria in §2.5 A, to determine how an unlisted use should be treated.
5. Based on Occupancy. For the purposes of computing parking requirements based on occupancy, calculations shall be based on the largest number of occupants working on any single shift, the maximum enrollment or the maximum fire-rated capacity, whichever is applicable, and whichever results in the greater number of spaces.
6. Garages. Garages of adequate size serving residential uses shall be applied to parking requirements.
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-21
D. Minimum Off-Street Parking. The following minimum schedule establishes the minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided for the use categories described in this LDC.
1 Ordinance 3, 2015
2 Ordinance #3, Series 2016
TABLE 4-7 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
USE CLASSIFICATION
SPECIFIC USE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED
Residential Use Categories (§3.2)
Household Living
Single-Family Dwellings, Townhouses, Two-family Dwellings, Manufactured Home and Mobile Home
2.0 per dwelling unit
Multi-Family Dwellings2
1st Unit
2.0 per dwelling unit
Each additional unit
1.75 per dwelling unit
Accessory Dwelling Unit and Upper Floor Residential2
1.0 per Accessory Dwelling Unit
Congregate Living
Rooming and boarding houses, dormitories, fraternities or sororities
1.0 per bed
Nursing Homes
1.0 per employee, plus 1 visitor space per 2 beds
Assisted Living
1.0 per employee, plus 1 visitor space per 4 beds
Accommodations
Hotels and Motels
1.0 per guest room
+1 space per 3 employees and
75% of parking required for other associated or accessory uses (restaurants, offices, meeting spaces)
Hostels1
1.0 per 2 beds
Bed and Breakfasts
1.0 space per guest room, plus 2 spaces for the owner/manager's unit
Public, Civic and Institutional Use Categories (§3.4)
Community
Service
Neighborhood or Community Centers
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. of improved area
Educational
Facilities
Elementary and Middle Schools
1.0 per classroom + 1.0 per 300 sq.ft. of office area + 1.0 per 5 seats in any auditorium assembly
All Other Schools
6.0 per classroom + 1.0 per 300 sq.ft. of office area + 1 per 5 seats in any auditorium or similar facility
Day Care
Day Care Homes, Schools and Centers
1.0 per non-resident employee
Medical
Hospital
1.0 per 2 beds + 1.0 per employee per day shift
Parks and Open Space
Cemeteries, Mausoleums
To be determined by Director (§4.4D 2.a)
Parks and recreational facilities
To be determined by Director (§4.4D 2.a)
Religious Institutions
Churches or Places of Worship
1 space per every 4 seats in the main sanctuary, plus 1 space for the parish home
Utilities
Major utilities
To be determined by Director (§4.4D.2.a)
Minor utilities
None
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
PAGE 4-22 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 4-7 (CONTINUED)
USE CLASSIFICATION
SPECIFIC USE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED
Accommodation, Retail, Service - Commercial Use Categories (§3.6)
Entertainment Event, Major
Auditoriums
1 space per every 4 seats
Fairgrounds
To be determined by Director (§4.4 D.2.a)
Office
Banks and Financial Institutions
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. + vehicle stacking see §4.4 J
Radio and Television Studios
1.0 per 300 sq. ft.
Government Offices
1.0 per 300 sq. ft.
Professional Offices
1.0 per 300 sq. ft.
Medical Clinic or Dental Office
1.0 per 200 sq. ft.
Parking, Commercial
Commercial parking lots and garages
1 space per Attendant
Recreation and Entertainment, Outdoor
Golf driving range
1.0 per tee box
Recreational vehicle parks
2 spaces per Site/RV Site (including RV), plus 1 parking space for each five sites for guests
Retail Sales and Service, Sales-Oriented
Art Galleries
1.0 per 1000 sq. ft.
Auto sales and rental
1.0 per 300 sq. ft.
Automotive Supplies
1.0 per 250 sq. ft.
Book Stores
1.0 per 250 sq. ft.
Convenience Stores, without gas pumps
1.0 per 200 sq. ft.
Furniture and Appliance Stores
1.0 per 400 sq. ft.
Greenhouse/Nursery, Retail
To be determined by Director (§4.4 D.2.a)
Outside Sales or Display
1.0 per 200 sq. ft.
Rental of equipment and supplies
1.0 per 300 sq. ft.
Recreational Vehicle Sales
1.0 per 400 sq. ft.
Lumber and building materials sales
To be determined by Director (§4.4 D.2.a)
All other retail
1.0 per 250 sq. ft.
Retail Sales and Service,
Personal Service-Oriented
Athletic or Health Clubs, Spas
1.0 per 200 sq. ft.
Barber and Beauty Shops
2.0 per chair
Dry Cleaning Drop-off and Pick-up
1.0 per 300 sq. ft.
Laundromats
1.0 per 2 machines
Funeral homes and Mortuaries
1.0 per 4 seats in assembly area
Kennels
1.0 per 300 sq. ft.
Veterinary clinic
1.0 per 300 sq. ft.
Retail Sales and Service,
Eating and Drinking oriented
Restaurants
1.0 per 200 sq. ft.
Eating and drinking with drive-thru
1 per 50 sq. ft. of customer service area + vehicle stacking spaces as required by §4.4J
Bars and taverns
1.0 per 200 sq. ft.
Coffee shop/bakery
1.0 per 200 sq. ft.
Retail Sales and Service,
Entertainment-Oriented
Recreation, indoor
1.0 per 200 sq. ft.
Private lodges and clubs
To be determined by Director (§4.4 D.2.a)
Theaters
1.0 per 4 seats
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-23
TABLE 4-7 (CONTINUED)
USE CLASSIFICATION
SPECIFIC USE
MINIMUM NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED
Industrial Use Categories (§3.8)
Retail Sales and Service,
Repair-Oriented
Appliance Repair
1.0 per 400 sq. ft.
Bicycle Repair
1.0 per 400 sq. ft.
Locksmith
1.0 per 400 sq. ft.
Self-storage Warehouse
Self-Storage or Mini-Warehouse
1.0 per 10 storage unit
Vehicle Repair
Auto Body Shops
2.0 per service bay + 1.0 per employee
Vehicle Repair
2.0 per service bay + 1.0 per employee
Vehicle Services, Limited
Car Washes
None- See §4.4J
Convenience Stores, with Gas Sales
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. + 1 per service bay
or gas pump
Service Stations
2.0 per service bay + 1.0 per employee
Quick Lube Services
1.5 per service bay + 1.0 per employee
Industrial Sales and Service
Warehousing and Storage
1.0 per 1000 sq. ft.
Manufacturing and Production
All uses
1.0 per 500 sq. ft.
Wholesale and Freight Movement
Air cargo terminal
To be determined by Director (§4.4D2a)
Outdoor storage, general
0.6 per employee
Post Offices
1.0 per 250 sq. ft.
Vehicle Storage Yard
1.0 per employee
Utility Service Yard or Garage
1.0 per employee
All other uses
1.0 per 2,000 sq. ft.
Waste-Related
Recycling Facility
To be determined by Director (§4.4D2a)
Wholesale Sales
Mail Order
0.6 per employee
Wholesale and Distribution
1.0 per 300 sq. ft. office and administrative + 1.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. additional gross floor area
Other Use Categories (§3.10)
Adult Entertainment
Adult Entertainment
1.0 per 200 sq. ft.
Agriculture
Animals (farm animal) breeding or raising
None
Greenhouse/nursery, non-retail
0.6 per employee
Alternative Energy Sources
Aviation and Surface Transportation
Airports and related facilities, public
Determined by Parking Study
(see §4.4 D.3)
Mining
Telecommunications Facilities
Wireless Communication Occupied Facilities Only
1.0 per 500 sq. ft.
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
PAGE 4-24 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
1. Disabled Access Parking
a. Parking spaces for disabled persons shall be provided per the following schedule:
TABLE 4-8 DISABLED ACCESS PARKING
TOTAL PARKING SPACES IN LOT
MINIMUM ACCESSIBLE SPACES
MINIMUM VAN-ACCESSIBLE SPACES
MINIMUM CAR-ACCESSIBLE SPACES
0 to 25
1
1
0
26 to 50
2
1
1
51 to 75
3
1
2
76 to 100
4
1
3
101 to 150
5
1
4
151 to 200
6
1
5
201 to 300
7
1
6
301 to 400
8
1
7
401 to 500
9
2
7
501 to 1000
2% of Total
1 out of every 8 accessible spaces
7 out of every 8 accessible spaces
Over 1000
20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
b. Parking spaces for the disabled shall have a minimum stall width of nine feet, unless it is a required van-accessible space, which shall be a minimum of 11 feet. All spaces designated as being for the disabled shall have a raised standard identification sign. The identification sign shall be 12 inches by 18 inches, with a height not to exceed seven feet. The standard colors of the sign shall be white on blue. (Ordinance 4, 2014)
2. Maximum Requirement and Shared Use Reduction
a. Maximum Parking. No use shall provide more than 110 percent of the required parking shown in Table 4-7 unless the greater amount is pre-existing from another use or the threshold is part of a structured public parking program.
b. Phased Development. Where a project is intended to be developed in phases, the Director may approve development of a parking area intended to serve current and future development.
3. Parking Studies
a. Parking for Uses Not Listed. In cases where parking demand is not specifically listed in Table 4-7, the Director may require the submittal of a parking demand study completed by the applicant according to the directives of §4.4.D.2.a., staff shall apply the off-street parking and loading standard specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or shall establish minimum off-street parking requirements on the basis of a parking and loading study prepared by the Applicant.
b. Estimates of Parking Demand. The parking and loading study must include estimates of parking demand based on recommendations of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or other acceptable estimates as approved by staff, and should include other reliable data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same as or comparable with the proposed use. Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-25
FIGURE 14 PARKING STALL DIMENSIONS
activity and location. The study must document the source of data used to develop the recommendations.
4. Parking Stall and Aisle Dimensions. Standard parking spaces shall conform to the dimensions shown on Table 4-9 (see Figure 14).
TABLE 4-9 PARKING STALL AND AISLE DIMENSIONS
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Angle of Parking
Stall Width
Stall Length
Stall Depth
Curb Length per Stall
Aisle width for two-way traffic with two-sided loading
Aisle width for one-way traffic, with one-sided or two-sided loading
0 degrees
9
23
N/A
23
20
12
30 degrees
9
20
17.4
17
20
15
45 degrees
9
20
20.2
12
20
15
60 degrees
9
19.5
21
10.4
24
20
90 degrees
9
19.5
19.5
9
24
22
1Designed fire lanes and emergency vehicle access mandated by the International Fire Code may require additional aisle width dimensions.
E. Location
1. Principal Use. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Section, required off-street parking stalls and aisles shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the principal use.
2. Setbacks in Non-Residential Zone Districts. In all non-residential zone districts except the
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
PAGE 4-26 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Industrial zone district, off-street parking shall not be located within the required yard setback area. Off-street parking in the CBD shall not be located between the lot line and the building line parallel to an arterial or collector street (see also §4.3, General Site Access).
3. Setbacks for Multi-Family Development. Off-street parking for multi-family developments may encroach on the rear yard only, but shall not be within three feet of the rear property line.
4. Setbacks from Rivers, Streams and Wetlands. See §5.4 E.1.b. for required parking area setbacks from delineated river/stream corridors and wetlands.
5. Parking in Driveways. Parking of single-family and two-family dwellings may be located in residential driveway areas that meet parking stall dimensions (excluding RVs and boats).
6. Street Buffer. Off-street parking areas shall be separated from the street edge by a street buffer area (see §4.6 3.4).
F. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking areas are subject to the following driveway access standards (Ordinance #3, Series 2016):
1. Dimensions
a. Grade. The maximum grade permitted for any required parking shall not exceed six percent.
b. Nonconforming Standards. Parking spaces using geometric standards other than those specified above may be approved if developed and sealed by a licensed engineer registered by the State of Colorado with expertise in parking facility design, subject to a determination by the Director, that the proposed facility will satisfy off-street parking aisle width requirements as adequately as would a facility using those specified above.
2. Surfacing. Where off-street facilities are provided for parking or any other vehicular use area, they shall be surfaced with asphalt bituminous, concrete or other dustless material (brick pavers, etc.) approved by the Director and shall be maintained in a smooth, well-graded condition; gravel or road base surfaces are prohibited. Single-family and duplex units are exempt from this requirement.
3. Curbs and Wheel Stops
Wheel Stops. All landscaping in, or adjacent to, a vehicular use area shall be protected from vehicular damage by a raised concrete curb six inches in height or equivalent barrier, however, the barrier need not be continuous. Curbs and wheel stops shall be placed a minimum of two feet from any designated landscape area or buffer.
Landscape Height. Landscaped areas adjacent to parking areas shall be landscaped so that no plant material greater than 12 inches in height will be located within two feet of the curb or other protective barrier.
4. Separation from Walkways and Streets. In the event any parking area abuts an accessway, sidewalk, or street, the parking area shall be separated by curbing or other protective device with a minimum distance of three and one-half feet between the protective device and the edge
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-27
of the walkway.
5. Landscaping and Buffers. Parking lots are subject to Parking Lot Landscaping Standards (§4.6 G.).
6. Drainage. See §5.1.
7. Backing Prohibited. All multi-family and nonresidential off-street parking spaces shall be accessible without backing into or otherwise reentering a public right-of-way, unless it is an alley right-of-way adjacent to the property. Vehicles exiting from a parking space for a single-family or duplex dwelling unit may back onto a road designated by the City as a local street.
8. Tandem Parking. Tandem parking (one vehicle parking directly behind another) shall not be permitted and shall not be credited toward meeting any off-street parking requirement for this Article, except for single-family or duplex residential uses, provided the tandem spaces are assigned to the same dwelling unit.
9. Snow Storage. Snow is to be stored on-site according to the following standards:
a. Area. A minimum area of 15 percent of the total required off-street parking or loading area, inclusive of access drives and aisles, shall be provided as the snow storage area.
b. Storage in Parking Spaces Prohibited. Snow shall not be stored within required parking spaces, except on an emergency basis, for a period not to exceed 48 hours.
c. Storage in Yards and Open Space Permitted. Snow may be stored in required yards and open space, including landscaped areas properly designed for snow storage. Stored snow shall not restrict access and circulation or create a visual obstruction for motorists.
d. Drainage. Adequate drainage shall be provided for the snow storage area to accommodate snow melt. Snow melt shall not be permitted to drain on to adjacent property.
10. Bicycle Racks. For premises requiring twenty (20) or more vehicular parking spaces, bicycle racks facilitating locking shall be provided to accommodate one bicycle per twenty parking spaces or required fraction thereof.
G. Prohibited Uses of Required Spaces
1. Off-street parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable automobiles of the residents, customers, and employees of the designated use. Prohibited use of required spaces shall be as follows:
storage of materials and/or inoperable vehicles;
the parking of delivery vehicles operated by the designated use;
display of vehicles for sale in commercial or industrial parking areas, except for the casual display of vehicles by owners who are employees or customers using the premises; and,
repair work that renders a vehicle inoperable for periods greater than 24 hours in a parking
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
PAGE 4-28 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
area required for a commercial use.
2. Parking stalls may be designated for shopping cart drop-off areas so long as those stalls are in addition to the required number of parking spaces.
H. Space for Customer Drop-Off of Shopping Carts. Large scale retail establishments shall plan and develop shopping cart drop-off locations within the parking lots. At least one cart drop-off location (9' x 19.5') shall be included for every 70 parking spaces. Parking spaces can be dedicated to this purpose, but said spaces shall not be included in the count of required parking spaces.
I. Off-site and Shared Parking Standards
1. On-Street Parking. The Director may approve on-street parking spaces located immediately abutting the subject parcel, entirely within the extension of the lot lines into the roadway, and not within any required clear sight triangle. The Director may count these spaces toward meeting off-street parking requirements if parking congestion for the neighborhood and public safety issues will not result by such approval.
2. Off-Site Parking. The Director may approve the location of required off-street parking spaces on a separate lot from the lot on which the principal use is located if the off-site parking complies with all of the following standards.
a. Ineligible Activities. Off-site parking may not be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements for residential uses (except for guest parking) or for convenience stores or other convenience-oriented uses. Required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities may not be located off-site.
b. Location. Off-site parking spaces shall be located within 250 feet from the primary entrance of the use served. Off-site parking may not be separated from the use that it serves by a street right-of-way with a width of more than 100 feet and may not be separated by an arterial or collector street.
c. Zoning Classification. Off-site parking areas serving uses located in nonresidential zone districts shall be located in nonresidential zone districts. Off-site parking areas serving uses located in residential zone districts may be located in residential or nonresidential zone districts.
d. Agreement
i. In the event that an off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use served, a written agreement between the owners of record shall be required. An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record must be submitted to the Director of Community Development for recordation.
ii. The owner of the off-site parking area shall enter into a written agreement with the City, with enforcement running to the City, providing that the land comprising the parking area shall never be disposed of except in conjunction with the sale of the building which the parking area serves so long as the facilities are required; and that the owner agrees to bear the expense of recording the agreement and such agreement shall bind his or her heirs, successors, and assigns.
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-29
iii. An off-site parking agreement may be rescinded only if all required off-street parking spaces will be provided in accordance with this section.
3. Shared Parking. The Director may allow a reduction of up to 25% of required parking for shared parking facilities if the design complies with all of following standards.
a. Ineligible Activities. Shared parking may not be used to satisfy the off-street parking standards for upper-story residential uses. Required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities may not be located off-site.
b. Location. Shared parking spaces shall be located within 500 feet of the primary entrance of all uses served, but shall not be separated by a private or public street.
c. Zone District Classification. Shared parking areas serving uses located in nonresidential zone districts shall be located in nonresidential zone districts. Shared parking areas serving uses located in residential zone districts may be located in residential or nonresidential zone districts. Shared parking areas shall require the same or a more intensive zoning classification than that required for the most intensive of the uses served by the shared parking area.
d. Shared Parking Study. Applicants wishing to use shared parking as a means of satisfying off-street parking requirements shall submit a shared parking analysis to the Director of Community Development that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared parking. The study shall be provided in a form established by the Director and made available to the public. It shall address, at minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking spaces.
e. Agreement
i. A shared parking plan will be enforced through written agreement among all owners of record. An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record shall be submitted to the Director on forms made available by the Director.
ii. A shared parking agreement may be rescinded only if all required off-street parking spaces will be provided in accordance with this section.
4. Recording of Approved Plans. An attested copy of an approved Alternative Parking Plan shall be recorded in the deed records for Gunnison County on forms made available by the Director. An Alternative Parking Plan may be amended by following the same procedure required for the original approval. The applicant shall provide proof of recording prior to approval of the Certificate of Occupancy.
J. Vehicle Stacking Requirements. The vehicle stacking requirements of this subsection shall apply unless otherwise expressly approved by staff.
1. Minimum Number of Spaces. Off-street stacking spaces shall be provided as in Table 4-10.
§4.4 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
PAGE 4-30 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 4-10 REQUIRED OFF-STREET STACKING SPACES
Activity Type
Minimum Queuing Spaces
Measured From:
Bank teller lane
3
Teller or Window
Automated teller machine
2
Teller
Restaurant drive-through
4
Order Box
Restaurant drive-through
3
Order Box to Pick-Up Window
Car wash stall, automatic
2
Entrance
Car wash stall, self-service
2
Entrance
Other
Determined by Traffic Engineer based on Traffic Study or by the Director
2. Design and Layout. Required stacking spaces are subject to the following design and layout standards:
a. Size. Stacking spaces must be a minimum of eight feet by twenty feet in size.
b. Location: Stacking spaces may not impede on- or off-site traffic movements into or out of off-street parking spaces, or movement within parking lot aisles.
c. Design. Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal driveways by raised medians if deemed necessary by the Director for traffic movement and safety.
K. Off-Street Loading Requirements
1. Off-Street Loading Dock Dimensions. Off-street loading docks may be approved with the following dimensions.
FIGURE 15 VEHICLE STACKING AREAS
§4.5 PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION FACILITIES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-31
Type A. 10 foot minimum width, 20-foot minimum length and 10 foot minimum vertical clearance.
Type B. 12 foot minimum width, 35-foot minimum length and 14 foot minimum vertical clearance.
2. Location and Layout
a. Must be On-Site. Off-street loading docks shall be on the site of the use served by the facility.
b. Required Setback. A loading area shall not be located in required setback.
c. Encroachment on Parking or Access. No loading bay may intrude into any portion of a required parking aisle or access dimension.
d. Screening Required. Loading areas shall be screened in accordance with §4.6 I.3.
e. Backing Across Street Prohibited. A loading dock shall be accessible without backing a truck across a street property line unless staff determines that provision of turn-around space infeasible and approves alternative access.
f. May Not Obstruct. An occupied loading dock shall not prevent access to a required off-street parking space, or obstruct pedestrian movement on public sidewalks, public roads, or designated fire lanes.
PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION FACILITIES
A. Applicability
1. For New Development. All new development, including new subdivisions and new nonresidential construction on previously approved lots, shall provide pedestrian facilities and pedestrian access in accordance with the requirements of this Section.
2. For Existing Development as of the Date of this LDC. Buildings and structures lawfully existing as of the effective date of this section, may be redeveloped, renovated, repaired or expanded without providing pedestrian facilities in conformance with this section, provided there is no gross floor area increase in such building or structure or expansion of impervious area on the site.
B. Types of Pedestrian Circulation Facilities
1. Sidewalks. Sidewalks are strips or sections of concrete or stone a minimum of four feet in width, typically parallel to adjacent streets, intended for use as a public walkway for pedestrians. Sidewalks are located within dedicated road rights-of-way or public easements.
2. Accessways. Accessways are developed strips or sections which provide pedestrian access to private property. Accessways are sized for providing safe access, contemplating the type and intensity of use. For example, a single-family residence may be accommodated by a three foot-wide tread-width, while accessways to shopping malls would require a 10 foot tread width.
§4.5 PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION FACILITIES
PAGE 4-32 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
3. Multi-Use Trails. Multi-Use Trails are minimum 15 foot-wide rights-of-way or easements dedicated for public use and have a minimum 8 foot wide tread way surface centered on the easement center line.
C. Pedestrian Linkage Requirements
1. Linkage Plan Required. All Land Use Development Applications and Site Development Applications (see §6.2) shall, to the maximum extent feasible, include the design and developments of interconnections with existing or planned streets and pedestrian, sidewalks, accessways and multi-use trail systems on adjoining properties in accordance with the criteria 2 and 3 cited below, the City of Gunnison Master Plan and the Non-motorized Transportation Plan.
2. Subdivision Pedestrian Facilities. All subdivisions established after the adoption of this LDC shall provide pedestrian circulation improvements.
3. Sidewalk Requirements on Arterial and Collector Streets. If a lot abuts an Arterial street, sidewalks shall be provided for public access and connection to adjacent properties. Arterial and Collector street sidewalks shall be configured according to §4.5 D.3.
D. Pedestrian Circulation Amenities. All developments are subject to pedestrian circulation facilities.
1. Durable Surface Materials. All internal accessways should be designed to be visually attractive and distinguishable from driving surfaces through the use of durable surface materials such as pavers, brick or concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort.
2. Sidewalk Widths. In R-1, R-1M, and R-2 residential zone districts sidewalks at least four feet wide shall be provided on both sides of any rights-of-way. Multi-family zone districts (RMU and R-3) are subject to the provisions of §4.5 D.3.
3. Sidewalk Placement. Unless otherwise specified, sidewalks are required according to one of the following placement alternatives:
a. Attached Facilities. In the Commercial, CBD, and Multi-Family zone districts sidewalks placed against the back of curb or directly adjacent to the road shoulder shall have a minimum width of eight feet.
b. Detached Facilities. Sidewalks with a minimum six foot maintained green space between the back of curb and the inside edge shall have a four foot minimum width on local streets and a minimum six foot width on collector and arterial streets.
E. Design and Construction Standards
1. Within Rights-of-Way. Sidewalks and multi-use trails shall be placed within the rights-of-way as determined by the Director and as specified below.
2. Designed According to Construction Standards. The slope, curve, vertical clearance,
§4.5 PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION FACILITIES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-33
pedestrian crossing, under walk drains and other design elements shall be in accordance with the City of Gunnison Construction Standards.
3. ADA Compliance. All pedestrian facilities shall be designed in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) regulations and the requirements of this LDC, whichever is safer for pedestrians.
4. Detached Pedestrian Facilities. The emphasis shall be to develop detached pedestrian facilities from the road shoulder or edge. The alignment will be determined on a case-by-case basis to account for unique natural features, buried utilities, irrigation ditches, stormwater facilities and similar features. In some instances, sidewalks and multi-use trails may be located outside of an existing right-of-way, and in such cases public easements shall be dedicated to the City of Gunnison.
5. Curb Separation. Sidewalks and accessways should be separated from the curb or street pavement edge, unless curb attached sidewalk are approved through site-specific development plan review or subdivision review.
6. Landscaping Requirement. Where separated sidewalks and accessways are required, the planting area, or that portion of the right-of-way between the curb and the sidewalk, shall be landscaped and maintained by the abutting property owners according to landscape requirements in §4.6.
7. Transition Sections. Where a combination or variation from the two placement methods described in §4.5.C.1 is necessary or desired, or that an obstruction is located within the paved area, the following criteria must be satisfied:
a. all radii in the transition section must be a minimum of 10 feet; and,
b. all transition sections must be approved by the Director.
8. Minimum Clearance. In order to provide safe and adequate access on city sidewalks, all sidewalks shall meet minimum clear width of at least two feet around all obstructions, natural or manmade.
9. Concurrent Construction. All sidewalks and accessways must be constructed concurrently with the street or, if the street is already constructed, prior to construction of any improvements adjacent to such street.
F. Multi-Use Trails Design and Construction Standards
1. Required Dedication for New Subdivisions. All new subdivisions and exempt subdivision plats shall be required to dedicate and install trail alignments as depicted in the City of Gunnison Non-Motorized Transportation Plan.
2. On a Designated Trail Alignment. In the case of new subdivisions and common interest community plats, dedication of a minimum 15 foot-wide easement to the City may be required if the development site is on a designated trail alignment defined by the Non-Motorized Transportation Plan.
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
PAGE 4-34 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
3. Design and Construction Specifications. Design and construction of multi-use trails shall be in accordance with the specifications defined in the Non-Motorized Transportation Plan, as it may be amended.
LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
A. Purpose and Intent. The intent of this Section is to establish standards to protect and enhance the city’s appearance by the installation of appropriate landscaping and buffering materials; to encourage the preservation of native plant communities and ecosystems; to maintain and increase the value of land by providing for restoration of disturbed areas and by incorporating adequate landscaping into development; to restrict the spread of invasive plant species that disrupt and destroy native ecosystems; to encourage skilled installation and continued maintenance of all plant materials; and, to establish procedures and standards for the administration and enforcement of this Section.
B. Applicability. These landscape and buffer standards shall apply to subdivisions created after the adoption of this LDC, and to all development where development plan review is required by Section 6 (Development Review Procedures).
C. Approval of Landscaping and Buffering Plan
1. Approved Landscape and Buffering Plan Required. No development plan required under this LDC shall receive final approval unless a landscaping and buffering plan meeting the requirements of this Section has been submitted and approved. Landscaping plans may include provision for phasing. Refer to Appendix B - Landscape Submittal Requirements.
2. Alternative Specifications. Alternatives to the specifications concerning minimum plant sizes and quantities set forth in this Section may be authorized by the City, provided that the applicant submits a detailed landscaping plan and that the City determines that the proposed landscaping satisfies the purpose and intent of this Section.
3. Final Inspection. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the following criteria are fully satisfied with regard to the approved landscaping and buffering plan:
a. Such plan has been fully implemented on the site and inspected by staff.
b. Such plan, which cannot or will not be implemented immediately because of seasonal conditions or phasing, has however, been guaranteed by an improvement agreement (or included in an approved development agreement) in a form agreeable to the City and secured by a letter of credit, cash escrow or other instrument acceptable to the City, in an amount equal to 115 percent of the cost of materials and labor for all elements of the landscape plan.
c. A landscaping as-built plan, including sizes and quantities, details regarding revegetation, and irrigation, shall be submitted to staff prior to inspection.
D. General Landscaping Design Standards and Guidelines. The following minimum standards shall apply to all landscaped areas developed under the requirements of this Section. See Subsections E through I below for additional specific landscaping requirements for multi-family, nonresidential and industrial developments.
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-35
1. Aesthetic Enhancement Guidelines. Landscaping should be utilized in the design to enhance the aesthetic quality of the property by adding color, texture and visual interest while obscuring views of parking and unsightly areas and uses. In locations where new development alters visually attractive and distinctive natural landscapes, the selection and arrangement of new plantings should be designed to complement and enhance the natural landscape character of the site.
2. Plant Materials
a. Use of Native or Adaptive Plant Materials. Refer to Appendix A for lists of plant materials considered native or appropriate. In order to further water conservation and to assure adequate growth and survival of new plantings, all landscape plans shall be comprised entirely of native or adapted plants that reflect the surrounding plant materials and environment. All proposed plant materials shall be chosen from Appendix A unless the Director approves an equivalent alternative.
b. Existing Plant Materials. Healthy existing trees, grasses and shrubs shall be incorporated into the landscape to the maximum extent feasible. These existing plants shall be shown on the landscape plan and labeled as “existing”. Similarly, existing and retained trees shall be listed on the plan’s plant list with their current size shown.
i. Landscaping Credit. Existing trees and shrubs shall be credited against landscaping requirements, provided that they meet applicable standards such as size and location requirements.
ii. Preservation of Existing Trees and Shrubs. If located between the edge of curb and gutter and the property line, no existing tree of four inches diameter at breast height (DBH) or greater, or dense stand of trees or shrubs of four or more feet in both depth and height shall be removed, unless dictated by plant health, access, safety or identification of the premises, all as determined by the Director.
iii. Root Zones. Design of the landscape shall take existing trees and shrubs into consideration with an adequate area provided around each tree that is free of impervious material to allow for infiltration of water and air. This pervious area shall be equal to the drip line of the tree. Root zones of existing trees and shrubs to be preserved shall be protected from unnecessary disturbance due to cut or fill grade changes. The location of underground utility lines shall be carefully planned to avoid unnecessary disturbance of root zones that would threaten the survival of existing trees and shrubs to be preserved. (See also Appendix B for protection of trees/vegetation during construction activities.)
c. Tree Canopy and Species Mix Guideline. Species variation is encouraged for all landscape plans because species uniformity can result in disease susceptibility and eventual demise of a large portion of a landscape at one time. Landscape plans shall exhibit species variation, which shall increase based on the number of trees proposed in the landscaping plan.
d. Plant Sizes. At the time of installation, plants shall be no smaller than the following:
i. Deciduous trees: minimum of two-inch caliper
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
PAGE 4-36 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
ii. Evergreen trees
Fifty percent (50 percent) of amount on site: six feet tall
Fifty percent (50 percent) of amount on site: four feet tall
iii. All shrubs: two-gallon
e. Plant Quantity. See Subsections E through G below for the quantity of landscaping required for each specific use category subject to this Section's requirements.
3. Location and Arrangement of Required Landscaping
a. The selection and arrangement of new plantings shall be planned to create visual appeal, to provide effective screening, to define site circulation and to enhance the use of the site.
b. All required landscaping elements shall be located on the property they serve. Landscaping located on adjacent properties shall not count toward the minimum landscaping area requirements established in Table 2-4 and Table 2-5.
c. All required landscaping shall be located outside of any adjacent right-of-way unless it is associated with a street buffer.
d. Trees shall be planted to allow for normal growth in height and shape without the need for excessive pruning.
e. Trees shall be planted no closer than seven feet from any structure and shall be installed with at least 55 square feet of non-paved area around the trunk.
f. No trees shall be planted within five feet on either side of water or sewer main lines.
g. Plantings with a mature height of more than 25 feet shall not be planted under utility lines.
h. Plantings that will exceed six inches in height shall not be planted within three feet of a fire hydrant.
i. No trees shall be located within 25 feet of street intersections or 10 feet from fire hydrants and utility poles.
4. Restoration and Revegetation of Disturbed Areas. All portions of the site where existing vegetative cover is damaged or removed, that are not otherwise covered with new improvements, shall be successfully revegetated with species identified in Appendix A or approved by the Director. The density of the reestablished vegetation after one growing season shall be adequate to prevent soil erosion and invasion of weeds.
5. Irrigation. All newly installed landscapes shall include a properly functioning watering system. A functional irrigation system is required for final approval of installed landscaping and release of associated collateral or assurances.
E. Landscaping Requirements for all Zone Districts
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-37
1. Minimum Requirements. The minimum number of trees and shrubs shall be provided per required landscaped area in zone districts according to Table 4-11.
2. Types of Materials except in CBD and Industrial Zone Districts. The landscape area in all zone districts except the CBD and Industrial zone districts must contain living plant materials, mulch, washed rock or permeable surface used for stormwater drainage. Living materials shall comprise no less than 50 percent of the required landscape area.
3. Types of Materials in Industrial Zone District. The 10 percent landscaped area in the Industrial zone district, as required by Table 2-5 must be covered by a combination of xeriscape plants, mulch, permeable surface used for stormwater discharge control, planters, planting pots or other coverage approved by the Director.
F. Buffering and Screening
1. Purpose. Buffering is intended to help mitigate the physical, visual and environmental impacts created by development on adjacent properties. Buffering and screening creates a visual buffer between incompatible or differing land uses.
2. Waivers. A waiver from these buffer and screening standards may be granted by the Commission (§9.4 G). A waiver application shall include a site plan showing the building footprint, driveways, parking, landscaping and utility lines. The waiver application will be considered at a public hearing and shall require public notice as specified in Section 6.7. Waivers shall only be granted if the applicant demonstrates that there are not adequate rights-of-way from the curb edge to the building front. The Commission may consider other site-specific circumstances not contemplated herein, and are not the result of previous development constraints initiated by the applicant (Ordinance #3, Series 2016).
3. Zone District Boundaries
a. A landscaped buffer shall be planted on the boundary between the zoning districts set forth below, unless the abutting property is determined by staff to be unbuildable or visually separated by topographic features. Zone district buffers shall not be required for areas
TABLE 4-11MINIMUM TREE AND SHRUB PLANTINGS
Zone District
Number of Trees and Shrubs per Required Landscape Area
Central Business District (CBD)
N/A
Commercial (C)1
1 tree and 2 shrubs per 400 sq. ft.
Business Professional (B-1)1
1 tree and 2 shrubs per 1500 sq. ft.
Industrial (I)
N/A
Single-Family Residential (R-1)
1 tree and 2 shrubs per 2000 sq. ft.
Single-Family Residential Modified (R-1M)
1 tree and 2 shrubs per 2000 sq. ft.
Duplex Residential (R-2)1
1 tree and 2 shrubs per 1500 sq. ft.
Residential Mixed Use (RMU)1
1 tree and 2 shrubs per 1200 sq. ft.
Multi-Family Residential (R-3)
1 tree and 2 shrubs per 500 sq. ft.
Note: The above required trees may be counted toward street tree requirements of §4.6.F.4.
1 Ordinance #3, Series 2016
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
PAGE 4-38 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
where street frontage buffer requirements are met.
b. The buffer shall be 20 feet wide and planted directly adjacent to the zone district boundary.
c. A minimum buffer consisting of four evergreen trees and five shrubs per one hundred linear feet of zone district boundary shall be installed between the following zoning districts (Ordinance #3, Series 2016):
i. an Industrial zone district and any other zoning district;
ii. a Commercial zone district and any Residential zone district; or
iii. all Multi-family Residential zone districts (RMU/R-3) and any other Residential zone district.
4. Street Frontage Buffers
a. Purpose. Landscaping in areas located adjacent to streets is intended to create tree-lined streets, provide shade, improve air quality and enhance property values through improved views for the traveling public.
b. Exemption. The following shall be exempt from these street frontage buffer requirements:
i. Development in the CBD zone district; but parking lots developed in the CBD shall comply with Parking Lot Landscape Standards (§4.6 G).
ii. Development in the Industrial zone district fronting on a local street is exempt from buffer requirements; a collector street shall comply with non-arterial buffer standards.
FIGURE 15AMINIMUM TREE AND SHRUB PLANTING AND BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
c. Planting
Property Line
Property Line
Buffer
Ordinance #3, Series 2016
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-39
Requirements (see Figure 16) (Ordinance 4, 2014)
FIGURE 16 BUFFERING REQUIREMENTS
d. Buffer Width. The buffer width shall be measured from the back edge of the curb or road shoulder and shall meet minimum dimensional standards shown on Figure 17.
e. Arterial and Collector Street Frontage Buffers
i. All development on property abutting an arterial and collector street shall provide a landscaped buffer with a minimum width of 25 feet along the entire street frontage (see Figure 16 and Figure 17).
ii. One tree shall be planted for each 25 lineal feet of street frontage and one shrub for each 20 lineal feet of street frontage, positioned to adequately buffer developed frontage as viewed from adjacent street or right-of-way as determined by the Community Development Director. Plantings shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the curb edge to accommodate winter maintenance of the right-of-way. (Ordinance 4, 2014)
f. Local Street Frontage Buffers
i. All development on property abutting a local street shall provide a landscaped buffer with a minimum width of 15 feet along the entire street frontage (see Figure 16).
ii. One tree shall be planted for each 50 lineal feet of street frontage and one shrub for each 20 lineal feet of street frontage, positioned to adequately buffer developed frontage as viewed from adjacent street or right-of-way as determined by the
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
PAGE 4-40 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Community Development Director. Plantings shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the curb edge to accommodate winter maintenance of the right-of-way.
g. No Development in Street Frontage Buffer Area.Within the street frontage buffer, there shall be no development or parking, except for driveway access to the portion of the site not in the buffer, which is approximately perpendicular to the right-of-way, underground utility installation, pedestrian and bicycle paths, allowable signs and necessary lighting.
5. Service Areas. See §4.6 I.2.
6. Loading Areas. See §4.6 I.3.
7. Berms. Berms may be utilized as part of street frontage landscaping, but shall vary in height over the length of the berm.
8. Responsibility for Buffering. Buffering shall be the responsibility of new development. Existing land uses may be required to provide buffering if the use is changed, expanded, enlarged or in any other way increases the impacts on adjacent properties or rights-of-way over what is present at the time this regulation is adopted. It shall be the responsibility of the expanded or changed land use to evidence what the uses and impacts were at the time of adoption of this regulation.
9. Method of Calculation. Figure 17 shall serve as a guide for the calculation of buffer requirements. (Ordinance 4, 2014)
Visibility Triangle: See §4.3 J.4.a.
FIGURE 17 GUIDE FOR BUFFER CALCULATIONS
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-41
G. Parking Lot Landscaping
1. Purpose. Parking lot landscaping is intended to improve the views from adjacent properties and public use areas, alter the microclimate of parking areas by providing shade and reducing reflected heat, breaking up large areas of impermeable surface and allowing areas for water infiltration.
2. Perimeter Landscaping
Applicability. All parking lots containing four or more spaces shall provide perimeter landscaping pursuant to the General Requirements below, except where abutting property is determined by the Director to be unbuildable or visually separated by topographic features. Parking lots in the Industrial, R-1, R-1M, and R-2 zone districts shall be exempt from these Perimeter Landscaping standards (see Figure 18).
General Requirements (see Figure 18)
i. All parking areas shall be separated from the back of the curb or outermost edge of the street shoulder by a planting area at least 25 feet wide on arterial streets and by a planting area at least 15 feet wide on other street property lines.
ii. All parking areas shall be separated from side and rear property lines by a planting area at least eight feet wide.
iii. All parking lots or areas shall be separated from the high water mark of all river banks by a minimum setback of 50 feet. The required perimeter landscaping shall be provided within this setback area through retention of existing vegetation, or through additional new tree and shrub plantings as needed to meet the required minimum quantities of perimeter plantings.
iv. Perimeter landscaping shall provide a semi-opaque screen during the winter season.
Berms. Berms may be utilized as part of perimeter landscaping, but shall vary in height over the length of the berm.
Walls/Fences. Where walls or fences are used, a minimum of one evergreen tree or three shrubs is required for every 40 linear feet of wall or fence and shall be planted on the side of the fence or wall facing the surrounding streets, walks, parks, trails or other public use properties.
Perimeter Planting Requirements
i. A minimum of one tree per 20 lineal feet and one shrub per 10 lineal feet shall be planted along the perimeter of any parking lot area located adjacent to an Arterial or Collector street. A minimum of one tree per 30 lineal feet and one shrub per 10 lineal feet shall be planted along the perimeter of any parking lot area located adjacent to Local streets (see Figure 18).
ii. Parking lot areas that are adjacent to a side or rear lot line shall have one tree per 30 lineal feet and one shrub per 10 lineal feet planted along the perimeter of any parking area located along the lot line.
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
PAGE 4-42 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
iii. Plants should be grouped, not evenly spaced.
iv. Parking lots adjacent to a zone district boundary are subject to Zone District Buffer Standards (§4.6 F.3.).
3. Parking Lot Interiors
Applicability. All parking lots with 30 or more parking spaces shall comply with these interior parking lot landscaping requirements. Interior parking lot landscaping requirements shall be in addition to all other landscaping requirements; no other landscaping requirement may be used to fulfill interior parking lot landscaping requirements.
Minimum Requirement: A minimum of five percent of the total interior parking lot area shall be landscaped with planted islands. A minimum of one tree and two shrubs must be planted in interior islands for every 2,500 square feet of parking lot, exclusive of perimeter plantings (see Figure 18).
Landscaped Islands
i. Individual landscaped islands shall include a minimum of one tree, a reliable water source and raised concrete curbs or other design needed for stormwater system function.
ii. Landscaped islands shall be at least 100 square feet in size, with the smallest dimension being six feet to allow for adequate root aeration and expansion (see Figure 18).
iii. Islands shall be arranged to maximize shading of parking spaces.
iv. Plantings shall be arranged so as not to interfere with driver vision, vehicle circulation or pedestrian circulation.
v. To the maximum extent feasible, landscape islands shall be incorporated in the stormwater management plan and located to break up large areas of impermeable surface, allowing areas for water infiltration.
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-43
H. Fences and Walls. Fences and walls are permitted as elements of a landscape plan and, in some locations, may be used to conceal and/or screen storage or other unsightly or conflicting land uses. All fences or walls shall meet the following requirements:
1. Materials. Fences or walls shall be constructed of wood, stone, brick, decorative concrete block, wrought iron (or products created to resemble these materials), a combination of any of these materials, or other materials as approved by the Director.
2. Finishing. In all non-residential zone districts except the Industrial, all fencing shall be finished on all sides that are visible from off-site.
3. Prohibited Applications
a. Plywood, particle board, sheet metal, concrete slabs, concrete barriers or similar materials shall not be used for fencing or walls intended to provide screening or buffering.
b. Chain-link fencing shall not be used for screening or buffering purposes. Chain link fencing may be allowed for security purposes under the provisions of this Section.
c. Barbed-wire and similar fence materials may only be used in conjunction with permitted agricultural and security uses.
FIGURE 18 PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
PAGE 4-44 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
4. Fence and Wall Standards
a. Height
i. A fence or wall in any residential zone district front yard shall not exceed four feet in height.
ii. Fences and walls over six feet in height require a building permit and must be constructed in conformance with the adopted International Building Code.
iii. Excluding lots in the Industrial and Commercial zone districts not abutting another zone district, all fences and walls greater than eight feet in height shall comply with the setback requirements for structures in the various zoning districts.
b. Adjacent to Streets. The construction and maintenance of fences and walls shall comply with §4.3 J.4, Intersection and Driveway Visibility.
c. Adjacent to Alleys. Permitted fences and walls adjacent to alleys shall contain an offset section or other provision deemed appropriate by the City for trash containers located on the property.
d. In City Right-of-Way. Fences or walls located on City rights-of-way are subject to a license agreement which is authorized by City Council.
e. Maximum Wall Length. Walls shall have a maximum continuous length and uninterrupted plane of 100 feet. Wall breaks shall be provided through the use of columns, landscaped areas, transparent section or change in material.
f. Plantings in Conjunction with Fences/Walls. Where opaque or solid fencing/walls continue for more than 40 feet along a buffer zone, the buffer requirements shall be located between the fence/wall and the area to be buffered. Where opaque or solid fencing/walls continue for more than 40 feet of street frontage, a minimum of one evergreen tree and three shrubs shall be planted on the outer or public side of the fence/wall for each 40 linear feet of fence.
I. Screening
1. Drive-Thru Facilities. Drive-thru windows and lanes shall be designed to adhere to the following standards:
Separation Distance Requirements. Drive-thru windows and lanes placed adjacent to the right-of-way and/or alley shall comply with parking lot separation distance requirements (see Figure 18).
Screening. No drive-thru window shall be permitted on the side of a building adjacent to any residential zone district without a six foot opaque fence or wall and shall comply with Zone District Boundary Buffers (§4.6 F.3.).
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-45
2. Service Areas
a. Location. In all non-residential and multi-family zone districts, trash collection, trash compaction, recycling collection and other similar service areas shall be located on the side or rear of the building and shall be effectively screened. Alternative locations may be within the established parking lot, subject to approval by the Director.
b. Approved Area. All service areas shall be limited to the area shown on an approved site plan.
3. Loading Areas. Loading areas shall be subject to the following screening requirements:
a. Screening of Type B Loading Areas. A minimum 100 percent year-round screen of all Type B loading areas visible from residential properties or public rights-of-way shall be provided.
b. Screening Material. This screen shall consist of berms, walls, fences, plant material or combination totaling eight feet in height at installation or completion of construction. Wall or fence materials shall be compatible with the primary structure.
c. Location of Loading Areas. All Type B loading docks not in the Industrial zone district shall be located at the side or rear of buildings a minimum of 50 feet away from any residentially-zoned property, unless the loading area is wholly within a closed building.
4. Mechanical Equipment
a. Screening. All roof-, ground- and wall-mounted mechanical equipment (e.g. air handling equipment, compressors, duct work, transformers and elevator equipment) shall be screened from view from residential properties or public rights-of-way at ground level of the property line.
b. Roof-Mounted Screening Material. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be shielded from view on all sides, to the maximum extent feasible. Screening shall consist of materials consistent with the primary building materials, and may include metal screening or louvers which are painted to blend with the primary structure.
c. Wall or Ground-Mounted Screening Material. Wall- or ground-mounted equipment screening shall be constructed of:
i. planting screens;
ii. brick, stone, reinforced concrete, or other similar masonry materials; or
iii. redwood, cedar, preservative pressure treated wood, or other similar materials.
5. Utilities. Above-ground utilities and appurtenances to underground utilities which require above-ground installation shall be screened by a continuous planting of shrubs, with a minimum mature height equal to that of the utility structure. Required accessways to these utilities are exempt from the screening provisions.
§4.6 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING
PAGE 4-46 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
6. Trash Receptacles. Screening shall be provided for all trash receptacles of two cubic yards in volume or greater, and shall consist of landscaping or a structural visual barrier, such as a fence, to block the view of the trash receptacle and to keep trash contained. One side of the screening shall be designed for easy access for trash removal. Any landscaping so provided shall count toward the landscaping standards of this Section.
J. Maintenance Requirements
1. Maintenance Required. Required landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times. The property owner is responsible for regular irrigating, pruning and weeding, mowing, fertilizing, replacement of plants in poor condition and other maintenance of all plantings as needed.
2. Maintenance of Landscape Structures. Where walls, fences or other structures are an integral part of the landscape plan, such structures shall be maintained in good repair. Fences that are leaning, broken, have missing pieces, peeling paint or are in any other way damaged shall be immediately repaired or replaced. Walls with missing bricks or blocks, crumbling mortar or other aesthetic or structural defects shall be immediately repaired.
3. Replacement. The following plant material conditions require plant removal and replacement:
a. Deciduous Trees. Deciduous trees and shrubs that fail to produce leaves on more than fifty percent of the plant by July 1st of the calendar year.
b. Evergreen Trees. Evergreen trees and shrubs with needle loss or browning over more than 50 percent of the tree.
c. Damaged Vegetation. Damaged plant materials that have split trunks, loss of major branch structure, loss of leader shoot or other damage that a certified nurseryman confirms will ultimately cause the premature death of the plant.
d. Diseased Vegetation. Diseased, insect-infested or parasite-infested plants that cannot be adequately treated to prevent premature death or to prevent contamination of other plant materials.
e. Timing. Removal and replacement shall occur during the same growing season in which plant material exhibits at least one of the above conditions. Where seasonal or adverse weather conditions make replanting or replacement within such a time period impractical, staff may grant an extension and may require adequate fiscal assurance, if needed, from the Applicant or owner to assure replacement.
4. Enforcement. All plantings shall be subject to periodic inspections to ensure compliance with this regulation and the approved landscape plan. Failure to comply with the Maintenance Plan shall be a violation of this LDC, subject to the enforcement and penalties provisions set forth in Section 15.
§4.7 OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND STORAGE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-47
OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND STORAGE
A. Applicability. Any merchandise, material or equipment stored outside of a fully-enclosed building shall be subject to the requirements of this section.
1. Exceptions. Vehicles for sale, lease or rent as part of a properly permitted use (including boats and manufactured housing) shall not be considered merchandise, material or equipment.
2. Zone District Requirements. Outdoor Storage shall be a Conditional Use in the Commercial zone district and is permitted in the Industrial zone district, but is subject to the minimum standards contained in this section.
B. Outdoor Display
1. Definition. Outdoor Display shall be defined as the outdoor display of merchandise readily available for sale. Outdoor Display shall not include nonseasonal merchandise or material in crates or other kinds of shipping containers. Merchandise in crates or shipping containers shall be considered Outdoor Storage.
2. Area. The extent of outdoor display permitted adjacent to the building façade shall be depicted on the development plan submittal.
3. Obstruction Prohibited
In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens, Outdoor Display shall not impede ingress or egress from the building or access for fire and emergency personnel.
Outdoor Display shall be located no closer than six feet from any public entrance.
Outdoor Display shall not impair the ability of pedestrians to use the accessways or parking areas.
The display area shall not encroach upon or interfere with on-site access, required parking, circulation, or required landscaping.
4. Maintenance. The display area shall, at all times, be kept neat, clean, and free of litter and debris.
C. Outdoor Storage
1. Definition. Outdoor Storage is more intensive than Outdoor Display. Materials stored in Outdoor Storage are not normally brought indoors overnight. Outdoor Storage shall be defined as the merchandise or material in boxes, in crates, on pallets or other kinds of shipping containers; fleet vehicles; and other similar merchandise, material or equipment.
2. Area. The extent of outdoor storage shall be depicted on the development plan submittal and shall meet the standards cited in this Section.
3. Screening. Outdoor storage shall be fully screened from view from the public right-of-way, public parking areas, or adjacent residential zone districts by a 100 percent opaque visual barrier or screen.
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-48 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
4. Setbacks
Outdoor storage that exceeds 8 feet in height shall not be located within the front and side yard setback, or 15 feet from the edge of the curb, whichever is greater.
Outdoor storage shall comply with the Intersection and Driveway Visibility Standards found in §4.3 J.4.
Outdoor storage may be located in the rear yard setback.
Outdoor storage may be located to the side of a building, provided it is not located within the side yard setback.
SIGNS
A. Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Section is to provide information to the public; identify businesses, services and activities; and, establish uniform control of signs. It is the intent of the regulations set forth in this Section to:
1. recognize that signs are a necessary means of visual communication;
2. ensure that signs are compatible with adjacent land uses and with the total visual environment of the community;
3. enhance property values and business opportunities;
4. assist in wayfinding;
5. provide fair and consistent permitting and enforcement; and,
6. protect the public from hazardous conditions that result from signs which are structurally unsafe, obscure the vision of motorists and/or compete or conflict with necessary traffic signals and warning signs.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this Section shall apply to the display, construction, erection, alteration, use, location and maintenance of all signs within the City, excluding traffic signage required by provisions in Chapter 5.20 (Traffic) of the City of Gunnison Municipal Code and other government signs placed in public rights-of-way. It is unlawful hereafter to display, construct, erect, alter, use or maintain any sign except in conformance with the provisions of this Section. Any sign in existence on the effective date of the adopted Land Development Code (Ordinance 1-1997) which was effective January 28, 1997, shall be allowed to remain and to be maintained, in conformance with §11.5 (Nonconforming signs) of the Land Development Code.
C.Definitions
§4.8 SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-49
1. Area of sign means the area of the smallest regular geometric symbol encompassing all the informative features of the sign, including copy, insignia, background and borders.
2. Awning means a movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and of a type which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building; or a covered space frame structure.
3. Banner means a display placed in the public rights of way with permission of the City.
4. Building Code means the latest edition of the Building Code, as amended and adopted by the City.
5. Building Official means the officer or other person charged with the administration and enforcement of this Section, or his or her duly authorized deputy.
6. Canopy means a permanently roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway or other similar area, which shelter may be wholly supported by a building or may be wholly or partially supported by columns, poles or braces extended from the ground.
7. Dissolve means a mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, in which the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message.
8. Face or wall of building means the general outer surface of any main exterior wall or foundation wall of the building, including windows and building front wall-plane.
9. Flag means a piece of canvas, fabric, paper, cloth, bunting, vinyl or other material attached to a staff or pole and which is designed to move in the wind (temporary or permanent).
10. Foot Candle is an English unit of measurement of the amount of light falling upon a surface (illuminance). One foot candle is equal to one lumen per square foot and can be measured by means of an illuminance meter.
11. Frame means a complete, static display screen on an Electronic Message Sign.
12. Frame Effect means a visual effect on an Electronic Message Sign applied to a single frame.
13. Frontage, building means the horizontal, linear dimension of that exterior side of a building which abuts a street, a parking area, a mall or other circulation area open to the general public; and has either a main window display of the enterprise or a public entrance to the building. Where more than one use occupies a building, each such use having an exterior public entrance or exterior main window display for its exclusive use shall be considered to have its own building frontage, which shall be the front width of the portion of the building occupied by that use.
14. Frontage, street means the linear frontage (or frontages) of a lot or parcel abutting on a private or public street which provides principal access to, or visibility of, the premises.
15. Height means the vertical distance measured from the elevation of the nearest sidewalk or, in the absence of a sidewalk within 25 feet, then from the lowest point of finished grade on the
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-50 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
lot upon which the sign is located and within 25 feet of the sign, to the uppermost point on the sign or sign structure.
16. Illuminance is the amount of light falling upon a real or imaginary surface, commonly called “light level” or “illumination.” Illumination is measured in foot candles (lumens/square foot) in the English system and lux (lumens/square meter) in the SI (metric) system.
17. Kiosk means a small structure, typically located within a pedestrian walkway or similar circulation area, and intended for use as display space for posters, notices, exhibits, etc.
18. Liquid Crystal Display (LCD), means a method of displaying readings continuously using a liquid crystal film sealed between glass plates, which changes its optical properties when a voltage is applied.
19. Light Emitting Diode (LED) means diodes that emit visible light when electricity is applied, much like a light bulb. When many LEDs are side-by-side, they can create pictures and images.
20. Light source means and includes any device, or method of producing light, including neon, fluorescent or similar tube lighting, incandescent bulb and any reflecting surface which, by reason of its construction and/or placement, becomes in effect the light source.
21. Lighting, backlighted means a concealed light source located behind the surface of the sign to highlight specific elements of the sign.
22. Lighting, neon means any method of lighting using neon tubes in a manner in which the neon tube can be seen.
23. Lot means a portion or parcel of land, whether part of a platted subdivision or otherwise, occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or use and its accessories, together with such yards as are required under the provisions of this LDC. A lot must be an integral unit of land held under unified ownership in fee or in co-tenancy.
24. Luminance is the light that is emitted by or reflected from a surface. Measured in units of luminous intensity (candelas) per unit area (square meters in SI measurement units or square feet in English measurement units.) Luminance is expressed in SI units as cd/m², and in English units as foot lamberts. Luminance is sometimes also expressed as “nits,” a colloquial reference to SI units. Luminance can be measured by means of a luminance meter.
25. Lux is the SI (metric) unit for illuminance. One lux equals 0.093 foot candles.
26. Maintenance means the replacing, repairing or repainting of a portion of a sign structure; periodic changing of bulletin board panels; or renewing of copy which has been made unusable by ordinary wear and tear, weather or accident.
27. Mural means a hand-produced work of visual art applied directly upon, or affixed directly to an exterior wall of a building.
28. “Nit” is a photometric unit of measurement referring to luminance. One nit is equal to one candela per square meter (cd/m2).
29. Obscene sign means a sign having those characteristics defined as obscene in the Colorado
§4.8 SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-51
Revised Statutes, as amended.
30. Permitted Sign Area means the total allowed sign for any street frontage, as calculated according to §4.8 G.1.
31. Roof means the cover of any building, including the eaves and similar projections.
32. Roof line means the highest point on any building where an exterior wall encloses usable floor space, including floor area for housing mechanical equipment. Roof line also includes the highest point of any parapet wall, provided that the parapet wall extends around the entire perimeter of the building.
33. Scroll is a mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign in which the message appears to move vertically across the display surface.
34. Sequencing is the display of two or more successive screens on an Electronic Message Center to convey a message.
35. SI (International System of Units) is the modern metric system of measurement; abbreviated SI for the French term “Le Systeme International d’Unites.”
36. Sign means any writing, pictorial representation, decoration (including any material used to differentiate sign copy from its background), form, emblem or trademark, flag or banner, or any other display of similar character placed in view of the general public, excluding murals which:
Is a structure or any part thereof (including the roof or wall of a building);
Is written, printed, projected, painted, constructed or otherwise placed or displayed upon or designed into a building, board, plate, canopy, awning, vehicle or upon any material object or device whatsoever; and
By reason of its form, color, wording, symbol, design, illumination, motion or other feature attracts or is designed to attract attention to the subject thereof.
37. Sign face means the surface of a sign upon, against or through which the message is displayed or illustrated.
D. Sign Types
Abandoned sign means a sign that no longer identifies or advertises an ongoing business, product, location, service, idea, or activity. Whether a sign has been abandoned or not shall be determined by the intent of the owner of the sign and shall be governed by applicable State Case Law and Statutory Law on abandoned structures.
Animated sign means a sign employing actual motion, the illusion of motion, or light and/or color changes achieved through mechanical, electrical, or electronic means. Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined and regulated by this Code, include the following types:
i) Environmentally Activated sign means animated signs or devices motivated by wind,
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-52 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
thermal changes, or other natural environmental input. Includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings, and/or other devices or displays that respond to naturally occurring external motivation.
ii) Mechanically Activated sign means animated signs characterized by repetitive motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric motors or other mechanically induced means.
iii) Electrically Activated signs are animated signs producing the illusion of movement by means of electronic, electrical, or electromechanical input and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below:
Flashing means any sign that contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animated electronic function whose illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle of illumination and non-illumination. For the purposes of this ordinance, flashing will not be defined as occurring if the frame static display period exceeds five seconds or more.
Patterned Illusionary Movement means animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form of constant motion. For the purposes of this Code, signs with Patterned Illusionary Movement of less than 2.5 square feet are permitted.
Awning sign means a sign painted, printed or attached flat against the surface of an awning. For the purposes of determining the maximum permitted sign area, only the area encompassing the graphic representation of the message shall be counted.
Canopy Signs
i. Canopy Fascia sign means signs which are mounted to the front or side fascia of a canopy and contained completely within that fascia.
ii. Above Canopy sign means signs which are mounted partially or entirely above the front fascia of a canopy and oriented parallel to the building wall surface.
iii. Under Canopy sign means signs which are suspended under a canopy, perpendicular to the building façade. Such signs are also considered to be suspended signs.
Changeable sign means a sign with the capability of content change by means of manual or remote input includes the following types:
i. Manually Activated means a Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed manually on a display surface.
ii. Electrically Activated means a Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be from an external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component
§4.8 SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-53
display. For the purposes of this Code, Electrically Activated Changeable Signs shall be classified as Electronic Message Centers.
Double-face sign means a sign where two sides are separated by not more than 18 inches and are parallel to each other. Such signs shall be considered as one sign.
Electric sign is any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical energy.
Electronic Message Center or Sign (EMC) means an electrically activated changeable sign whose variable message and/or graphic presentation capability can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote location. EMCs typically use light emitting diodes (LED) or liquid crystal display (LCD) as a lighting source. Electronic Message Centers provide a static image frame display for a minimum five second interval.
Electronic Reader Board means a sign which contains a traveling message or a message that appears to be traveling, usually in a horizontal manner. The characteristics incorporated into any message remains constant and does not change in hue or intensity or appear to change in hue or intensity as they appear to travel across or through the automatic changing copy area. Electronic reader boards are only mono colored. Electronic Reader Boards shall be classified as Electronic Message Centers
Flashing sign - see Animated Sign, Electrically Activated (a.), above).
Freestanding sign means a sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, poles or braces extended from the ground or from an object on the ground, or a sign which is erected on the ground, provided that no part of the sign is attached to any part of any building, structure or other sign. Freestanding sign includes pole signs, pedestal signs and ground signs.
Government or Safety sign means any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the city, county, state or federal government including signs required for public utility notification. Government sign size, location and material limitations are determined by the City.
Historical sign means a sign designated as such by City Council that has been in place for at least 20 years and contains historic and/or community significance. The sign may have relevance because of its unique mechanical features, it’s relevance to a building’s design, or possesses other traits that may be worthy for such designation. Historical signs must be maintained in both appearance and structure.
Illuminated sign means a sign characterized by the use of artificial light, either projecting through its surface(s) (internally or trans-illuminated); or reflecting off its surface(s) (externally illuminated).
Inflatable sign means a sign that is intended to be expanded by air or other gas for its proper display or support.
Monument sign means a freestanding sign with the entire base of the sign structure affixed to the ground conforming with the standards of §4.8 H. 11.
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-54 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Portable sign means a sign which is not attached to the ground, a building or other structure, but does not include a Vehicle-mounted sign or Sandwich Board sign as defined in this Section.
Projecting sign means a sign attached to a building or extending in whole or in part greater than 12 inches or more horizontally beyond the surface of the building to which the sign is attached.
Revolving, Rotating or Spinning sign is a sign that has the capability to revolve three hundred and sixty degrees (360º) about an axis. See also: Animated Sign, Mechanically Activated Sign.
Sandwich Board sign means a sign not exceeding 32 inches in width to 42 inches in height located on a sidewalk/grass strip of a public right-of-way or on private property.
Suspended sign means a sign suspended from the ceiling of an arcade, marquee or canopy.
Temporary sign means a sign to be displayed for a limited period of time and complies with the standards set forth in §4.8 D. 4.
Vehicle-mounted sign means a sign displayed upon a trailer, van, truck, automobile, bus, railroad car, tractor, semi-trailer or other vehicle, whether or not such vehicle is in operating condition.
Wall sign means a sign displayed upon or against the wall of a building or structure where the exposed face of the sign is in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall or parapet roof extension and extends not more than 12 inches horizontally from the face of the wall.
Wind sign means a sign consisting of one or more banners, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers or captive balloons, or other objects or materials fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind or breeze, but does not include flags as defined in C.9.
Window sign means a sign which is painted on, applied or attached to, the interior of a window, which can be seen through the window from the exterior of the structure. Merchandise included in a window display shall not be considered to be a sign.
27. Sign structure means any supports, uprights, braces or framework of a sign.
28. Signs, number of. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements clearly organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where sign elements are displayed in an unrelated or random manner, each element shall be considered to be a single sign.
29. Transition is a visual effect used on an Electronic Message Center to change from one message to another.
30. Travel is a mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Center in which the message appears to move horizontally across the display surface.
§4.8 SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-55
31. Work of Art means art which in no way identifies a product, business, or enterprise and which is not displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise that would realize direct commercial gain from such a display.
E. Exemptions. Except as specifically provided, the following may be erected without a sign permit. All signs shall meet all applicable setbacks, number of signs, sign area (if applicable), construction, illumination and safety standards.
1. Signs which are not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are located and/or from any public thoroughfare or right-of-way.
2. Flags, the maximum individual size of a permanently displayed flag shall be 40 square feet. (Ordinance 3, 2015)
3. Signs displayed on trucks, buses, trailers or other vehicles provided that they are parked or stored in areas appropriate to their use as vehicles.
4. Temporary signs that are found to be in compliance with the following standards:
a. Owner Consent. All temporary signs must be located on private property and only with the consent of the property owner.
b. Size. The size of a temporary sign is regulated according to Tables 4-12, 4-13, 4-14 and 4-15.
c. Height. Freestanding temporary signs shall not exceed 12 feet in height. Wall mounted temporary signs may be located on any portion of a building wall and shall not extend the top of any wall plane or parapet.
d. Lighting. No temporary sign shall be illuminated.
e. Duration. Temporary signs may be displayed up to 120 days per calendar year.
f. Location. No part of a temporary sign shall be placed within or protrude into any public rights-of-way.
5. Signs required or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute, ordinance or resolution.
6. Signs for placement upon publicly owned athletic field fences, scoreboards, ice rink boards, and rodeo arenas which meet the following criteria:
a. Such signs shall be securely fastened, constructed and continuously maintained in such a manner as to prevent damage from the natural elements.
b. Such signs shall be located only upon fences or boards which encircle playing fields or rinks, and in such a manner so as to minimize visual impacts to areas located outside of the park facilities.
c. In the case of City facilities, an agreement between the City and the sign sponsor shall be executed specifying annual or one-time fees and a maintenance schedule. This agreement
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-56 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
may be reviewed annually.
7. Signs designated by passage of a City Council resolution establishing a pre-existing sign as a historical sign.
8. Suspended signs, as long as they comply with the provisions of §4.8. I.
F. Prohibited Signs. The following signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in the City:
1. obscene signs;
2. Signs prohibited by the State of Colorado (i.e.: marijuana sign prohibitions);
3. any sign which is hand-held, installed or erected in or projects onto or over any public right-of-way, except in the case of a sign which meets the standards of this Section and is granted under a license agreement by the City;
4. inflatable signs;
5. any sign or sign structure which:
is structurally unsafe, or
constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation, or
is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with it.
6. any sign or sign structure which:
may be confused with, or obstruct the view of, any authorized traffic sign or signal, obstructs the sight-distance triangle at any road intersection or extends into the public right-of-way;
creates an unsafe distraction for motor vehicle operators; or,
obstructs the view of motor vehicle operators entering a public roadway from any parking area, service drive, private driveway, alley or other thoroughfare.
7. any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape, stand-pipe or other required exit way;
8. animated signs (§4.8 C.D.b.) except for Electronic Message Centers operated under the standards of this Code;
9. patterned illusionary movement signs;
10. any sign which adversely affects safety including signs which prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, fire escape, or that prevent free access from one part of a roof to any
§4.8 SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-57
other part. No sign other than a safety sign shall be attached to a stand-pipe or fire escape.
11. revolving, rotating and spinning signs;
12. any sign which emits smoke, visible vapors, particles, sound or odor;
13. open flames used to attract public attention to a place of business or to an advertising sign;
14. no mirror device shall be used as part of a sign; and,
15. abandoned signs.
G. Sign Area
1. Total Permitted Sign Area. The total Permitted Sign Area (PSA) for any street frontage shall be calculated by using the formula below; provided that the maximum permitted sign area, which is the sum of all signs, shall not exceed a total of 150 square feet per ownership parcel.
Formula: (LF x 2) + 20 square feet = PSA
Where: LF = Lineal feet of street frontage of the property and
PSA = Permitted Sign Area in square feet.
2. Signs or Uses with Multiple Frontage. The total area of all signs on any face of a building shall not exceed one and one-half square feet per lineal foot of building frontage at ground level.
3. Multiple Tenant Buildings. In the case of building occupied multiple tenant spaces with individual entrances directly to a public street frontage, the sign area shall be calculated using the lineal distance of each business space fronting the street. In such circumstances the total sign area for the entire building may exceed the total maximum area of 150 square feet.
4. Computation of Sign Area. The area of a sign shall be measured with the following regulations:
For signs whose shape is a regular geometric figure (square, rectangle, circle, oval, etc.), the area shall be calculated using standard formulas (H x W; πr2; etc.).
In the case of an irregularly shaped sign or a sign with letters and/or symbols directly affixed to or painted on the wall of a building, the area of the sign shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter of not more than eight straight or radial lines enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any material or color forming an integral part or background of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed.
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-58 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Where a sign contains a frame, background, or other material used to differentiate the sign from the background on which it is placed, the sign area shall be measured to include the entire frame, background, or other material.
Where a sign has two or more display faces and is not a double-faced sign, the area of all faces shall be included in determining sign area.
The following standards shall be used to determine the area of signs containing multiple elements. Figure illustrates these measurement methods.
i. Regardless of their spacing, the letters forming a word or name shall be considered a single sign.
FIGURE 1 GEOMETRIC SIGNS
§4.8 SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-59
FIGURE 19 IRREGULARLY SHAPED SIGNS
ii. When two or more separate items in a sign (such as a word and a logo) are separated horizontally or vertically by less than twice the width or height of the largest item, the items shall be considered a single sign, and the area shall be determined by measuring the area enclosed by a perimeter enclosing all of the items.
iii. When two or more separate items (such as a word and a logo) are separated horizontally or vertically by more than twice the width or height of the largest item, the items shall be considered two signs, and the area of each item shall be determined individually.
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-60 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Where three-dimensional figures are used as signs, the area shall be the total area, as projected on a vertical plane (elevation view), of each side of the figure which is visible by the public beyond the boundaries of the lot upon which the figure is located. For purposes of this regulation, a figure shall be considered to have not less than one or more than four sides.
Lot frontage used as the basis of determining permitted sign area for one use shall not be used again as the basis for determining the permitted sign area for a different use. Nothing in this Subsection shall be construed to prohibit the additional lot, building or use from erecting a sign which would otherwise be authorized by the provisions of this Section.
All riders or attachments to signs or sign structures (whether temporary or permanent) shall be included as part of the total sign area for the sign to which they are attached.
H. General Regulations
1. Signs at Street Intersections and Driveways. Other than a pole 12 square inches or less in cross-sectional area, signs that will obstruct vision between a height of three feet and 11 feet shall not be erected, placed or maintained within the sight visibility triangle formed by a straight
FIGURE 3 SIGNS WITH MULTIPLE ELEMENTS
§4.8 SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-61
line starting at the point of intersection of the curb line and extending 30 feet from their point of intersections.
2. Illumination. Illuminated signs shall be subject to the following conditions:
signs may be indirectly or internally illuminated;
any light used for the illumination of a sign shall be shielded so that the beams or rays of light will not shine directly beyond the lot upon which the sign is located;
neither the direct nor the reflected light from any light source shall create a traffic hazard or distraction to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares;
no sign shall exceed 5,000 nits during the day and 500 nits during nighttime hours. Prior to issuance of a sign permit the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed 5,000 nits and that the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password-protected software or other method determined appropriate by the Community Development Director.
all illuminated signs must comply with the maximum luminance level of 500 cd/m² or nits at least one-half hour before dusk. All illuminated signs must comply with this maximum luminance level throughout the night, if the sign is energized, until dawn, at which time the sign may resume luminance levels appropriate for daylight conditions, when required or appropriate.
signs that have external illumination, whether the lighting is mounted above or below the sign face or panel, shall have lighting fixtures or luminaires that are fully shielded;
3. Electronic Message Centers (EMCs). The following standards apply:
a. The minimum static frame display time interval is five seconds.
b. The transition time between messages or message frames will be one second.
4. Signs on Fences and Freestanding Walls. Signs on fences or freestanding walls shall be erected or mounted in a plane parallel to the fence or wall, and shall not extend above the top of the fence or wall nor project more than 12 inches from the face of the fence or wall. Such signs shall be subject to all regulations of this Section applicable to free-standing signs, including but not limited to maximum area per sign, maximum sign height, minimum setback from property lines and number of signs permitted per lot or per premises.
5. Window Signs. Window signs up to 12 square feet, at ground floor level will not be included in the total permitted sign area.
6. Signs in the Public Right-of-Way. Any sign or banner in the public right-of-way is subject to an administrative license agreement and shall be compliant with all sign standards. The staff may refer the application to City Council for any reason. The City Manager or their designee
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-62 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
may issue an administrative license agreement to allow the sign in accordance with Chapter 9.40 of the City of Gunnison Municipal Code as long as:
a. the City is carried as “additionally insured” on a current insurance policy; and,
b. proof of coverage is provided to the City Clerk and remains in effect for the duration of the permit issued.
7. Sandwich Board Signs. One sign per property (parcel) not exceeding 32 inches in width and 42 inches in height may be permitted within the sidewalk/grass strip of a public right-of-way or on private property provided the following requirements are met:
a. the building owner has obtained a license agreement pursuant to Error! Reference source not found., above;
b. placement of the sign within the public rights-of way shall be located and maintained in compliance with Section 9.40.080 of the City of Gunnison Municipal Code.;
c. the sign must be free-standing and shall not be permanently affixed, chained, anchored, or otherwise secured to the ground or to any pole, parking meter, tree, tree grate, fire hydrant, railing, or other structure;
d. the sign must be internally weighted so that it is stable and windproof;
e. no sign shall be placed in a public right-of-way for the duration of a declared snow emergency; and,
f. Sandwich Board signs shall not count toward the permitted sign area of the premise.
8. Free Standing Sign Height. The free standing sign height shall be based on the distance the sign is setback from the back of the curb or edge of pavement where no curb exists. Signs setback zero to 20 feet shall have a maximum height of 15 feet; signs setback greater than 20 feet may increase the sign height six inches for every one foot of additional setback, to a maximum of 25 feet.
9. Monument Signs. The following standards apply:
a. One monument sign shall be allowed for a street frontage on a commercial development with three or more tenants or lots and with greater than 25,000 square feet of aggregate gross floor area, which are part of a common interest community as defined by State Statute.
b. Tenants allowed to display on the monument sign shall be a party to a recorded covenant or other legally binding document and the document terms shall address shared use and maintenance responsibility.
§4.8 SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-63
c. Monument signs shall conform to the free standing sign height provisions of8., above;
d. The sign shall be subject to review in conjunction with Final Plat Subdivision review or development applications submitted and reviewed by the Community Development Director.
e. The maximum sign area is 150 square feet.
f. Monument signs shall not count toward the permitted sign area of each business.
10. Murals. The following standards apply:
a. Within the Central Business District murals are permitted only on non-street facing walls and street facing walls that are more than 15 feet from a property line.
b. Within all other districts murals are permitted on any wall.
c. Murals are permitted only on the flat plane of walls.
d. Murals will not be painted on or obscure architectural features such as windows, egress doors, cornices or recessed or projecting wall features.
I. Zone District Sign Regulations
1. Zoning Districts. The zoning districts, as set forth in Section 2 and amendments thereto, shall apply to this Section. The boundaries of these zone districts shall be determined by reference to the zoning map of the City of Gunnison.
2. Establishment of Zone District Regulations. The type of signs permitted and the regulation of the number, placement, area and use of signs is established herein. No sign shall be erected except as provided in this Section and in the zone district in which it is permitted, nor shall any sign be used for any purpose or in any manner except as allowed by the regulations for the zone district in which such sign is proposed or maintained.
3. Schedule of Requirements. The following schedule of “class of sign permitted,” “type of sign permitted,” “maximum sign area permitted per lot,” “maximum area per sign face,” “maximum number of signs permitted” and “maximum height of freestanding signs” regulations for the various zoning districts is adopted.
4. Maximum Sign Area is calculated according to the provisions of §4.8 G.4.
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-64 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 4-122 SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS
(CBD, I, C)
Prohibited Signs
Maximum Sign Area by Permitted Type
Maximum Number of Signs Permitted
Maximum Height of Signs or other Restrictions
See Section §4.8 F. Prohibited Signs
Awning signs (§4.8 C.D.3.),
Canopy signs (§4.8 C.D.4), or
signs on Architectural Projections: 30% of the width multiplied by the vertical height of the projection
1 per building face or per business storefront
Free Standing signs
(§4.8 C.D.11.): calculated PSA up to a maximum of 60 square feet.
EMC (§4.8 D.8.): 25% of the permitted free standing sign area (maximum 15 square feet) in Commercial;
12 square feet in CBD and Industrial
2 per parcel
25 feet; see §4.8 H.8. for additional standards associated with freestanding signs.
See §4.8 H.3. for additional standards associated with EMC’s.
Wind signs (§4.8 C..25.)
– calculated PSA up to a maximum of 60 square feet
2 per building face or per business storefront
Monument signs (§4.8 B.16):
Up to a maximum of 150 square feet; prohibited in CBD and Industrial.
1 per commercial development and located on either a designated collector or arterial street frontage
25 feet; see §4.8 H. 9.for additional standards associated with monument signs.
Projecting signs (§4.8 C.18):
12 square feet per sign face
EMC (§4.8 C.37.8): 25% of sign area.
1 per frontage or 2 allowed on corner parcels
4 feet from the property line in the CBD, 8 feet from property lines in all other zoning districts.
Maximum height: 18 feet or to the eave line or top of parapet wall of the building to which it is affixed.
Minimum clearance: 8 feet from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign
Maximum projection: 5 feet
§4.8 SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-65
TABLE 4-12 SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS
(CBD, I, C) (CONTINUED)
Prohibited Signs
Maximum Sign Area by Permitted Type
Maximum Number of Signs Permitted
Maximum Height of Signs or other Restrictions
Suspended signs (§4.8 C.21):
1.5 square feet per face (3’ total). Does not count toward the total PSA.
1 per building face or per business storefront
8 feet from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign
Minimum horizontal separation: 15 feet between suspended signs.
Projection: shall not project beyond the outside limits of the arcade, canopy, or marquee to which they are attached.
Temporary signs (§4.8 D.22. and §4.8 E.4)12 square feet
1 per street frontage
12 feet for a freestanding sign.
Wall signs (§4.8 D.24): calculated PSA.
EMC (§4.8 D.8): 25% of sign area in Commercial; 12 square feet in CBD and Industrial
1 per building face or per business storefront
Maximum height: 25 feet above the ground.
Maximum projection:
24” above the eave line or parapet.
12” from the face of the building.
See §4.8 H.3. for additional standards associated with EMC’s.
Murals (§4.8 H.10):
Minimum of 32 square feet.
Setbacks in Central Business
District
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-66 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 4-13 SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR THE B-1 DISTRICT
(B-1)
Prohibited Signs
Maximum Sign Area Permitted per Business
Maximum Number of Signs Permitted
Maximum Height of Signs or other Restrictions
In addition to §4.8 F., the following signs are prohibited:
Bulletin Board signs
Portable signs (§4.8 D.17.)
Awning signs (§4.8 C.D.3),
Canopy signs (§4.8 C.D.4), or signs on architectural projections:
30% of the width multiplied by the vertical height of the projection
1 per building face or per business storefront
The face of any such sign shall not project above or below the face of the canopy, awning or architectural projection. Signs may project horizontally beyond the face of the canopy or architectural projection the distance necessary to accommodate the thickness of the letters, but no more than 12 inches. Signs displayed on architectural projections which extend 15 inches or less from the face of a building may be considered wall signs, and are subject to these provisions.
Free Standing signs
(§4.8 D.11.): calculated PSA or 12 square feet maximum.
EMC (§4.8 D.8): 15% of sign area
1 per general access point
6 feet
Projecting signs (§4.8 D.18.): 12 square feet per sign face
EMC (§4.8 D.8): 25% of sign area
1 per building face or per business storefront
18’ or to the eave line or top of parapet wall of the building to which it is affixed.
8 feet from the property line.
Minimum clearance: 8 feet from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign.
Maximum projection: 5 feet.
See §4.8 H.3. for additional standards associated with EMC’s.
Suspended signs (§4.8 D.21): 1.5 square feet per face (3 feet total). Does not count toward the total PSA.
EMC (§4.8 D.8): 25% of sign area.
8 feet from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign.
Minimum horizontal separation: 15 feet between suspended signs.
Projection: shall not project beyond the outside limits of the arcade, canopy, or marquee to which they are attached.
See §4.8 H.3. for additional standards associated with EMC’s.
Temporary signs (§4.8 D.22. and §4.8 E.4): 12 square feet
1 per street frontage
12 feet for a freestanding sign.
§4.8 SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-67
TABLE 4-13 SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR THE B-1 DISTRICT
(B-1)
Prohibited Signs
Maximum Sign Area Permitted per Business
Maximum Number of Signs Permitted
Maximum Height of Signs or other Restrictions
Wall signs (§4.8 D.24): calculated PSA up to 75 square feet maximum.
EMC (§4.8 D.8): 12 square feet of sign area.
See §4.8 H.3. for additional standards associated with EMC’s.
Murals (§4.8 H.10):
Minimum of 32 square feet.
2 Ordinance 3, 2015
TABLE 4-14 SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX ZONE DISTRICTS
(R-1, R-1M, R-2)
Prohibited Signs
Maximum Sign Area Permitted per Business
Maximum Number of Signs Permitted
Maximum Height of Signs or other Restrictions
In addition to §4.8 F., the following signs are prohibited:
Awning signs (§4.8 C.D.3.)
Canopy signs (§4.8 C.D.4.)
Changeable signs (§4.8 D.5.)
Electronic Message Centers
(§4.8 D.8. and §4.8 H.3.)
Portable signs (§4.8 D.17.)
Wind signs (§4.8 D.25.)
Wall signs (§4.8 D.24.):
12 square feet
1 per building
Temporary Signs (§4.8 D.22. and §4.8 E.4):
12 square feet
1 per street frontage
12 feet for a freestanding sign.
Freestanding signs2 (§4.8 C.D.11.):
calculated PSA or 12 square feet maximum.
1 per street frontage
6 feet
Murals (§4.8 H.10):
Minimum of 32 square feet.
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-68 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
J. Structural Requirements
1. Construction
The installation, repair or replacement of any sign is subject to possible required issuance of a building permit by the City of Gunnison Building Official.
The City of Gunnison Building Official may require that building plans for any sign be stamped by an engineer licensed in the State of Colorado.
Signs, sign structures, sign foundations and methods to attach and anchor signs must be designed and constructed in accordance with applicable provisions of the International Building Code as adopted by the City. All signs and their foundations and attachments must be designed for the appropriate dead load, wind load and snow load for the geographic area in question.
The supports and foundations used in construction for all signs and sign structures must be located outside of any public rights-of-way.
Welds of sign structures and sections of sign structures must be welded in accordance with the International Building Code.
2. Electrical and Fire Code Requirement
Electric signs and Electronic Message Centers shall be manufactured and installed in compliance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) NFPA70e, or other code administered by the State of Colorado. Installation of any electronic sign is subject to
TABLE 4-15 SCHEDULE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY ZONE DISTRICTS
(RMU AND R-3)
Prohibited Signs
Maximum Sign Area Permitted per Business
Maximum Number of Signs Permitted
Maximum Height of Signs
In addition to §4.8 F., the following signs are prohibited:
Awning signs(§4.8 C.D.3)
Bulletin Board signs
Canopy signs (§4.8 C.D.4.)
Electronic Message Centers
(§4.8 D.8.. and §4.8 H.3.)
Portable sign (§4.8 D.17.)
Wind signs (§4.8 D.25.)
Free Standing signs (§4.8 C..D.11): 30 square feet
1 per general access point.
15 feet
Projecting signs
(§4.8 D.18.):
15 square feet
18 feet or to the eave line or top of parapet wall of the building to which it is affixed
Suspended signs
(§4.8 D.21.):
1.5 square feet per face (3’ total)
Wall signs
(§4.8 D.24): 30 square feet
Temporary signs
(§4.8 D.22. and §4.8 E.4): 12 square feet
1 per street frontage
12 feet for a freestanding sign.
Murals (§4.8 H.10):
Minimum of 32 square feet.
§4.8 SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-69
obtaining an electrical permit.
The listing label number for all signs shall be provided on the Sign Permit application, or, if the sign has not been manufactured yet, through Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) validation: A NRTL file number from the sign manufacturer shall be provided for all electric signs on the Sign Permit application.
3. Dangerous Sign Structures and Equipment. Signs, sign structures or awnings that are dangerous must be taken down and removed or made safe as the Building Official deems necessary. Signs may be deemed dangerous for any specific reason including but not limited to:
if a sign structure, it’s foundation, attachments to a building, or a building to which a sign is attached is damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability is materially less than it was before the catastrophe;
if any portion or member of a sign, sign structure or awning is likely to fail, or become detached or dislodged, or to collapse;
if any portion or member of a sign, sign structure or awning is likely to partially or completely collapse as a result of any cause, including, dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; faulty construction or wiring; or removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground or building necessary for supporting such structure;
if a sign, sign structure or awning is structurally or electrically unsafe or otherwise hazardous to human life or safety by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment;
All signs, sign structures and awnings determined after inspection by the Code Officer to be dangerous must be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
4. Clearance. Signs shall not be located with less than six feet horizontal clearance or 10 feet vertical clearance from overhead primary lines.
5. Freestanding Signs. Where such signs are located in vehicular parking and circulation areas, a base or barrier of concrete, steel or other effective barrier not less than 30 inches high, shall be provided to protect the base of the sign from possible damage by vehicles. Where any freestanding sign has a clearance of less than nine feet from the ground, there shall be provided a barrier or other adequate protection to prevent hazard to pedestrians and motorists.
K. Permits
1. Sign Permit Required. Except as provided in §4.8 E., it is unlawful to display, erect, relocate or alter any sign without first filing with the Building Official an application in writing and obtaining a sign permit. When a sign permit has been issued by the Building Official, it is unlawful to change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of the permit without prior approval of the building official. A written record of such approval shall be entered upon the original permit application and maintained in the files of the building official.
§4.8 SIGNS
PAGE 4-70 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
2. Application for Permit. The application for a sign permit shall be made by the owner or tenant of the property on which the sign is to be located, or his or her authorized agent. Such applications shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the Building Official and shall be signed by the applicant. The Building Official shall, within seven working days of the date of the application, either approve or deny the application or refer the application back to the applicant in any instance where insufficient information has been furnished.
3. Revocation of Permits. If the Building Official finds that work under any permit issued is not in accordance with the information supplied in the permit application and/or is in violation of this Section or any other pertinent ordinance of the City, or should he or she find that there has been any misrepresentation in connection with the application for the permit, he or she shall notify the sign owner or erector of such findings and that the violations must be corrected without delay. If such correction is not made forthwith, the Building Official shall revoke the permit and serve written notice thereof upon the sign owner or erector. No person shall proceed with any part of such work after such notice is received.
4. Revocation of Permits for Nonuse
If actual work whether on-site or off-site is not completed under any permit issued within 60 days from the date of such permit, and/or if substantial building operations under any permit issued under this Section are suspended for a period of 60 consecutive days, the permit shall automatically become null and void.
The Building Official may grant an extension of time in which to start or resume operations. All requests for extension and approval thereof shall be in writing.
5. Plans, specifications and other data required. The application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the following plans and other information:
the name, address and telephone number of the owner or person entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or erector;
the location, by street address or other location identification acceptable to the building official, of the proposed sign structure;
complete information as required on an application form provided by the Building Official, including a site plan and elevation drawings of the proposed sign, caption of the proposed sign, type of proposed illumination and such other data as is pertinent to the application;
plans indicating the scope and structural details of the work to be done, including details of all connections, guy lines, supports and footings and materials to be used; and,
if an electrical permit is required, verification of final electrical inspection approval shall be provided to the Building Official.
6. Inspections. All signs shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official. Footing inspections may be required for all freestanding signs. The permit holder or his or her agent shall notify the Building Official when signs are complete and ready for final inspection.
(Multiple changes to § 4.8 per Ordinance #8, 2017)
§4.9 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-71
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens; provide security for businesses, services and other activities; and for the protection of night skies.
B. Applicability. All new development shall comply with the standards of this Section.
1. Buildings and structures lawfully existing as of the effective date of this section, may be redeveloped, renovated or repaired without modifying outdoor lighting in conformance with this Section, provided there is no increase in gross floor area in such building or structure or impervious area on the site.
2. Where a building or structure existed as of the effective date of this Section, and such building is enlarged in gross floor area or impervious area on the site by 10 percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less, outdoor lighting as specified in this Section shall be provided.
C. Exemption. The following shall be exempt from the Outdoor Lighting requirements of this section:
1. fixtures utilizing luminaries (bulbs) with less than 1,000 initial lumen output;
2. public recreational playfield lighting;
3. lighting with more than 1000 initial lumen may be allowed with an active or activated motion sensor; and
4. Federal and State Government entities i.e.: Gunnison-Crested Butte Regional Airport and Western State Colorado University;
5. public street lighting (new street lighting shall comply with Outdoor Lighting as specified in this Section).
D. Prohibited Light Sources. The following light fixtures and sources shall not be used within the city where the direct light emitted is visible from adjacent areas:
1. cobra-head-type fixtures having dished or drop lenses or refractors which house other than incandescent sources; and
2. searchlights and other high-intensity narrow-beam fixtures.
E. Design Requirements. Outdoor Lighting shall primarily be used to provide safety while secondarily accenting key architectural elements and to emphasize landscape features. All lighting fixtures designed or placed so as to illuminate any portion of a site shall meet the following requirements:
1. Fixture (Luminaire). The light source shall be concealed. In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of light spillage into the night sky and onto adjacent properties, all lighting fixtures shall be full cutoff fixtures.
2. Fixture Height. Lighting fixtures shall be a maximum of 25 feet in height within parking areas and at driveway intersections.
§4.9 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
PAGE 4-72 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
3. Mounting. Fixtures shall be mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is contained on-site and does not cross any property line of the site.
4. Limit Lighting to Periods of Activity. The use of sensor technologies, timers or other means to activate lighting during times when it will be needed may be required by the Director to conserve energy, provide safety and promote compatibility between different land uses.
F. Specific Standards. Cut sheets for all lighting fixtures (luminaries) to be installed on-site or on adjacent streets shall be required as follows:
1. Street Lighting. A street light standard of 30 feet mounting height shall be installed at all street intersections, at the end of cul-de-sacs and at intermittent spacing necessary to produce a minimum of 0.6 maintained foot candles for Collector streets and 0.4 maintained foot candles for Local streets with uniformity ratio not exceeding 3:1. Luminaries shall have minimum 175 watt high intensity discharge lamps.
2. Security Lighting
a. Building-mounted security light fixtures shall not project above the fascia or roof line of the building and shall be shielded.
b. Security fixtures shall not face a residential property.
c. Security fixtures shall not be substituted for parking area or walkway lighting and shall be restricted to loading, storage, service and similar locations.
3. Accent Lighting. Only lighting used to accent architectural features, landscaping or art may be directed upward.
4. Canopy Area Lighting. All development that incorporates a canopy area over fuel sales, automated teller machines or similar installations shall use a recessed lens cover flush with the bottom surface of the canopy that provides a cutoff or shielded light distribution.
5. Entrances and Exits in Nonresidential and Multi-Family Development
a. All entrances and exits to buildings used for nonresidential purposes and open to the general public, along with all entrances and exits in multi-family residential buildings, shall be adequately lighted to ensure the safety of persons and the security of the building.
b. Exterior light fixtures shall be mounted no higher than 20 feet above the doorway, deck, walkway, driveway, or other occupied areas, or the highest grade point immediately adjacent to the light fixture.
6. Off-street Parking Area Lighting
a. Off-street parking areas shall be required to provide adequate lighting during nighttime hours of operation.
b. Parking and security lighting within 25 feet of the property boundary shall not be greater
§4.10 LARGE SCALE RETAIL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-73
than 15 feet in height and may be subject to buffering mitigation measures.
G. Excessive Illumination
1. Lighting within any lot that unnecessarily illuminates and interferes with the use or enjoyment of any other lot is prohibited. Lighting unnecessarily illuminates another lot if it clearly exceeds the requirements of this section, or if the standard could reasonably be achieved in a manner that would not interfere with the use or enjoyment of neighboring properties.
2. The maximum light trespass originating from exterior lighting shall be 1000 lumens of light at a point 25 feet outside the property line or the parcel from which the light is emitted.
3. Lighting shall not be oriented so as to direct glare or excessive illumination onto streets in a manner that may distract or interfere with the vision of drivers on such streets.
4. All lighting, including any exterior floodlights, shall be shielded so that substantially all emitted light falls within the property line of the property from which the light emanates.
5. Illumination using bare illuminated tubing or strings of lights that completely outline or define property lines, sales areas, roofs, doors, windows, signs or similar areas in a manner that is not primarily for safety purposes is prohibited, except for temporary holiday displays.
6. All lighting fixtures used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be arranged so as to direct or shield the light away from any adjoining residential premises.
7. Lighting used to illuminate commercial sites and parking areas shall be arranged, located or screened to direct light away from any adjoining or abutting residential zone district or use or any street rights-of-way.
LARGE SCALE RETAIL
A. Purpose. These standards are intended to ensure that large scale retail establishment development is compatible with its surrounding area and contributes to the unique community character of Gunnison.
B. Applicability. The standards of this Section shall apply to all retail uses in structures with more than 50,000 gross square feet, including single or multi-building developments with more than 50,000 square feet in any one structure. Large retail sales developments include;
1. single large retail sales buildings;
2. multiple large retail sales buildings; or
3. large retail sales building(s) with pad/liner sites comprising a complex that is planned, developed, owned, or managed as a single association.
C. Single Building Site Development Intent. The single building site design standards are intended to create an attractive building in an appealing and functional setting. The integration of structure, surfaces, and natural site features will:
§4.10 LARGE SCALE RETAIL
PAGE 4-74 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
1. respect the surrounding commercial and residential neighborhoods by appropriate buffering, screening, and lighting;
2. achieve defined edges with landscape, streetscape, and signage to frame a building that uses a variety of architectural features to reflect the character of the community;
3. establish a safe and coherent pedestrian and vehicular network within the site and between adjacent neighborhoods in accord with existing and projected traffic patterns;
4. provide for energy conservation and efficient use of utility services, minimizing adverse environmental impacts from such effects as storm-water runoff, light pollution, noise, odor, and waste; and
5. comply with the City of Gunnison Master Plan.
D. Single Building Site Development Standards
1. General. Site development shall be designed and constructed in accordance with all of the provisions of Section 4, General Development Standards, as well as all other applicable standards of the LDC.
2. Orientation. Building wall planes shall be oriented parallel to primary street frontages and accessways.
3. Front Parking. No more than 50 percent of the required off-street spaces shall be located between the front lot line and a line segment parallel to the entire lot frontage and intersecting the closest point of the building front. All remaining off-street parking shall be located outside of the area delineated by this standard.
E. Multiple Building Site Development Intent. The Multiple Building Site Design Standards are intended to create attractive primary and secondary retail buildings in an appealing and functional setting. The integration of structures, surfaces, and natural site features will:
1. respect the surrounding commercial and residential neighborhoods by appropriate buffering, screening, and lighting;
2. achieve defined edges by the use of landscape, streetscape, signage, and siting of secondary buildings to frame the primary building. All buildings shall use a variety of architectural features in a common theme;
3. establish a safe and coherent pedestrian and vehicular network within the site and between adjacent neighborhoods in accord with existing and projected traffic patterns;
4. provide for energy conservation and efficient use of utility services, minimizing adverse environmental impacts from such effects as stormwater runoff, light pollution, noise, odor, and waste;
5. comply with the City of Gunnison Master Plan; and
6. provide that primary commercial buildings serve as “anchors” for commercial and mixed-use
§4.10 LARGE SCALE RETAIL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-75
zones. Anchor buildings may be flanked by a variety of supporting, pedestrian-oriented retail storefronts and secondary commercial uses located on pad sites provided that they meet the following design elements:
a. The siting and design of smaller retail stores (pad sites or liner buildings) creates an inviting appearance along arterial and highway corridors and within the neighborhood by reducing the apparent visual scale of the project and by expanding the range of activities and businesses found within the neighborhood.
b. The layout of pad site or liner buildings relate coherently to the public streets and surroundings (outward) as well as to the main center (inward), and specific siting decisions shall further the general intent of creating a sense of place, focal points, community amenities, and arrival into a commercial center.
c. The location, orientation of the entry, and architecture of pad site buildings frame the entry into the neighborhood and contribute to the aesthetic appeal of the development by placing storefront spaces closer to the street and creating a street scene.
d. Smaller retail stores are sited in a liner building configuration or on discrete pads or building pad groups that complement overall site layout and function; they shall not be randomly sited inconsistently with other site plan elements.
e. The architecture of pad site structures or liner buildings is compatible with the development’s anchor buildings.
F. Multiple Building Site Development Standards. Where multiple buildings are proposed, the building footprints may be configured as individual pads, pads wrapping the anchor(s), or contiguous liner buildings wrapping edges of the development. Multiple building layouts shall be completed in accordance with the following requirements.
1. Location Standards. Pad sites shall be clustered together to define street edges and entry points or to enclose and create community amenities and visual interest between buildings. Pad site building wall planes shall be no more than 100 feet from primary street frontages, major collector streets, or entrance driveway. Isolated pad buildings will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis but shall be adjacent to roads or entrance driveways as required herein.
2. Orientation. Buildings shall be oriented parallel or perpendicular to primary street frontages or entrance driveways (Figure 20).
§4.10 LARGE SCALE RETAIL
PAGE 4-76 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
3. Front Parking. No more than 20 percent of the required off-street spaces of any pad site building shall be located between the front lot line and the front elevation of the building. All remaining off-street parking shall be located outside of the area delineated by this standard. Additionally, no more than 50 percent of the parking dedicated to the large scale retail establishment (anchor building) shall be located between the front lot line and the front elevation of that building.
4. Phasing. If a large retail sales development is built in phases, the phasing shall be established as part of the design review. Site improvements for each respective phase including, but not limited to landscaping, circulation, parking, and drainage, shall be guaranteed by a development improvement agreement secured by a corporate surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash, and/or other means acceptable to the Director. The applicant shall submit to the Director estimates of the cost of completion of each required improvement, made by the applicant’s engineer, along with the schedule of construction and completion thereof. The collateral amount shall equal 125 percent of the prescribed cost as determined to be satisfactory by the Director of Community Development.
G. Vehicular Circulation
1. Transportation Impact Study Requirements. A detailed Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) shall be prepared in accordance with §4.1 H. of this LDC. Those guidelines include a description of all necessary procedures and analysis as well as steps to identify any transportation mitigation measures.
2. Access to Collector Streets. Access onto Collector streets that serve adjacent residential areas is prohibited unless it can be shown that the site traffic will not have a negative impact on adjacent residential areas and the access is approved by the City. Additionally, the City may require a license plate survey traffic study to determine the extent of cut-through traffic after the project completion if residential neighborhood traffic is perceived to have significantly increased. Negative impacts on adjacent residential areas are defined to include but not be limited to:
a. any increase in delivery truck traffic in the adjacent residential area (10 or more delivery truck trips per day serving the development); and
b. an increase in cut-through traffic in the adjacent residential area by those that do not live within the adjacent residential area that exceeds the greater of: (a) 20 percent of the existing
YES!
FIGURE 20 BUILDING ORIENTATION FOR MULTIPLE-BUILDING DEVELOPMENT
§4.10 LARGE SCALE RETAIL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-77
residential traffic volume on a given roadway or (b) 200 cars per day.
c. Traffic impacts that exceed either of the thresholds in 1 and 2 above will require mitigation of the impact or the closure of the access in question. The costs of cut-through and/or truck monitoring study and any mitigating measures shall be the responsibility of the owner or owners of the large scale retail establishment.
3. Internal Drive Connectivity. Any building, lot, parcel, or other real property that is intended to serve the general public, and that is designed as part of the development plan for a large scale retail establishment, shall be provided with vehicular access from the internal circulation system.
4. Passenger Loading Zones
a. In addition to passenger loading zones required by the International Building Code as amended and adopted by the City, each large scale retail establishment shall provide at least one pull-up space directly adjacent to the large scale retail establishment main entrance. Specific location shall be coordinated with the Fire Marshal.
b. The loading zone shall be a minimum 50 feet in length and 10 feet in width. The loading zone shall be signed as a physically disabled loading zone.
5. Traffic Control. All accesses shall be designed and constructed with appropriate traffic control and signage conforming to the Federal Highway Administration Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition.
6. Speed Change Lanes. Speed change lanes shall be required on Collector or Arterial roadways when the design hour traffic volume to or from the access will equal or exceed the standards in the Colorado State Highway Access Code, assuming the most appropriate access category. The design of any required speed change lanes shall also comply with the recommendations of the Colorado State Highway Access Code.
7. Restricted Turning Movements. Where a site driveway accesses an Arterial roadway, left turning movements into and/or out of the driveway may have to be restricted based on the findings of the approved traffic study. The preferred method for restricting left turns is the construction of a median that limits the driveway to a one-half or three-quarter access. Turn restriction islands in the throat of a driveway may only be considered if median construction is not possible (e.g., adequate right-of-way width is not available and cannot be acquired; adjacent mature trees would have to be removed). The decision to consider a turn restriction island instead of the construction of a median shall be made by the decision-making authority. If
FIGURE 21 PASSENGER LOADING ZONES
§4.10 LARGE SCALE RETAIL
PAGE 4-78 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
allowed, the design of a turn restriction island must be approved by a representative of the City who is a licensed civil engineer with a specialty in traffic engineering.
H. Pedestrian Circulation Facilities. The provisions of Section §4.5 shall apply to all large scale retail developments.
I. Residential Protection. The provisions of this Section are specifically designed to mitigate impact of large scale retail establishments and related development on existing residential uses and all residential zone districts (R-1, R-1M, R-2, RMU, or R-3 zone district).
1. Building Location. No building shall be erected within 100 feet of the lot line of property that is in a residential zone district or that contains a single-family, attached single-family or duplex use; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply across the street from a residential zone district.
2. Buffering and Landscaping. Buffers shall provide sufficient landscaping to protect adjacent land uses. Buffers may include walls, fences, and berms. Landscaping and buffering shall comply with the standards of §4.6 and shall be provided across the street from, or adjacent to, any property located in a residential zone district or containing a single-family, attached single-family or duplex dwelling.
J. Building Design Standards
1. Intent. Building design shall be tailored specifically to the site, the neighborhood and the physical context of the general area. The use of building wall and roof articulation, materials, architectural elements, color, and texture features shall ensure visual interest and compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood and comply with Section 6, Development Review Procedures; §4.10 C, Single Building Site Development Intent; and, §4.10 E, Multiple Building Site Development Intent.
2. Ground Floor Façades
a. Ground floor façades abutting public streets and/or parking lots shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other such features. Animating features such as these must total no less than 60 percent of the horizontal length of the façade.
b. Liner and pad site buildings shall have separate, exterior customer/resident entrances. Such entrances are preferred on both street and parking lot sides. The street level façade of liner or pad site buildings shall have transparent fenestration, entry areas, awnings or other features eight feet above the walkway grade for no less than 60 percent of the horizontal length of the building façade of such additional stores.
FIGURE 22 GROUND FLOOR FAÇADES
§4.10 LARGE SCALE RETAIL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-79
3. Articulation
a. Exterior Wall Plane. No single exterior wall plane
shall constitute more than 60 percent of any primary
façade of 100 feet or more in length. Variations of
less than one foot in depth are not considered to
break the plane.
b. Primary Façades. Any primary façade shall
include projections or recesses (articulation) in
accordance with this subsection. No uninterrupted
horizontal length or uninterrupted curve of such
façade shall exceed the lengths set forth below:
i. Buildings of less than 20,000 square feet in floor area shall require one articulation of not less than five feet in depth for every 50 feet in length. Such articulation shall extend at least five feet horizontally.
ii. Buildings 20,000 square feet or more in floor area shall require one articulation of not less than 10 feet in depth for every 100 feet in length. Such articulation shall extend at least 10 feet horizontally.
c. Secondary Façades. Any façade, other than a primary façade, shall include no less than three of the following elements:
i. an expression of architectural or structural bays through a change in plane of no less than 12 inches in width, such as an offset, reveal or projecting rib, as shown in Figure 24;
ii. horizontal separation between projecting ribs, reveals and offsets may vary depending on the building wall manufacture specifications, but shall not be greater than 20 feet on center;
iii. material module change;
iv. color change; or
v. textural change.
FIGURE 23 EXTERIOR WALL PLANE
FIGURE 24 SECONDARY FAÇADE
§4.10 LARGE SCALE RETAIL
PAGE 4-80 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
K. Architectural Elements. Primary façades of large scale retail establishments shall have clearly defined architectural detail featuring no less than three of the following:
1. canopies or porticos;
2. overhangs;
3. recesses and projections;
4. arcades;
5. raised, corniced parapets over the door;
6. peaked roof forms;
7. arches;
8. outdoor patios;
9. display windows;
10. architectural details such as tile work, architectural banding, and moldings, which are integrated into the building structure and design;
11. integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting; or
12. other elements proposed by the developer and accepted by the Community Development Director.
L. Building Entrances. The public access points of large scale retail establishments shall have clearly defined, highly visible entrances featuring at least three of the following elements:
1. canopies or porticos;
2. overhangs;
3. recesses and projections;
4. arcades;
5. raised, corniced, parapets over the door;
6. peaked roof forms;
7. arches;
8. outdoor patios;
9. display windows;
FIGURE 26 BUILDINGS ENTRANCES
FIGURE 25 ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENTS
§4.10 LARGE SCALE RETAIL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 4-81
10. architectural details such as tile work, architectural banding, and moldings, which are integrated into the building structure and design;
11. integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting; or
12. other elements proposed by the developer and accepted by the Community Development Director.
M. Materials and Colors
1. Predominant exterior building materials on all sides shall be of high quality, including the following or other materials of similar appearance and characteristics: brick, sandstone, other native stone; tinted/textured concrete masonry units; brick, stone or native veneer; architectural concrete with form, line, texture, mass, and space (negative and positive) elements that establish aesthetic quality; metal for beams, lintels, trim elements and ornaments; wood and log; and glass.
2. Color shades shall be used to unify the development. Façade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral, earth tone colors. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black, or fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
3. Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors, including primary colors.
4. Wall surface materials shall not include smooth-faced concrete block, smooth-faced concrete panels or other similar products, aluminum or vinyl siding, or prefabricated steel panels.
5. Metal may be utilized as a roofing material and/or as an accent to other siding materials, provided that all such metal materials used shall have a non-metallic luster.
6. Use of neon as an architectural building accent is prohibited.
7. other elements proposed by the developer and accepted by the Community Development Director.
8. Roofs. Roofs shall comply with the provisions of §4.6.I.4, and shall have no less than two of the following features:
parapets, the average height of which shall not exceed 15 percent of the height of the supporting wall, shall not at any point exceed one -third of the height of the supporting wall, and shall feature three-dimensional cornice treatment;
overhanging eaves, extending no less than three feet past the supporting walls;
FIGURE 27 PARAPETS
§4.11 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS WAIVER
PAGE 4-82 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the supporting walls, with an average slope greater than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every four feet of horizontal run and less than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every one foot of horizontal run;
three or more roof slope planes;
other elements proposed by the developer and accepted by the Community Development Director.
N. Abandoned Buildings. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new building or space that is subject to the provisions of this Section, without compliance with the following requirements. All properties developed for commercial purposes including those abandoned by the applicant in favor of new development regulated by this section, whether they are occupied or not, shall be regularly maintained so they are not allowed to fall into a state of disrepair or neglect. This maintenance requirement shall be established by a covenant or other document considered satisfactory to the City Attorney, memorializing this requirement. At a minimum the following maintenance functions shall occur:
1. glazing shall not be boarded and broken windows shall be replaced immediately;
2. vegetated landscaping shall be watered, trimmed and mowed during the growing season. In addition, dead vegetation shall be removed or replaced in accordance with §4.6. J. 3;
3. graffiti shall be immediately removed from the site;
4. painted or stained building surfaces shall be painted or stained at least every three years or when the surface starts to peel, crack, or fade;
5. emergency vehicle access shall be maintained.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS WAIVER
In order to provide flexibility in the administration of this LDC by the City certain development standards contained in this Section 4 may be considered for a waiver pursuant to the directives established in Section 9 of this Land Development Code.
§5.1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-1
Section 5. Natural Resource Protection Standards
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
A. Purpose. The City recognizes the need and responsibility for adequate engineering standards to accommodate stormwater runoff. The need has become more apparent with the County goal to concentrate development adjacent to municipal boundaries and the City of Gunnison Master Plan goal to develop and concentrate urban land uses within its corporate boundary.
The City of Gunnison Stormwater Management Manual provides consistent and accurate engineering design management for all developments within the city boundary. The desire is to develop stormwater management and erosion control facilities by promoting Low Impact Design techniques that mimic natural fluvial dynamics found in the area.
The City has adopted stormwater design standards based on the Denver Urban Drainage and Flood Control District Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manuals (USDCM), Volumes 1, 2 and 3, with appropriate revisions to address local conditions. These design standards for stormwater facilities are commonly used in the State of Colorado and provide consistency for engineer and design professionals.
B. Stormwater Design and Construction Standards
1. The City of Gunnison Stormwater Management Manual shall be incorporated herein by reference.
2. Design and Construction of all stormwater facilities shall be in accordance with the City of Gunnison Stormwater Management Manual as it may be amended.
3. The drainage system shall be designed and constructed so that only historic runoff rates, not including historic irrigation, shall be released from the site. Drainage flows in excess of this amount shall be retained, detained or handled in a storm sewer system. All costs associated with handling runoff generated by a development shall be paid by the developer.
4. The drainage system shall comply with applicable state and federal requirements.
C. Floodplain. Lands within the City limits and located within an adopted 100 year floodplain are subject to the City’s Flood Damage Prevention Regulations found in Chapter 14.60 of the City of Gunnison Municipal Code.
SLOPE PROTECTION STANDARDS
A. Density Calculation for Residential Development on Steep Slopes in Excess of Ten Percent
1. Applicability. These density calculation provisions shall apply to all new residential development and subdivisions in the City of Gunnison. All Map Amendments proposed after the adoption date of this LDC shall be subject to these Slope Protection Standards.
§5.2 SLOPE PROTECTION STANDARDS
PAGE 5-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
2. Definition. For the purposes of this Section “average slope” shall be measured as set forth in Figure 28.
3. General Rule. Notwithstanding the maximum densities permitted by the underlying zoning district, the minimum lot area and front yard dimension for new residential development on parcels containing slopes 10 percent or greater shall be determined by the following factors presented in Table 5-1.
TABLE 5-1 AREA AND FRONT YARD DIMENSIONS IN SLOPE PROTECTION AREAS
Zone District
Base Minimum Lot Area
Adjusted Minimum Lot Area (Square Feet) at “x” % Slope
10 %
15%
20%
25%
>26%
R-1
8,000
12,000
20,000
32,000
64,000
128,000
R-1M
6,250
12,000
20,000
32,000
64,000
128,000
R-2
6,250
12,500
25,000
50,000
75,000
Not Permitted
RMU
6,250
16,250
32,500
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
R-3
6,250
16,250
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Front Lot Length
75 ft.
75 ft.
80 ft.
80 ft.
100 ft.
Density Reduction R-2M
Max Units Per Acre
-25%
-50%
NA
NA
NA
Density Reduction R-3
Max Units Per Acre
-25%
NA
NA
NA
NA
FIGURE 28 SLOPE PROTECTION STANDARDS
§5.2 SLOPE PROTECTION STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-3
B. Development Restrictions on Steep Slopes
1. Applicability. These development restrictions shall apply to all new development in the City of Gunnison, except for subdivisions approved for single-family residential use prior to the effective date of this LDC. Non-residential development zone districts shall be prohibited on slopes greater than 10 percent.
2. New Structures—Existing Slopes in Excess of Ten Percent
a. New development proposed to be built on any parcel containing an average slope of ten percent or greater shall be subject to review and approval pursuant to Section 6. This provision applies to development that would otherwise be exempt from the development plan review process.
b. Staff shall review all such development plans and evaluate them according to the following standards:
i. Site Disturbance shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable (§5.2 D., Grading Standards).
ii. Cuts for utilities and access driveway shall be shared to the maximum extent feasible;
iii. To the maximum extent feasible, new construction shall not take place on any portion of a parcel that shows evidence of slope instability, landslides, avalanche, flooding, alluvial fan or other natural or manmade hazards.
iv. The applicant shall demonstrate that the slope’s ground surface and subsurface are not unstable, that the proposed development will not cause instability or increase the potential for slope failure, and that the development of the slope will not increase the degree of hazard both on-site and on adjacent properties.
c. For purposes of this section, steepness of slope shall be measured from the points with the highest and lowest elevation within five feet of any portion of the proposed structure.
3. Structure Clearance from Steep Slopes. Structure clearance from ascending or descending slopes greater than 30 percent shall comply with the requirements set forth in the applicable Building Code provisions.
4. Grading, Clearing and Excavation−Slope in Excess of Ten Percent. Clearing, excavation and grading on slopes greater than 10 percent shall not be allowed, unless expressly approved through a site development application.
5. Roads/Driveway – Slopes in Excess of Ten Percent. Shared driveway and access to site or lots containing slopes in excess of ten percent shall be utilized to the maximum extent feasible (also see §4.3, General Site Access).
§5.3 GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL
PAGE 5-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL
A. Applicability. The provisions of this Section apply to all residential and nonresidential development subject to subdivisions and/or site plan applications.
B. Grading Plan. The Community Development Director may require applicants to submit a grading plan for site-development applications that illustrates the extent of the land disturbance which is to occur on the property. The grading plan shall illustrate existing site features and shall depict existing and proposed contours, using a contour interval of two feet. Where slopes are greater than 20 percent, five foot contours may be depicted.
C. Plan Preparation. Preparation of an effective grading plan and execution of proper grading involve certain basic steps pertaining to street layout, block grading and lot grading. The objective is to establish the street grades, floor elevations and lot grades in proper relation to each other and to existing topography, considering property protection, and use. The basic steps are as follows:
1. Fit to Topography. If the street layout is still subject to design or adjustment, fit it to the topography to obtain the most favorable types of block and lot grading which are compatible with other objectives.
2. Block and Lot Grading. Determine type of block grading for each block or portion of a block and, if possible, indicate the general lot grading for each lot by drainage arrows.
3. Easements. Determine any easements and other provisions needed for adequate block drainage and erosion control.
4. General Limitations. Determine general lot grading limitations for local conditions such as minimum gradients for grass swales and slopes and maximum for sidewalks and driveways.
5. Specific Limitations. For each type of house and lot determine the specific lot grading limitations along a typical lot grading control line from the street to the house and determine the minimum street-to-floor rise.
6. Street Profiles. If the street profiles are to be designed or adjusted, establish them so as to facilitate the provision of good drainage for both the lots and the streets, giving due consideration to existing topography and lot limitations.
7. Elevations. For each property, determine proposed elevations for key points on the lot and for the dwelling floor, giving due consideration to street elevations, existing topography and lot grading limitations.
D. Grading Standards
1. Grading Prohibited Without Prior Approvals/Permits. No cutting, filling, stockpiling, excavation, or vegetation removal shall be permitted, whether to provide for a building site, for on-site utilities, or services for any roads or driveway, prior to final approval of a grading and excavation plan submitted in conjunction with a site development plan application or the issuance of a building permit.
§5.3 GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-5
2. Limits on Changing Natural Grade. The original, natural grade of a lot shall not be raised or lowered more than 10 feet at any point for construction of any structure or improvement except:
a. Foundation walls incorporated into the principal structure to allow the building mass step in response to natural grade; or
b. The original grade of the site may be raised or lowered to a maximum of twelve feet if a retaining wall or terracing is used to reduce the steepness or manmade slopes, provided that the retaining wall or terracing comply with the requirements set forth in this Section (see Figure 29).
3. Cutting and Creating Benches.
Cutting and grading to create benches or pads for additional or larger building sites or lawns shall be avoided to the maximum extent feasible.
4. Grading For Accessory Building Pads Discouraged. Separate pad for accessory buildings and structures other than garages, such as tennis courts, swimming pools, outbuildings, and similar facilities, shall be discouraged except where the average slope is 15 percent or less.
5. Limits on Graded Filled Manmade Slopes
a. Slopes of 20 percent or less are strongly encouraged wherever feasible or practicable.
b. Except as provided below, graded or filled manmade slopes shall not exceed a slope of 30 percent (3:1 slope) unless civil engineering plans incorporating recommendation from a geotechnical report, both of which shall be submitted by an engineer licensed in the State of Colorado, is furnished to the Community Development Director. The plans and reports shall include a written statement establishing that the site has been investigated and that, in the opinion of the qualified professionals, a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property both on the site and directly adjacent to the affected site.
c. If a steeper slope will result in less overall site disturbance, then graded or filled manmade slopes associated with road construction may exceed a slope of 50 percent (2:1 slope), but shall be subject to City review and approval.
6. Retaining Walls
a. Use of retaining walls should be limited as much as feasible to reduce the steepness of manmade slopes and to provide planting pockets on steep slopes conducive to revegetation, subject to the following standards:
FIGURE 29 LIMITS ON CHANGING NATURAL GRADE
§5.3 GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL
PAGE 5-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
i. Retaining walls shall be used to provide breaks in manmade slopes exceeding 30 percent and to provide planting pockets.
ii. Retaining walls may be permitted to support steep slopes but shall not exceed six feet in height from the finished grade except for:
a structure’s foundation wall;
as necessary to construct a driveway from the
street to a garage or parking area; or,
as otherwise expressly allowed by this Section.
iii. Any retaining wall or multiple retaining wall design greater than four feet in height shall be designed by an engineer registered in the State of Colorado and the engineer design shall be based on recommendations from a geotechnical engineer soils report. The engineer design shall be submitted to staff for review and approval prior to construction.
iv. A three-foot minimum horizontal terrace shall be required for any multiple retaining walls that are less than four feet in height. A minimum five-foot horizontal terrace shall be required for any multiple retaining walls that are four-feet or greater in height. Terraces created between retaining walls shall be permanently landscaped with vegetation.
v. Retaining walls visible from a collector street, arterial street or highway, or from public open areas or parks, shall be screened by vegetation or faced with wood, stone or other earth-colored materials that blend with the surrounding natural landscape.
vi. All retaining walls shall comply with applicable Building Code provisions, except that when any provision of this Section conflicts with any provision set forth in the Building Code, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
b. Filling or Dredging of Waterways Prohibited. Filling, draining or dredging of water courses, wetlands, gullies, stream beds or stormwater runoff channels is prohibited, except as authorized with a floodplain development permit or with an approved site development plan.
c. Detention/Stormwater Facilities. Where detention basins and other stormwater and erosion control facilities may be required, any diverse visual impact on the natural landscape and topography shall be minimized to the maximum extent feasible.
FIGURE 30 RETAINING WALLS
§5.3 GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-7
7. Restoration of Disturbed Areas
a. Follow Natural Contours. All disturbed areas shall be restored as natural-appearing land forms, with curves that blend in with the adjacent undisturbed slopes. Abrupt angular transitions and linear slopes shall be avoided.
b. Revegetation Required. Areas disturbed by grading shall be contoured so they can be revegetated and they shall be revegetated within one growing season after construction using native species seed mix (see Appendix A). Revegetation shall be sufficient to provide erosion control and prevent the invasion of weeds. Plans for revegetation of cut-and fill and graded slopes shall be included as part of the site development plan application.
c. Timeline. In addition to the requirements of §5.3 E., overlot grading projects affecting an area greater than one acre in size that has been wholly or partially grubbed or wholly or partially graded, construction shall commence and shall be continuous within 60 days after grubbing. Should construction or grading not commence or be continuous within the required 60 day period, the site shall be native seeded within 30 days following the expiration of the required 60 day period. When approved by the Community Development Director, a time extension may be granted for conditions beyond the control of the permittee for items including but not limited to flooding or discovery of historic artifacts.
d. Man-Made Slopes Greater than Twenty–five Percent. On man-made slopes of 25 percent or greater, plant materials with characteristics that minimize erosion and reduce surface runoff shall be selected.
e. Man-made Slopes Greater than Fifty Percent. On man-made slopes greater than 50 percent stabilization measures such as erosion netting, hydro mulching or other advanced
FIGURE 31 DETENTION AND STORMWATER FACILITIES
§5.3 GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL
PAGE 5-8 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
slope stabilization technique shall be utilized.
f. Topsoil Stockpiled. To the maximum extent feasible, topsoil that is removed during construction shall be stockpiled and conserved for later use on areas requiring revegetation or landscaping, such as cut-and-fill slopes.
8. Limitations of Disturbance
a. Defined. Limits of Disturbance (LOD) means the areas of a site that may be disturbed by earth movement (grading), or cleared of vegetation, including disturbance or clearance to provide space for construction of principal and accessory uses and structures, driveways, parking areas, roads, drainage and stormwater management facilities or utilities.
b. Establishment of Limits of Disturbance. For all site development, preliminary subdivision and final subdivision plans shall include a map clearly depicting the limits of disturbance according to the criteria set forth below. The LOD shall indicate the specific area(s) within a development project where the development activity shall be contained.
c. Criteria for Establishing LOD. While LOD may be multiple and noncontiguous on a site, the following criteria shall be taken into account:
i. avoidance of visual impact, including but not limited to ridgeline protection areas steep slopes and scenic views;
ii. avoidance of steep slopes in excess of 20 percent and provide erosion prevention and control measures including but not limited to protection of natural drainage channels and compliance with an approved stormwater drainage management plan;
iii. preservation of native vegetation, trees, rock outcroppings and formations, and other significant natural site conditions;
iv. wildfire preventions and safety, including but not limited to location of trees and vegetation near structures;
v. mitigation of other geologic hazards, including potential adverse impact down- slope and adjacent to properties;
vi. riparian habitat, stream corridors and wetland protection and buffering;
vii. floodplains, floodways, flood fringes and flood hazards;
viii. significant wildlife habitat areas; and
ix. the practical need of approved construction activity in terms of ingress and egress to the developed project and necessary staging and operation areas.
§5.3 GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-9
d. Limits to Disturbance–Development Standards and Guidelines
i. No construction activity including, without limitation, grading excavation or stockpiling or fill material, shall be permitted within the limits of disturbance, whether to provide for a building site, on-site utilities or services or for any roads or driveway, prior to the approval of any required erosion and sedimentation control plan for the development.
ii. To the maximum extent feasible, no development, grading or vegetation removal or alteration shall occur as part of the development project or associated construction activity outside the LOD except as provided in subsection iii.c) below.
iii. Disturbance or construction
activity may occur outside the LOD with the written consent of landowner and approval of the staff for
the following limited purposes:
a) mitigation of development activities;
b) restoration of previously disturbed or degraded areas;
c) utility installations and emergency public safety activities when such activities and installations cannot reasonably be contained within the LOD or other nearby developed areas;
d) construction of a trail or pedestrian walkway that will provide public access or education or recreational purposes when such trails or walkway cannot reasonably be contained within the LOD or other nearby developed areas; or
e) the enhancement of the habitat values and/or other natural resource values of an identified natural area.
e. Designation on Final Grading and Drainage Plans. Approved LOD shall be shown on the preliminary and final subdivision grading plan and/or on the development plan for each
FIGURE 32 LIMITS OF DISTURBANCE
§5.4 WETLAND AND STREAMS CORRIDOR PROTECTION
PAGE 5-10 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
lot or development site. The respective LOD will be described as necessary to accurately define the boundary, as acceptable to the Community Development Director.
f. Standards for Protection during Construction. LOD shall be designated in the field prior to commencement of excavation, grading or construction.
E. Construction Stormwater Management Plan. All grading plans will include the submittal of a Construction Stormwater Management Plan (CSWMP). At a minimum, the CSWMP must contain the requirements listed in the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment document General Permit Application and Stormwater Management Plan Preparation Guidance available at www.colorado.gov/cs/Satellite/CDPHE-WQ/CBON/1251596877287, under the Stormwater Construction category. The Community Development Director is authorized to accept alternative plan submittals, waive submittal requirement determined not to be applicable or require additional data to ensure that an efficient construction sediment and stormwater control plan is submitted.
WETLAND AND STREAMS CORRIDOR PROTECTION
A. Purpose and Intent. The following requirements and standards are intended to promote, preserve and enhance the important hydrologic, biological, ecological, aesthetic, recreational and educational functions that stream and river corridors, associated riparian areas and wetlands provide.
B. Applicability. This Section shall apply to all new development, except for the following:
1. agricultural activities such as soil preparation, irrigation, planting, harvesting, grazing and farm ponds;
2. maintenance and repair of existing public roads, utilities and other public facilities within an existing right-of-way or easement;
3. removal of noxious weeds;
4. maintenance and repair of flood control structures and activities in response to a flood emergency; and
5. wetland and wildlife habitat restoration, creation and/or enhancement that improve the wetland function provided that the proposed activity is approved by the appropriate agency such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the Colorado Division of Wildlife.
C. Other Regulations
1. This Section does not repeal or supersede any existing federal, state or local laws; easements; covenants; or deed restrictions. When this Section imposes a higher or more restrictive standard than found in another applicable ordinance, statute or regulation, this Section shall apply.
2. No person shall engage in any activity that will disturb, remove, drain, fill dredge, clear, destroy or alter any area, including vegetation, within a wetland that falls in the jurisdiction of the federal government and its agencies, except as may be expressly allowed under applicable federal laws or regulations.
§5.4 WETLAND AND STREAMS CORRIDOR PROTECTION
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-11
D. Boundary Delineation
1. Stream and River Corridor Boundaries. Stream and river corridors shall be delineated by the defined floodway.
2. Mapped Wetland Boundaries. The initial boundary delineation of wetlands shall be established by reference National Wetlands Inventory prepared by the U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service (www.wetlands.fsw.gov), or other data provided by the applicant.
3. Unmapped Wetlands. The review of a development proposal may discover a potential wetland that has not been mapped or for which the boundaries have not been clearly established. In such instances, the Applicant shall retain a qualified wetland expert to delineate the boundaries of the wetland according to accepted professional standards for jurisdictional wetlands as defined by the Army Corps of Engineers.
E. Buffer/Setback Areas
1. Major Ditch and River Corridors
a. Building/Structure Setbacks
i. Major Ditches. All buildings and accessory structures shall be setback at least 30 feet horizontally (plan view) from the outside edge of adjacent City irrigation ditch banks. Where defined banks are not readily discernible, the setback shall be measured from the center of the ditch (See Figure 33).
ii. Gunnison River and Tomichi Creek Corridors
a) General Rule. All buildings and accessory structures shall be setback at least 25 feet horizontally (plan view) from the floodway of river corridors, or, if not readily discernible, from the delineated floodway.
b) Exception for Lots Developed Prior to the Adoption of this Code. All buildings and accessory structures shall be setback at least 25 feet horizontally (plan view) from the defined floodway (see Figure 33).
b. Parking Lot Setbacks. Parking lots shall be setback at least 25 feet horizontally (plan view) from the annual high-water mark of stream or river corridors, or not readily discernible, from the defined floodway of the stream or river.
2. Wetlands
a. To the maximum extent feasible, jurisdictional wetlands shall not be included as part of a platted development lot.
b. All buildings, accessory structures and parking lots shall be setback at least 50 feet horizontally (plan view) from the delineated edge of a wetland (see Figure 33). Development on lots that were approved for single-family residential use prior to the adoption of this LDC shall be exempt.
§5.4 WETLAND AND STREAMS CORRIDOR PROTECTION
PAGE 5-12 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
3. Private Open Areas and Landscaping Credit. All stream corridor and wetland setback areas
shall be
credited toward any relevant private open areas requirements or landscaping and buffer requirements.
F. Development Standards
1. Prohibited Activities. No person shall engage in any activity that will disturb, remove, fill, drain, dredge, clear, destroy or alter any area, including vegetation, within stream or river corridors wetlands and their associated buffer/setback areas, except as may be expressly allowed in this Section.
2. Utilities. Utilities may be allowed in a buffer/setback area only if the City determines that there is no practical alternative. Any disturbance of the buffer area shall be reclaimed by final grading and revegetation. Provisions for reclamation of the disturbed area shall be included in any development or improvements agreement for the project, with adequate collateral to guarantee that the reclamation will be completed. Utility corridors in buffer/setback areas shall be located at the outside edge of the area and access roads for maintenance of utilities shall be located outside the buffer/setback area. Access for maintenance of utilities in buffer/setback areas should be at specific points rather than parallel to the utility corridor.
3. Recreation, Education or Scientific Activities. Structures and improvement for recreational, educational or scientific activities such as trails, fishing access and wildlife management and viewing may be permitted in a buffer/setback area provided that a management plan that
FIGURE 33WETLAND/STREAM SETBACK
§5.5 NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS WAIVER
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 5-13
establishes long-term protection of the buffer/setback area is submitted and approved.
G. Preservation of Vegetation. All desirable existing vegetation within the stream/river corridor or wetland buffer/setback area shall be preserved, and where necessary to provide adequate screening or to repair damaged riparian areas, supplemented with additional native planting and landscaping.
H. Wetland Mitigation Requirements
1. Restoration shall be required according to an approved wetland mitigation plan when a wetland or its buffer is altered in violation of law or without specific permission or approval by the Community Development Director.
2. All approved alterations of wetlands must be mitigated by replacement or enhancement on the site or within the same drainage basin on a one-to-one basis with equivalent or better biologic and hydrologic functions.
NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS WAIVER
In order to provide flexibility in the administration of this LDC by the City certain natural resource protection standards contained in this Section 5 may be considered for a waiver pursuant to the directives established in Section 9 (Development Standard Waivers), of this Land Development Code.
§5.5 NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS WAIVER
PAGE 5-14 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
§6.1 PURPOSE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-1
Section 6. Development Review Procedures
PURPOSE
The purpose of this Section is to establish procedures for various development applications that are processed by the City.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW CATEGORIES
There are two types of development review applications: Land Use Development Application and Site Development Application.
A. Land Use Development Applications. Land Use Development Applications include conditional uses, variances, waivers, amendment to the LDC or Official Zoning Map, Subdivision/PUD, vacations, and design review applications.
B. Site Development Applications. Site Development Applications include but are not limited to: building and fire code permits; grading permits; applications for development in special flood hazards; applications for the construction or reconstruction, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; land disturbances including, but not limited to grubbing or grading; or any change in use to a conforming use. Site Development Applications are subject to administrative approval by the Community Development Director or their assignee. Site Development Applications may be processed if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The proposed site development application is not a Land Use Development Application.
2. The site development is proposed on a legally subdivided lot that has adequate public facilities as defined in §4.1 of this LDC.
3. The proposed Site Development Application is in conformance with all provision of Section 1 through Section 5 of the LDC, and all technical codes adopted by the City (see Title 14 of the City of Gunnison Municipal Code).
4. Performance guarantees following the provisions of §7.7.D of this LDC to ensure that required public improvements, general and limited common elements, landscaping and other site development improvements are completed to City standards.
STAGES OF THE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS
Six designated stages comprise the Development Review Process. Land Use Development Applications are subject to the provision of every defined Stage described below. Site Development Applications are subject to Stages 1, 2, 3, and 6 as set forth below.
A. Stage 1: Preapplication conference between the applicant and the Community Development Director or their assignee;
B. Stage 2: Submission of the development application by the applicant;
C. Stage 3: Staff review of the development application to determine whether it is complete and whether it complies with all applicable development review standards;
§6.3 STAGES OF THE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS
PAGE 6-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
D. Stage 4: Provision of public notice of a public hearing, when applicable to the particular development process;
E. Stage 5: Public action on the development application by the appropriate decision-making body or bodies; and
F. Stage 6: Actions following development approval by the applicant prior to obtaining a site development permit.
The subsequent sections of this Section are organized to sequentially describe these six stages of the development review process in complete detail. The following diagram depicts the sequence of the actions which shall be accomplished by the applicant, the staff and the public review bodies to complete the six stages of the development review process. These actions are also explained in the remainder of this Section.
FIGURE 34 STAGES OF THE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS
§6.4 STAGE 1: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-3
STAGE 1: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE
A. Conference. Prior to filing a development application, the applicant may confer with the Community Development Director to obtain information and guidance as to the City’s development procedures and standards. The preapplication conference is required prior to filing a sketch and preliminary subdivision or PUD application, and is optional, but recommended, for all other development application types.
1. Purpose. The purpose of the conference is to permit informal review of development concepts before substantial commitments of time and money are made in the submission of an application, so the applicant may decide how best to proceed in accomplishing the intended development.
2. Not a Design Service. The preapplication conference shall not be used as a design service by the applicant. The applicant shall be responsible for preparing an application which contains sufficient information to enable the City to determine its conformance with this LDC.
B. Content of Conference. Items to be discussed during the preapplication conference may include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Applicant’s Proposal. The applicant shall provide a verbal description of the proposed development, accompanied by a survey, site plan or other map illustrating the site’s boundaries, and the applicant’s development concepts.
a. Preliminary Evaluation. The applicant may request that the Community Development Director provide a preliminary evaluation of the project’s likely conformance with this LDC and the City of Gunnison Master Plan. The Director may provide a verbal, preliminary evaluation during the conference or in writing within 15 days thereafter.
b. No Reliance Provided. The preliminary evaluation, and all other comments made by the Community Development Director during the preapplication conference shall not be deemed to provide the applicant with assurance or reliance as to the outcome of the formal development review process.
2. Review Procedure. The Community Development Director should explain the procedures and review standards which apply to the proposed development, including which decision-making body or bodies will review the application, whether public notice is required and the sequence of actions and approximate time required to complete the development review process.
3. Review Agencies. The Community Development Director should identify any city, county, special district, state, and federal agencies that will review the proposed development and provide the applicant with the names of persons at these agencies to contact.
4. Application Contents. The Community Development Director should:
a. describe the materials required to be submitted as part of the application package;
b. provide any applicable City development forms;
c. identify the number of copies of the application to be submitted; and
d. indicate the applicable processing fee.
§6.5 STAGE 2: SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION
PAGE 6-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
STAGE 2: SUBMISSION OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION
A. Eligibility to Apply. A development application may only be submitted by, or on behalf of, the owners of real property proposed for development.
1. Power of Attorney Authorization. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, or is a contract purchaser of the property, a letter signed by the owner consenting to the submission of the application shall be submitted.
2. Multiple Property Owner Applicants. If the applicant is to be represented by an agent, a signed Authorization of Agent Form provided by the City, granting power of attorney to the agent shall be submitted with the application.
B. Form. The development application shall be submitted in the form required and shall include the information and materials specified for that particular type of application in the applicable sub-section of this Section.
1. Copies. The correct number of copies of the application shall be submitted as identified during the preapplication conference or by request of the Community Development Director.
2. Nonrefundable Application Fee. The correct nonrefundable processing fee for the application shall be submitted. The fees for the processing of applications are established by the City Council and are available through the Community Development Department.
C. Minimum Application Contents. All development applications shall include, at a minimum, the following information and materials:
1. Name, Street and Mailing Address, Telephone Number, and Power of Attorney. The applicant’s name, address and telephone number. If the applicant is to be represented by an agent, a letter signed by the applicant granting power of attorney to the agent shall be submitted, authorizing the agent to represent the applicant and stating the representative’s name, street and mailing address and phone number.
2. Legal Description. The legal description and street address, if such exists, of the parcel on which development is proposed to occur.
3. Disclosure of Ownership. A disclosure of ownership of the parcel on which the development is to occur, listing the names of all owners of the property, and all mortgages, judgments, liens, easements, contracts, and agreements that run with the land. The disclosure of ownership shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the City Attorney, that the applicant has the right to submit the development application.
4. Vicinity Map. An eight and one-half inch by 11 inch vicinity map locating the subject parcel within the City of Gunnison.
5. Written Description. A written description of the proposal and an explanation in written, graphic or model form of how the proposed development complies with the review standards applicable to the application, found in the applicable sub-section of this Section.
6. Names and Mailing Addresses of Adjoining Property Owners. Submittal of a written list of adjoining property owners within 100 feet of the application property boundary is required.
§6.6 STAGE 3: STAFF REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-5
The list will include their mailing addresses, and a map showing the location of these owners’ properties in relationship to the proposal. Adjoining property owner information is not required for Site Development applications.
7. Vested Property Rights. If the applicant is seeking to obtain approval of a site-specific development for which the creation of vested property rights is requested, the application shall contain a specific request and statement for creation of the vested property rights.
D. Consolidation. The land development review process is intended to encourage efficient processing of applications. Applicants may request, and the Community Development Director may permit, the consolidated submission and review of all necessary development applications for a parcel of land. The Community Development Director is authorized to waive any overlapping application requirements in the consolidated review.
STAGE 3: STAFF REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION
A. Completeness Review. Within five business days of receipt of the application, the Community Development Director shall determine whether the application is complete.
1. Application is not complete. If the application is not complete, the Community Development Director or their designee shall inform the applicant of the deficiencies in writing and shall take no further action on the application until the deficiencies are remedied.
2. Application is complete. If the application is complete, the Community Development Director or their designee shall certify it as complete, affix the date of the application acceptance thereon, and assign the application an agenda date with the applicable review body.
3. Completeness is not a determination of compliance. A determination that an application is complete shall not constitute a determination that it complies with the substantive standards of this LDC, City of Gunnison Master Plan, or other City regulations.
B. Staff Review. Within 30 days from the date of the completeness determination, the Community Development Director shall review the development application to determine its conformance with the requirements of this LDC. The Community Development Director may solicit the professional analysis and recommendations of any other agency, organization or technical consultant deemed appropriate and necessary to complete the review, including:
1. Governmental Entities. County, state, or federal entities having an interest in or authority over the proposed development or any portion thereof.
2. Utility Companies and Special Districts. Utility companies, special service districts serving the proposed development and the school district.
3. Staff. Members of the City staff.
4. Technical Consultants. Engineers, designers, and legal consultants.
C. Report. Prior to the date of the review body meeting, the Community Development Director shall compile a written report which sets forth how the application complies with, or does not comply with, the applicable standards of this LDC. The Community Development Director shall distribute
§6.7 STAGE 4: PROVISION OF PUBLIC NOTICE
PAGE 6-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
a copy of the report to each member of the review body and to the applicant, and shall make the report available to the public.
STAGE 4: PROVISION OF PUBLIC NOTICE
TABLE 6-1 LAND DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW
Application Type
Decision-Making Bodies
Public Hearing?
LDC Interpretation
Community Development Director
No
Conditional Use, vested property right
Planning and Zoning Commission
Yes
Density Bonus Incentive
Planning and Zoning Commission
Yes
Variance
Zoning Board of Adjustments and Appeals
Yes
Waiver
Community Development Director
No
Planning and Zoning Commission
Yes
City Council
Yes
Amendment to Official Zoning Map or text of LDC
Planning and Zoning Commission (recommendation)
Yes
City Council (decision)
Yes
Major Subdivision/P.U.D.
Sketch Plan – Planning and Zoning Commission (decision)
Yes
Preliminary Plat – Planning and Zoning Commission (decision)
Yes
Final Plat – Planning and Zoning Commission (recommendation)
No
Final Plat – City Council (decision)
No
Minor Subdivision/P.U.D.
Preliminary Plat – Planning and Zoning Commission (decision)
Yes
Final Plat – Planning and Zoning Commission (recommendation)
No
Final Plat – City Council (decision)
No
Subdivision Exemption
Community development director (decision)
No
Vacation of subdivision, right-of-way, or easement
Planning and Zoning Commission (recommendation)
Yes
City Council (decision)
No
Design Review
Planning and Zoning Commission (decision)
Yes
Verification of Zoning Compliance
Community Development Director (decision)
No
Vested Property Right Request
Planning and Zoning Commission (decision)
Yes
City Council (decision)
Yes
A. Notice Required. Table 6-1 identifies the types of land development applications which shall be considered during a public hearing, and at what step during the review process that hearing shall occur. Public notice shall be provided for each application type that is identified in Table 6-1 as
§6.7 STAGE 4: PROVISION OF PUBLIC NOTICE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-7
requiring notice to be given. Notice shall be provided as specified in §6.5 B.
B. Manner of Notice. Public notice shall be given by publication of notice in the newspaper, mailing of notice to all adjacent property owners to the subject property, and posting of notice on the property.
1. Publication of Notice. Publication of Notice shall be accomplished by the Community Development Director or their assignee, which shall place a legal notice in the City’s official newspaper. The legal notice shall be published in the newspaper at least 15 days prior to the public hearing.
2. Mailing of Notice. Mailing of notice shall be accomplished by the Community Development Director or their assignee.
a. Certified Mail. Notice shall be sent by certified mail to all adjoining property owners at least 15 days prior to the public hearing.
b. List to be created by Applicant. The list of all adjoining property owners’ names and addresses shall be created by the applicant, using the current Gunnison County Assessor’s records, and shall be submitted with the application. The list shall include all property owners within 100 feet of the subject property boundary. The applicant shall pay the certified postage for each name on the list to the Community Development Department.
c. Exception for General Amendments to Official Zoning Map. Creation of a list of adjoining property owners and mailing of notice shall not be required whenever the official zoning map is to be amended as part of a general revision of the LDC or as part of a City initiative to implement the Master Plan. Instead, a map illustrating the proposed amendment shall be published as part of the legal notice for the hearing. A copy of the proposed amended official zoning map shall be available for public inspection in City Hall during normal business hours at least 15 days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing.
d. Exception for Amendments to Land Development Code. Creation of a list of adjoining property owners and mailing of notice shall also not be required whenever the LDC is to be amended.
3. Posting of Notice. Posting of notice shall be accomplished by the applicant.
a. Conspicuous Location. The applicant shall post and maintain the notice in a conspicuous location on the subject property.
b. Duration. The sign shall be posted at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. The applicant shall maintain the sign in a legible manner until the closure of the public hearing and shall remove it on the day following closure of the public hearing.
c. Dimensions. The minimum dimensions of the sign shall be 18 inches by 24 inches.
d. Materials. The materials to which the notice form is affixed shall be sturdy and waterproof or shall have a waterproof covering.
e. Exception for Amendments to Land Development Code. Posting of notice shall not be
§6.8 STAGE 5: REVIEW BY DECISION-MAKING BODY
PAGE 6-8 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
required whenever the LDC is to be amended.
C. Content of Notice. Each notice shall contain the following information:
1. Name and Address. Name of the applicant and address or legal description of the property.
2. Type of Application. The type of development approval sought.
3. Date, Time and Place. The date, time, and place of the hearing and name of the decision-making body conducting the hearing.
4. Summary. A brief summary of the development proposal.
5. Other Information. Such other information as may be necessary to fully apprise the public about the application.
6. Vested Property Right. If the development is for a site-specific development for which the creation of vested property rights has been requested, the following statement shall appear: “Final approval of this development will create a vested property right pursuant to article 68 of title 24, C.R.S.”
D. Notice Deemed Valid. The Community Development Director and the applicant shall make all reasonable efforts to comply with the notice provisions set forth in this section. Notice shall be deemed valid if notice was mailed to all property owners, as listed on the last available tax assessment rolls, and if publication and posting has occurred in accord with §6.7 B.2 shall not be considered invalid because of unrecorded or subsequent transfers of title or uncertainties concerning ownership not discernible from the tax assessment rolls.
STAGE 5: REVIEW BY DECISION-MAKING BODY
A. Site Inspection. Prior to its meeting to consider the development application, the City may, as a group or through a committee appointed for that purpose, inspect the site of the proposed development. Upon reasonable request by the Community Development Director, the applicant shall mark the development site before the site visit is to occur to locate property boundaries, building envelopes and other key site development features.
B. Hearing Procedure. At its meeting to consider the development application, the decision-making body shall hear a presentation by the applicant, hear testimony from all members of the public in attendance wishing to speak, hear a presentation of the findings and recommendations of the Community Development Director, and hear responses from the applicant and staff. The decision-making body shall have the right to ask questions of any person presenting testimony at the hearing.
1. Burden on Applicant. The burden shall be on the applicant to demonstrate through competent evidence that the application will comply with all applicable provisions of this LDC, City of Gunnison Master Plan, and other provisions of the Gunnison Municipal Code.
2. Withdrawal of Application. An applicant shall have the right to withdraw an application at any time prior to action on the application by the decision-making body.
C. Action by Decision-Making Body. After hearing the evidence and considering the comments of all persons interested in the matter, the decision-making body shall make its decision and findings
§6.9 STAGE 6: ACTIONS FOLLOWING DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-9
and have them entered in its minutes. The decision-making body shall not be required to take final action on an application during the same meeting when testimony from interested persons is taken, but action shall be taken within 21 days of closing the public hearing.
1. Findings. In its findings, the decision-making body shall report the facts, whether the applicant has met the requirements of each applicable review standard, and whether the application is approved, approved with conditions, recommended for approval to another body, tabled pending receipt of additional information, or denied. An application that fails to comply with any applicable review standard shall be denied.
2. Written Action. Whenever a decision-making body grants or denies an application, it shall be specified in writing and the following will be forwarded to the applicant:
a. Code Sections. The section(s) and standards of this LDC used in evaluating the application;
b. Findings. Its findings of fact and conclusions regarding these review standards; and
c. Conditions. Conditions, if any, that will be imposed upon the application. Any representation made by the applicant shall be incorporated as a condition of approval.
D. Successive Applications. Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, whenever any application is denied for failure to meet the substantive requirements of this Land Development Code, no application for the same or similar development shall be considered for a period of one year after the date of denial, unless:
a. the applicant can demonstrate a change of circumstances or conditions as determined by the Community Development Director; or,
b. a majority of the members of the decision-making body that made the final decision on the application determines that the prior denial was based on a material mistake of fact.
E. Inactive Applications. The decision-making body shall deny any application which remains inactive. An application may be deemed inactive and be denied when the decision-making body determines that the applicant is not making reasonable progress in moving the application towards final approval.
1. Determination of Inactivity. A project shall be determined to be inactive if more than two months have passed since a request for additional information was made by the Community Development Director or the review body, and the request has not been complied with, or more than three months have passed since the last official contact by the applicant to the Community Development Director.
2. Written Notice. The Community Development Director shall provide advance written notice to the applicant stating the time, place, and date when the decision-making body will consider denial of the application due to its inactivity.
STAGE 6: ACTIONS FOLLOWING DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
A. File Required Documents. Following approval of the development application, the applicant shall
§6.9 STAGE 6: ACTIONS FOLLOWING DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
PAGE 6-10 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
submit to the Community Development Director all documents which are required as a condition of approval of the application, including, but not limited to, those documents which are to be recorded in the Office of the Gunnison County Clerk and Recorder, any performance bonds or other financial security measures which must be filed, and the applicable fee for document recordation. Documents must be received no later than 30 days after final approval otherwise, the Community Development Director shall process it as an inactive application pursuant to §6.8 E.2. The documents to be recorded may include, but are not limited to: a Final Plat, an improvements agreement, any other agreements, and any restrictions on the property which may have been agreed to during the review process.
B. Staff Review. The Community Development Director shall review the submitted documents and, if necessary, return them to the applicant for any necessary revisions prior to recordation. The Community Development Director may solicit the assistance and recommendations of the City Attorney, the City Engineer or any agency or organization which provided technical assistance during review of the site development application.
C. Recordation. The applicant shall make any requested revisions to the documents and file the revised documents with the community development director. The Community Development Director shall circulate the documents to obtain necessary signatures and deliver them to the office of the Gunnison County Clerk and Recorder for recordation.
D. Verification of Zoning Compliance. Before the applicant may obtain a building permit for the proposed site development or may change any existing use, the Community Development Director shall verify that the development or change of use complies with the standards of this LDC.
1. Proposal Follows Site Development Application. If the applicant is proposing site development following approval of a site development application, then the purpose of the zoning compliance verification shall be to determine that the permit application complies with the approval and any conditions imposed on the approval by the decision-making body, and otherwise complies with the applicable standards of this LDC.
2. Proposal Did Not Involve Development Application. The zoning compliance verification shall be to determine that the site development application complies with the applicable standards of this LDC.
3. Scale Drawings. The Community Development Director may require that the application for zoning compliance verification be accompanied by scale drawing(s) of existing and proposed site features. The drawing(s) shall indicate the shape, dimensions, and locations of lot boundaries, all existing and proposed structures and their intended uses and heights and setbacks; any proposed off-street parking areas, landscape areas and signs; and such other information as may be necessary to determine whether the proposal complies with the applicable standards of this LDC and any conditions of approval.
E. Vested Property Rights. If the applicant has obtained final approval of a site-specific development for which the applicant has requested the creation of vested property rights, the documents required as a condition of approval, including any documents to be recorded, shall state: “The approval of this site-specific development creates a vested property right pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S.”
§6.9 STAGE 6: ACTIONS FOLLOWING DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 6-11
1. Public Notice Following Action. Within 14 days of final approval of the site-specific development, the Community Development Director shall publish a notice in the designated newspaper of general circulation within the city advising the general public of the approval of the site-specific development and the creation of a vested property right pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S.
2. Duration. The final approval of a site-specific development, which creates a vested property right, shall remain in effect for a period of three years from the date of such approval, notwithstanding any shorter period of time contained within this LDC.
§6.9 STAGE 6: ACTIONS FOLLOWING DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
PAGE 6-12 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
§7.1 GENERAL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-1
Section 7. Conditional Uses
GENERAL
Conditional Uses are those land uses which are generally compatible with the permitted uses in a zone district, but which require site-specific review of their location, design, intensity, density, configuration, and operating characteristics, and which may require the imposition of appropriate conditions in order to ensure compatibility of the use at a particular location and mitigate its potentially adverse impacts. Only those uses authorized as a Conditional Use for each zone district in §2.4 may be approved as a Conditional Use.
PROCEDURE
An applicant requesting Conditional Use approval shall follow the stages of the City of Gunnison land development process outlined below.
A. Preapplication Conference. Attendance at a preapplication conference is optional, but recommended, for an applicant intending to submit an application for a Conditional Use permit.
B. Submit Application. The applicant shall submit a complete application to the Community Development Director containing those materials listed in §7.3 or §7.4, as applicable.
C. Staff Review. The Community Development Director shall review the application to determine whether it is complete, as specified in §6.6 A, Completeness Review. The Community Development Director shall forward a report to the Commission which summarizes the application’s compliance with the review standards contained in §7.5.
D. Review by External Consultants. The technical comments and professional recommendations of other agencies, organizations, and consultants may be solicited in drafting the report.
E. Public Notice. Public notice that the Commission will conduct a hearing to consider the application for a Conditional Use shall be provided as specified in §6.7, Stage 4: Provision of Public Notice.
F. Public Action by Commission. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing to review the conformance of the application with all applicable provisions of this LDC. The Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application, or remand it to the applicant with instructions for modification or additional information or action.
G. Actions Following Approval. The applicant may apply for a site development permit following approval of the Conditional Use permit and the filing and, if applicable, recordation of any documents required by the permit approval.
GENERAL CONTENTS OF A CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION
All Conditional Use applications, except those for a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, shall contain the following materials. A Conditional Use application for a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park shall contain those materials specified in §7.4.
A. Minimum Contents. The minimum contents for all applications specified in §6.5 C, Minimum Application Contents.
§7.4 APPLICATION CONTENTS -MOBILE HOME PARK OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK
PAGE 7-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
B. Site Plan. A site plan (with a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or alternate scale approved by the Director) of the subject property, showing existing and proposed features, buildings, roads, alleys, easements, utilities, wetlands, floodplains, etc., which are relevant to review of the Conditional Use application. Current land use of properties on all sides of the property and across streets and alleys must be included on the site plan or accompanying map.
C. Other Information. The Community Development Director may request the applicant to submit such other information as is necessary to evaluate the impacts of the Conditional Use application. Examples of the information which may be requested are elevation views of proposed new or remodeled structures, analysis of the traffic impacts of the proposed use, or evaluation of the environmental impacts of the proposed use.
APPLICATION CONTENTS -MOBILE HOME PARK OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK
A Conditional Use application for a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park shall contain the following materials:
A. Minimum Contents. The minimum contents for all applications specified in §6.5 C, Minimum Application Contents.
B. Site Plan. A site plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or such other scale as is approved by the Community Development Director, showing:
1. Site Dimensions. Site dimensions and boundaries.
2. Utilities. The location, size, and use of all utilities, utility easements, and other site improvements, such as lighting and trash disposal, proposed to be constructed within the park.
3. Roads. The location, width, and proposed standards for roads, sidewalks, and other paths.
4. Spaces. The location, size, classification, and designated use of all mobile home or recreational vehicle spaces.
5. Common Areas. The location and size of parking lots and spaces, recreation and open space areas and proposed landscaping improvements to the same.
6. Buildings and Accessory Structures. The location, size, and height of buildings and accessory structures and a description of the proposed use of those buildings and structures, including the location and floor plan of proposed service buildings.
C. Grading and Drainage Plans. At the discretion of the Community Development Director, grading and drainage plans showing and describing the existing and proposed means of handling on-site drainage.
D. Utilities. A written description of the general manner in which water supply, sewage disposal, electric supply, natural gas, storm water drainage, telephone, street lighting, irrigation water, cable television (if appropriate), and trash collection services will be provided to the park.
REVIEW STANDARDS
An application for Conditional Use approval shall comply with the following standards:
§7.6 TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL USES STANDARDS.
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-3
A. Consistency with Master Plan. The use shall be consistent with the City of Gunnison Master Plan.
B. Conformance to Codes. The use shall conform to all other applicable provisions of this LDC and the City of Gunnison Municipal Code, including, but not limited to:
1. Zoning District Standards. The purpose of the zone district in which it is located, the dimensional standards of that zone district §2.4 (Principal Use Tables) and §2.6 (Base Zone District Dimensional Standards).
2. Specific Use Regulations. All Conditional Use applications shall comply with all applicable Special Use Regulations set forth in Section 3 of this LDC.
3. General Development Standards. All Conditional Use applications shall comply with all applicable regulations, criteria and standards set forth in Section 4 of this LDC.
4. Natural Resource Protection Standards. All Conditional Use applications shall comply with all applicable regulations, criteria and standards set forth in Section 5, Natural Resource Protection Standards, of this LDC.
C. Use Appropriate and Compatible. The use shall be appropriate to its proposed location and be compatible with the character of neighboring uses, or enhance the mixture of complementary uses and activities in the immediate vicinity.
D. Traffic. The use shall not cause undue traffic congestion, dangerous traffic conditions or incompatible service delivery, parking or loading problems. Necessary mitigating measures shall be proposed by the applicant.
E. Nuisance. The operating characteristics of the use shall not create a nuisance and the impacts of the use on surrounding properties shall be minimized with respect to noise, odors, vibrations, glare, and similar conditions.
F. Facilities. There shall be adequate public facilities in place to serve the proposed use, or the applicant shall propose necessary improvements to address service deficiencies which the use would cause.
G. Environment. The use shall not cause significant deterioration to water resources, stormwater volume and quality, wetlands, wildlife habitat, scenic characteristics, or other natural features. As applicable, the proposed use shall mitigate its adverse impacts on the environment.
TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL USES STANDARDS.
In addition to the Conditional Use Review Standards (§7.5), temporary commercial activities shall comply with criteria and standards established in §3.13 C. of this LDC.
COMMISSION AUTHORIZED TO IMPOSE CONDITIONS
The Community Development Director may recommend, and the Commission may impose, such conditions as are necessary to maintain the integrity of the City’s zone districts, to ensure the use is
§7.8 EXPIRATION OF CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL
PAGE 7-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
consistent with the City of Gunnison Master Plan, conforms with this LDC, is appropriate to its location and compatible with neighboring uses, is served by adequate public facilities and does not cause undue traffic congestion or significant deterioration of the environment. Authorized conditions include, but are not limited to:
A. Site Planning Features. Limitations or requirements regarding the area, height, setbacks, open space, landscaping, impermeable surface coverage, buffering, lighting, fencing, signage, off-street parking, and similar site planning features of the proposal.
B. Public Facilities. Requirements to improve public facilities which are necessary to serve the Conditional Use.
C. Operations. Limitations or requirements on the operating characteristics of the use or the duration of the Conditional Use approval.
D. Performance Guarantee. As applicable, the Commission may require the applicant to post a financial guarantee, before development of the Conditional Use is initiated, to ensure performance of the conditions it has imposed.
1. File Surety or Bond. The applicant shall file with the City a surety or cash bond, letter of credit or other collateral found to be suitable by the City Attorney, in the amount specified by the Commission, to ensure the actual construction of required improvements or the installation of required landscaping within that period of time which the Commission has specified.
2. Certification and Release. Upon completion of the required improvements or installation of the required landscaping, the applicant shall provide certification from a licensed professional engineer or landscape professional, as applicable, that the improvements or landscaping have been installed in conformance with the approved plan. The security shall be released within seven calendar days following receipt of an acceptable certification, and inspection by the City.
3. City Use of Security. In the event the improvements or landscaping are not installed, or are installed in a manner which does not conform with the approved plan, the City may draw upon the security to bring the improvements or landscaping into conformance with the approved plan or, if development was initiated, but never carried through to completion, to return the site to its predevelopment condition.
EXPIRATION OF CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL
A. Time Limit. At the time that the Commission grants a Conditional Use approval, it shall identify the time period for completion of the Conditional Use. In no case shall this time period exceed three years from the date of approval. If the action is not completed within this time period, the Conditional Use approval shall automatically expire.
B. Extension. The applicant may submit a request to the Community Development Director to extend the Conditional Use approval. The extension request shall be submitted prior to the date of expiration and shall specify the reasons why the development has not been completed to date. The approval shall be deemed extended until the Commission has acted upon the request for extension at a meeting as a regular agenda item. The Commission shall be authorized to extend the approval, by a period of up to one year, and to impose additional conditions if necessary.
§7.9 INSUBSTANTIAL CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED CONDITIONAL USE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 7-5
INSUBSTANTIAL CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED CONDITIONAL USE
A. Insubstantial Changes. Insubstantial changes to a development approval for a Conditional Use may be approved by the Community Development Director. An Insubstantial Change is one that becomes necessary due to technical or engineering considerations discovered during actual development, or operational characteristics discovered after the use is developed, that could not reasonably be anticipated during its initial review and that, in the discretion of the Community Development Director, do not significantly change the original approval granted.
B. Amendments. All deviations from the original approval which do not qualify as an insubstantial change shall be considered an amendment to the original approval. Amendment of an approved Conditional Use shall only be approved by the Commission pursuant to §7.2 (Procedure).
§7.9 INSUBSTANTIAL CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED CONDITIONAL USE
PAGE 7-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
§8.1 GENERAL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 8-1
Section 8. Variances
GENERAL
A. Purpose. This Section defines the procedures and required showing to obtain a Variance from the standards of this LDC. Variances are authorizations to deviate from the literal terms of this LDC that would not be contrary to the public interest in cases where the literal enforcement of the provisions of this LDC would result in undue or unnecessary hardship. A Variance shall not be granted solely because of the presence of nonconformities in the zone district or adjoining zone districts.
B. Use Variances Not Authorized. Establishment or expansion of uses prohibited in zone districts as identified in Table 2-3 of the LDC shall not be allowed by Variance.
C. Dimensional Standards Variances Authorized. Variance from the dimensional standards of the underlying zone district shall be authorized only for minimum lot area, maximum height, minimum floor area, minimum building width, maximum lot coverage, minimum setbacks, maximum setbacks, parking requirements, minimum landscape area, and buffer width (Ordinance #8, Series 2016).
PROCEDURES
A. Development Review. An applicant requesting a Variance shall follow the stages of the City of Gunnison land development process as described in §6.3.
B. Submit Application. The applicant shall submit a complete application to the Community Development Director containing those materials listed in §6.5 C, Minimum Application Contents.
C. Staff Review. The Community Development Director shall review the application to determine whether it is complete, as specified in §6.6 A., Completeness Review. The Community Development Director shall forward a report to the decision-making body which summarizes the application’s compliance with the conditions outlined in §8.3, Required Showing. The Community Development Director may solicit the assistance of other agencies and organizations in drafting the report.
D. Public Notice. Public notice that the Zoning Board of Adjustments and Appeals (Board) will conduct a hearing to consider the application for a Variance shall be provided as specified in §6.7, Stage 4: Provision of Public Notice.
E. Public Action by Board. The Zoning Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall hold a public hearing to review the conformance of the application with all applicable provisions of this Land Development Code. The Board may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application or remand it to the applicant with instructions for modification or additional information or action. The Board shall deny any application that does not demonstrate the required showing set forth in §8.3, Required Showing.
F. Actions Following Approval. The applicant may apply for a building permit following approval of the Variance and the filing and, if applicable, recordation of any documents required by the Variance approval.
REQUIRED SHOWING – DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS VARIANCE
§8.4 BOARD AUTHORIZED TO IMPOSE CONDITIONS
PAGE 8-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
The applicant shall demonstrate the following to the Board before a Variance may be authorized:
A. Special Circumstances Exist. Special circumstances or conditions, which are peculiar to the land or building for which the variance is sought, that do not apply generally to land or buildings in the neighborhood;
B. Not Result of Applicant. The special circumstances and conditions that are not the result from any act of the applicant;
C. Strict Application Deprives Reasonable Use. The special circumstances and conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this LDC would deprive the applicant of reasonable use of the land or building;
D. Variance is Necessary to Provide Reasonable Use. The granting of the Variance is necessary to provide the applicant a reasonable use of the land or building;
E. Minimum Variance. The granting of the Variance is the minimum necessary to make possible the reasonable use of the land or building;
F. Not Injurious to Neighborhood. The granting of the Variance will not be injurious to the neighborhood surrounding the land where the Variance is proposed, and is otherwise not detrimental to the public welfare or the environment; and
G. Consistent with Land Development Code. The granting of the Variance is consistent with the general purposes and intent of this LDC.
BOARD AUTHORIZED TO IMPOSE CONDITIONS
The Board, in approving the Variance, may impose such restrictions and conditions on such approval, and the premises to be developed or used pursuant to such approval, as it determines are required to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed Variance on other land in the neighborhood and on the general health, safety, and welfare of the City. All conditions imposed upon any Variance shall be set forth in the granting of such Variance.
EXPIRATION OF APPROVED VARIANCE
A. Time Limit. All Variances shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance if no site development permit has been issued to establish the variation authorized, or if the variation does not require a site development permit, unless the variation is established, ongoing, and in operation. Such time period shall not be altered by transfer of ownership.
B. Extension. Upon written request, the Board may grant an extension of the Variance for a period not to exceed six months given reasonable justification. No request for an extension shall be considered unless a written application requesting the extension is submitted to the Community Development Director prior to the date the Variance is to expire. The Variance shall be deemed extended until the Board has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this Section shall render the Variance null and void.
AMENDMENT OF APPROVED VARIANCE
Amendment of an approved Variance that does not have substantive changes may be approved by the Community Development Director. Otherwise, amendment of an approved Variance shall only be approved by the Board by repetition of the procedures and required showing of this Section.
§9.1 GENERAL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-1
Section 9. Development Standard Waivers
GENERAL
A. Purpose. This Section defines the procedures and required showing to obtain waivers from the standards established in Section 4, General Development Standards, and Section 5, Natural Resource Protection Standards. Waivers are authorizations to differ from the literal terms of established standards that would not be contrary to the public interest in cases, where the literal application from the standards are warranted by site factors, or where alternative designs are proposed that meet the purposes of this LDC.
B. Applicability. Waivers may be granted pursuant to Table 9-1 Decision-Making for Waivers.Waivers shall not be authorized for standards that are subject to a Variance review. Where a standard is determined that is not contained in the list, the Community Development Director may make an administrative determination or at the Director’s discretion forward the Waiver application to the Commission. Waivers are a discretionary act by the City and shall not be construed to be a land use right of a property owner.
C. Decision Making Body and Development Review. The decision-making body for Waivers of specific standards is assigned in Table 9-1 and pursuant to the following guidelines.
1. City Council Waivers. Waivers assigned for City Council consideration are related to major and minor subdivision reviews and will be considered as part of the subdivision review process. Waivers from subdivision-related standards must be submitted at the time of Preliminary Plan application pursuant to §9.3. Waivers for subdivision-related standards are subject to Final Plat approval.
2. Planning and Zoning Commission Waivers. Waivers that are determined administratively by staff are related to Site Development Applications. Waivers determined by the Commission and/or recommended to City Council by the Commission, are acted upon as a public hearing agenda item at a scheduled meeting. The administrative review follows all of the procedures set forth in §9.3 with the exception of item D, Public Notice. Waivers may be approved in conjunction with processing site development applications, land use development applications, including subdivision applications, as defined in §6.2.A of this LDC (Ordinance #3, Series 2015)(Ordinance #3, Series 2016).
APPLICATION CONTENTS
Formal requests for Waiver from the standards, policies or submittal requirements of these criteria shall be submitted with appropriate documentation. In addition to the minimum contents for all applications specified in §6.5 C, Minimum Application Contents, the application shall contain:
A. a site plan of the subject property, showing existing and proposed features, buildings, etc., which are relevant to the review of the waiver application;
B. citation of the specific section and subsection containing the standards for which the waiver is being requested, including the specific language of the related standard;
C. citation of the reasons, site conditions or issues with the required standard and how an alternative design meets the purposes of the LDC; and,
§9.3 PROCEDURES AND PROCESS
PAGE 9-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
D. definition of alternative(s) being proposed for the waiver, if applicable, and any supporting documentation, including mapping, technical literature, necessary calculations, engineering or site plan design data that graphically or analytically depict the alternative standards to be applied, and provides justification for the Waiver request; and
E. any other pertinent information that the Community Development Director determines is necessary to enable the decision-making body to make an informed decision on the waiver request.
PROCEDURES AND PROCESS
A. Development Review. An applicant requesting a waiver shall follow the stages of the City of Gunnison land development process as described in §6.3.
B. Submit Application. The applicant shall submit a complete application to the Community Development Director containing those materials listed in §6.5 C, Minimum Application Contents, and in §9.2.
C. Staff Review. The Community Development Director shall review the application to determine whether it is complete, as specified in §6.6 A., Completeness Review. The Community Development Director shall forward a report which summarizes the application’s compliance with the conditions outlined in §9.4 to the decision-making authority. The Community Development Director may solicit the assistance of other agencies and organizations in drafting the report.
D. Public Notice. Any waiver request that comes before the City Council and/or Commission shall require public notice for a hearing to consider the application for a waiver as specified in §6.7, Stage 4: Provision of Public Notice.
E. Action by Decision-Making Authority. The Commission or other decision-making authority may approve, approve with conditions, deny the application or remand it to the applicant with instructions for modification or additional information or action.
F. Actions Following Approval. The applicant may apply for a development permit following approval of the waiver and the filing and, if applicable, recordation of any documents required by the waiver approval.
REVIEW CRITERIA
All waiver application approvals shall be found to be in compliance with the following General Criteria (A) and the criteria established for the relevant code sections applicable to the waiver request (B through N, below).
A. General Criteria
1. consistent with the City of Gunnison Master Plan;
2. approval of the waiver will not jeopardize the community’s health safety and welfare;
3. there are special circumstances or conditions which are peculiar to the land or building for which the Waiver is sought that is more suitable, functional, or is a better site design;
4. no Waiver shall result in a detriment to City services in terms of service function, general maintenance restrictions, and increased City costs for service and maintenance;
§9.4 REVIEW CRITERIA
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-3
5. the developer is responsible for all development costs unless shared costs are determined by City Council;
6. no Waiver shall be approved that is in conflict with any prevailing State or Federal law or regulation;
7. the granting of the Waiver will not be injurious to the neighborhood surrounding the land where the waiver is proposed, and is otherwise not detrimental to the public welfare or the environment;
8. no Waiver will negatively affect the promulgation of any other development standard of this LDC.
B. Adequate Public Facilities (§4.1)
1. The design, materials, and construction methods are equal or superior to existing standards.
2. The long term City maintenance restrictions or costs, and the facility design-life will not be diminished by approval of the Waiver.
3. The level of service provided by the Waiver is consistent with existing standards.
C. Road Construction Standards (§4.2)
1. The design, materials, and construction methods are equal or superior to existing standards.
2. Long term City maintenance restrictions, maintenance costs, and the utility/facility design-life will not be diminished by approval of the Waiver.
3. The level of service provided by the Waiver is consistent with existing standards.
4. Adequate rights-of-way and easements are established for the installation and maintenance of public utilities and services.
5. Transportation system functions will be efficient and safe.
6. The resulting streetscape will provide adequate light, air and area for landscaping and buffers.
7. The development of non-motorized circulation facilities will not be diminished by approval of the Waiver.
D. General Site Access (§4.3)
1. Waivers from general site access standards shall not create an unsafe design for the ingress or egress of vehicles and non-motorized transportation functions.
2. Long-term City maintenance restrictions, maintenance costs, and the utility/facility design-life will not be diminished by approval of the Waiver.
3. Waivers for properties fronting highways will not be granted if a State Highway Access Permit is
§9.4 REVIEW CRITERIA
PAGE 9-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
required, unless they are in conjunction with a CDOT permit approval.
4. Waivers shall not be approved if the result requires vehicles to back onto streets.
5. Waivers will not diminish the function of sidewalks, accessways or multi-use trails.
6. Waivers will not result in a situation that precludes access to an adjacent property.
E. Off-Street Parking and Loading (§4.4)
1. Any Waiver requesting a reduction of the number of parking spaces shall be based on established demand factors from the Institute of Traffic Engineers or reliable data collected from uses or combination of uses that are comparable with the proposed development.
2. Waivers shall not be approved that reduce the minimum requirements for disabled accessibility.
3. Waivers that affect the location of parking and reduce the required buffer width shall only be allowed if an alternative landscape design provides adequate buffering, or the use of the property is significantly diminished without a Waiver.
4. Waivers will not diminish the function of sidewalks, accessways or multi-use trails.
F. Pedestrian Circulation Facilities (§4.5)
1. The Waiver is needed because the physical characteristics of the property or other circumstances including but not limited to topography, protecting wetlands and/or critical habitat.
2. Alternative design, specifications and layout provide safe, efficient and functional pedestrian circulation.
3. The Waiver does not preclude the extension of major sidewalk systems and multi-use trails designed in the City of Gunnison Non-Motorized Transportation Plan.
4. The Waiver is not contrary to requirements established by the Americans with Disabilities Act.
G. Landscaping, Buffer and Screening (§4.6)
1. Alternative design, specifications and layout are set forth in a detailed landscape plan that satisfies the purpose and intent of the landscape, buffering and screening standards.
2. Reductions from the required buffer setbacks shall only be allowed if an alternative landscape design provides adequate buffering, or the use of the property is significantly diminished without a waiver due to rights-of-way width, road section constraints or lot dimensions.
3. Waivers from buffer dimensional standards that protect residential property from non-residential property are not permitted unless it is found that the denial of the Waiver would render the property undevelopable.
4. The Waiver is necessary for the placement of public utilities, public ditches, or stormwater
§9.4 REVIEW CRITERIA
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-5
facilities, and in which case an alternative buffer/landscape plan is proposed that fulfills the requirements to the maximum extent feasible.
5. Waiver from plant species types do not permit or create situations causing the proliferation of noxious weeds.
6. Waivers that preclude required site restoration or revegetation of disturbed areas shall not be granted.
7. Waivers from fences and walls shall not interfere with street or driveway site distance requirements required by the LDC.
8. Fence and wall Waivers shall not result in the use of plywood or sheet metal.
9. Waivers from service area screening shall not create a visual detriment to adjacent residential uses or from view of any public street.
H. Outdoor Storage and Display (§4.7)
1. Waivers shall not impede ingress, egress or access for fire and emergency response personnel.
2. Waivers shall not impede access and circulation or reduce the required number of parking spaces.
3. Outdoor displays on the required landscape areas shall not result in the damage of vegetation.
4. Waivers shall not interfere with intersection site distance requirements established in the LDC.
5. Waivers shall not permit the display or storage of any feature in the public rights-of-way.
6. Waiver of outdoor storage and display within the front yard setback shall not permit the display or storage of any feature exceeding 15 feet in height.
I. Outdoor Lighting (§4.9)
1. Waivers shall not be granted if it will result in an illumination that interferes with the use or enjoyment of any lot in a residential zone district.
2. The maximum light trespass shall be 0.5 foot-candles of light at a point 25 feet from the property line of any residential zone district.
3. Unique security or public safety may warrant approval of a Waiver, but mitigating impact to any adjacent residential lots must be provided.
J. Large Scale Retail (§4.10)
1. Any Waiver associated with a single building site development plan shall meet the intent statements found in §4.10C of the LDC.
2. Any Waiver associated with multiple building site development plan shall meet the intent statement found in §4.10 E of the LDC.
§9.4 REVIEW CRITERIA
PAGE 9-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
3. Any Waiver associated with building design shall meet the intent statement found in §4.10 J of the LDC.
4. All Waiver requests shall comply with §14.6 Design Review Standard Objectives.
5. Waivers will be considered based on compliance with the following criteria:
a. Boundaries, Easement, or Title Constraints. If an easement or a legal or physical hardship would prevent the building of a structure pursuant to site development standards, a Waiver may be approved; provided, that the approved Waiver is the minimum necessary to accommodate the hardship.
b. Public Outdoor Space Development. In order to form an outdoor space such as a plaza, courtyard, patio, or garden between a building and the sidewalk, a Waiver may be approved; provided, that the street yard area shall have landscaping, low walls, a tree canopy or other similar site improvements along the sidewalk designed for pedestrian interest, comfort, and visual continuity.
c. Number and Design of Parking Spaces. A Waiver of the required number and/or design of parking spaces may be approved; provided, that the need for existing and future parking is addressed; and the configuration provides for the safety of pedestrians and vehicles.
d. Orientation. A Waiver may be approved where it is shown that the change in orientation will not adversely affect the overall appearance of the development.
e. Water, Air Quality, and Energy Conservation. A Waiver may be approved where it is shown that water, air quality, and/or energy conservation will be enhanced. However, a water conservation Waiver shall not be used to limit or eliminate vegetation cover.
f. Vehicular Transportation and Circulation. A Waiver may be approved where it is consistent with the approved transportation impact study.
g. Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering.A Waiver may be approved where the change from design review standards will mitigate adverse impacts to adjoining uses.
h. Building Design Standards.A Waiver may be approved for §4.10 J.2, Ground Floor Façades; §4.10 J.3, Articulation, and §4.10 M., Materials and Colors. The request must include a description of the alternative elements that will be used to break up larger building mass and emphasize pedestrian scale, show an obvious contrast in building wall planes and justify the preference for alternative materials and colors.
K. Stormwater Management (§5.1)
1. There is adequate area for construction and long-term maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
2. The Waiver results in a system of facilities that adequately reduce runoff volumes, slows runoff velocity and provides water quality treatment meeting State and Federal water quality standards.
§9.5 DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-7
3. The Waiver will not jeopardize channel stabilization.
4. The Waiver does not violate State or Federal laws.
5. The Waiver is the minimum necessary and does not jeopardize the community’s health, safety or welfare.
L. Slope Protection Standards (§5.2)
1. The development conforms to the other development, site design and environmental standards set forth in the LDC.
M. Grading and Erosion Control (§5.3)
1. Waivers that increase the limit of natural grade change shall not create unstable slopes or slopes prone to excessive erosion.
2. Waivers that increase the limit of natural grade change shall only occur if it is determined that adequate emergency access is provided.
3. Waivers that increase the limit of natural grade change shall not be in conflict with slope protection standards unless application of grading standards renders the site undevelopable.
4. Wavier from erosion control standards shall only be allowed if alternative construction best management practices are proposed that mitigate erosion and stormwater runoff impacts to the maximum extent feasible.
5. Waivers from the Limits of Disturbance shall include a program for the complete restoration of the disturbed area in a timely manner.
N. Wetland and Stream Corridor Protection (§5.4)
1. Waivers from wetland and stream corridor protection standards shall not be in conflict with wetland protection regulations promulgated by the Army Corps of Engineers and Floodplain Protections Standards adopted by the City.
2. Waivers from ditch setbacks are subject to written approval of all ditch owners.
3. Waivers from buffer and setback areas shall only be approved if it is determined that application of a buffer/setback standard renders the site undevelopable.
DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY
The decision-making authority has no obligation to approve a Waiver, and may impose restrictions and conditions on approvals, as determined required to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed Waivers on neighboring land and on the general health, safety and welfare of the City. All conditions shall be set forth in the granting of such waiver. A written copy of all administrative waivers will be forwarded to the Commission and City Council.
§9.6 EXPIRATION OF APPROVED WAIVER
PAGE 9-8 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
EXPIRATION OF APPROVED WAIVER
A. Time Limit. All Waivers shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance if no site development permit has been issued. If the Waiver does not require a development permit, site improvements associated with the Waiver shall be complete and in operation within the allotted time. Such time period shall not be altered by transfer of ownership.
B. Notification. Written notice of expiration will be given to the owner of record no less than 30 days from the expiration date.
C. Extension. Upon written request, the decision-making body may grant an extension of the Waiver for a period not to exceed six months given reasonable justification. No request for an extension shall be considered unless a written application requesting the extension is submitted to the Community Development Director prior to the date the Waiver is to expire. The Waiver shall be deemed extended until the decision-making authority has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this Section shall render the Waiver null and void.
APPEALS
A. Waivers that are determined administratively by the Community Development Director or staff may be appealed by the applicant to the Commission.
B. The appeal shall be in the form of a written letter of appeal submitted to the Community Development Director within 30 days of the date the waiver decision was made. The Commission may affirm, modify, reverse or remand the application with specific directions.
C. The Planning and Zoning Commission decisions are final with no appeal.
DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS §4.1 Adequate Public Facilities
§4.1 C.1. Approval Conditioned Upon Adequate Public Facilities
√ §4.1D Sewage Disposal
§4.1 D.1 Level of Service
rec
√
§4.1 D.2 Criteria for New Development
§4.1 D.3 Minimum Approval Requirements
√ §4.1 E.Water
§4.1 E.1 Level of Service
rec
√
§4.1 E.2 Minimum Approval Requirements
√ §4.1 F. Drainage/Water Quality Management
§4.1 F.1 Level of Service
rec
√
§4.1 F.2 Minimum Approval Requirements
√ §4.1 G Fire Protection
§4.1 G.1 Level of Service
√
§4.1 G.3 Minimum Approval Requirements
√
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-9
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS §4.1 H. Transportation
§4.1 H.1.a Level of Service-General Standard
rec
√
§4.1 H.1.b Level of Service-Waiver
rec
√
§4.1 H.1.c. Access to Development in all Zone districts
rec
√
§4.1 H.3.a–e Traffic Impact Analysis Contents
√
§4.1 H.4. Minimum Approval Requirements
√
§4.1 H.5. Pedestrian Circulation
§4.1 H.5.a. Level of Service
√
§4.1 H.5.b. Criteria for New Development or Redevelopment
rec
√
§4.1 H.5.c. Minimum Approval Requirements
rec
√ §4.1 I. Electricity
§4.1 I.2. Criteria for New Development
rec
√
§4.1 I.3. Minimum Approval Requirements
√ §4.1 J. Irrigation System
§4.1 J.2. Criteria for New Development
rec
√
may only be granted if the extension of the irrigation is impractical
§4.1 J.3. Minimum Approval Requirements
rec
√ §4.2 Road Construction Standards §4.2A. General Road Construction Standards
§4.2 A.4. Other Standards of Construction
rec
√
§4.2 A.5. Construction Approval
rec
√
§4.2 A.6. Typical Cross-Sections
rec
√
§4.2 A.8 Street Designations
rec
√
§4.2 A.9. Repairs and Restoration
PW Director §4.2 B. Streets
§4.2 B.1.Street Construction and Design Specifications.
rec
√
§4.2 B.2. Sub-local Streets
rec
√
§4.2 B.3. Street Sections and Rights-of-Way Width
rec
√
§4.2 B.4. Shoulders
PW Director
§4.2 B.5. Bike Lanes
rec
√
§4.2 B.6. Street Sub-Grade and Asphalt Standards
PW Director
§4.2 B.8. Private Streets
rec
√ §4.2 C. Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-End Streets
§4.2 C.1. Where Allowed
rec
√
Only where terrain or site constraints preclude connectivity
§4.2 C.2. Length
rec
√
§4.2 C.3. Number of Vehicle Trips per Day
rec
√ §4.2 D. Street Intersections
rec
√
§4.2 D.1. Curb Radii
rec
√
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
PAGE 9-10 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS
§4.2 D.2. Sight Distance
rec
√
§4.2 D.3. Intersection Grade Standards
rec
√ §4.2 E. Vertical Alignment
§4.2 E.2. Street Grades
rec
√
§4.2 E.3. Street Grade Changes
rec
√ §4.2 F. Horizontal Alignment
§4.2 F.1. Street Horizontal Alignment
rec
√
§4.2 F.2. Minimum radii of curvature
rec
√
§4.2 F.3. Clear visibility measure
rec
√
§4.2 F.4. Reverse curve tangent
rec
√ §4.2 G. Cross Slope
rec
√ §4.2 H. Curb and Gutter
rec
√ §4.2 I. Street Dedication
§4.2 I.1. Dead-end streets
rec
√
§4.2 I.2. Street construction and right-of-way connections
rec
√
§4.2 I.3. Rights-of-way abutting unincorporated property
rec
√ §4.2 J. Acceptance of Public Dedicated Streets and Other Public Utilities
§4.2 J.1. Acceptance Timing and Season
PW Director §4.2 K. Partial-Width Street
rec
√ §4.2 L. Additional Rights-of-Way
√ §4.2 M. Street Paving and Signs
rec
√ §4.2 N. Roadside Delineators
PW Director §4.2 O. Erosion Control
rec
√ §4.2 P. Clustered Mail Box
√ §4.3 General Site Access §4.3 A. Access to Public Roads
√ §4.3 B. Driveway Access - General Standards
§4.3 B.1.a. Limits on Curb Cuts
√
PW Director
§4.3 B.1.b. On State Highways
√
§4.3 B.1.c Arterial Streets
√ §4.3 C. Backing Prohibited
√ §4.3 D. Shared Driveways
√
§4.3 D.2. May be on Property Line
√
§4.3 D.3. Maintenance Agreement Required
√
§4.3 D.4. Multi-family Access Threshold
√ §4.3 E. Corner Lots
√ §4.3 F Property Lines
√ §4.3 G Driveway Alignments
√ §4.3 H Driveway Opening Requirements
√ §4.3 I Driveway Spacing
√
§4.3 I.1. Arterial Streets
√
§4.3 I.2. Collector Streets
√
§4.3 I.3. Local and Sub-Local Streets
√
§4.3 I.3.a. Residential Drive Spacing
√ §4.3 J. Driveway Design Standards
§4.3 J.1 Surface Material Standards
√
§4.3 J.1.a. For 5+ parking spaces
√
§4.3 J.1.b. For 20+ parking spaces
√
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-11
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS
§4.3 J.1.c. Apron length where garage is used as parking
√ §4.3 J.2 Geometric Design Standards
§4.3 J.2.a. Residential driveways maximum 8% grade
√
§4.3 J.2.b. Nonresidential driveways maximum 6% grade
√
§4.3 J.2.c. Grades for driveways within 20 feet of intersection
√
§4.3 J.2.d. Follow natural contours
√
§4.3 J.2.e. Stacking space for nonresidential driveways
√
§4.3 J.3. Other Driveway Construction Standards
√
§4.3 J.3.a. Driveway within property line and street
√
§4.3 J.3.b. Angle at Intersection
√
§4.3 J.3.c.Driveway grading and drainage
√
§4.3 J.3.d. Drainage in the R-O-W
√
§4.3 J.3.e. When paving is required
√
§4.3 J.3.f. When concrete pan is required
√
§4.3 J.3.g. Single-family drive sidewalk depth
√
§4.3 J.3.h. Multi-family or commercial drive sidewalk depth
√
§4.3 J.3.i. Access for driveways serving 8+
√
§4.3 J.3.j. Culvert length under driveway
√
§4.3 J.3.k. Replacement Standards for sidewalks
√
§4.3 J.3.l. Replacement standards for curb and gutter
√
§4.3 J.3.m. Standards for new construction abutting existing sidewalks and asphalt
√
§4.3 J.3.n. Standards for gated access
√
§4.3 J.4. Intersection and Driveway Visibility
√
§4.3 J.4.a. Intersection
√
§4.3 J.4.b. Driveway Sight Visibility
√
§4.3 J.4.c. Visibility for driveways serving 20+ parking spaces
√ §4.4 Off-street Parking and Loading §4.4 B. Applicability
§4.4 B.1. No CO until requirements met
√
§4.4 B.2. Requirements for modified off-street parking and loading facilities
√
§4.4 B.3. Site plan required for development with 4+ spaces
√
§4.4 B.4. Grandfather clause for parking and loading if no increase in floor area or change of use.
√
§4.4 B.5. Parking requirements for projects with increased floor area or change of use
√
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
PAGE 9-12 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS
§4.4 B.6. Requirements for residential/bed and breakfast approved through Conditional Use in CBD.
√ §4.4 C. Parking Calculation Provisions
§4.4 C.1. For Developments Containing More than One Use. Developments containing more than one use shall provide parking spaces in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses.
√
ZBAA or CD Director if 20% reduction is OK §4.4 D. Minimum Off-Street Parking
√
ZBAA or CD Director if 20% reduction is OK
§4.4 D.1.a Disabled Access Parking
√
§4.4 D.1.b ADA Parking Signage
√ §4.4 D.2. Maximum Requirement and Shared Use Reduction
§4.4 D.2.a. Not more than 110% of required parking allowed
√
§4.4 D.4. Parking Stall and Aisle Dimensions.
√ §4.4 E. Location
§4.4 E.1. Off-street parking on same parcel as principal use
√
§4.4 E.2. Setbacks in non-residential zone districts
√
§4.4 E.3. Setbacks for multi-family development
√
§4.4 E.6. Buffers for off-street parking
√ §4.4 F. Driveway Access for off-street parking serving 8+ stalls §4.4 F.1. Dimensions
§4.4 F.1.a. 6% maximum grade
√
§4.4 F.1.b. Parking spaces using non-conforming standards must be developed by a licensed engineer.
√
§4.4 F.2. Surfacing
√
§4.4 F.3. Curbs and Wheel Stops
√
§4.4 F.3.a. 6" curb to protect landscaping
√
§4.4 F. 3.b. No landscaping >12" within 2' of curb
√
§4.4 F.4. Separation from Walkways and Streets
√
§4.4 F.7. Backing Prohibited
√
§4.4 F.8. Tandem Parking
√
§4.4 F.9.a Snow Storage Area
√
§4.4 F.9.b Storage in Parking Spaces Prohibited
√
§4.4 F.9.d Drainage
√
§4.4 F.10 Bicycle Racks
√ §4.4 G.1. Prohibited Uses of Required Spaces
√
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-13
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS §4.4 H. Space for Customer Drop-Off of Shopping Carts
√ §4.4 I. Off-site and Shared Parking Standards
§4.4 I.1. On-Street Parking
√
§4.4 I.2. Off-Site Parking
√
§4.4 I.2.a. Ineligible Activities
√
§4.4 I.2.b. Location
√
§4.4 I.2.c. Zoning Classification
√
§4.4 I.2.d. Agreement
√
§4.4 I.3. Shared Parking
√ §4.4 J. Vehicle Stacking Requirements
√
§4.4 J.1. Minimum Number of Spaces
√
§4.4 J.2. Design and Layout
√ §4.4 K. Off-Street Loading Requirements
√
§4.4 K.1.a. Loading Dock Dimensions
√
§4.4 K.2. Location and Layout
√
§4.4 K.2.a Must be on-site
√
§4.4 K.2.b. Not in required setback
√
§4.4 K.2.c. Not in parking aisle or access dimension
√
§4.4 K.2.d. Screening required
√
§4.4 K.2.e. Accessible without backing across street
√
§4.4 K.2.f. Shall not obstruct access to parking, sidewalks, roads, or fire lanes
√ §4.5 Pedestrian Circulation Facilities §4.5 A. Applicability §4.5 A.1. For new development
rec
√ §4.5 B. Types of Pedestrian Circulation Facilities
§4.5 B.1. Sidewalks
√
§4.5 B.2. Accessways
√
§4.5 B.3. Multi-Use Trails
√ §4.5 C. Pedestrian Linkage Requirements
§4.5 C.1. Linkage Plan Required
rec
√
§4.5 C.2. Subdivisions must have pedestrian facilities
rec
√
§4.5 C.3. Sidewalk requirements on arterial and collector streets
√ §4.5 D. Pedestrian Circulation Amenities
§4.5 D.1. Durable surface materials
√
§4.5 D.2. 4' wide sidewalks in R-1, R-1M, and R-2
√
§4.5 D.3. Sidewalk Placement
√
§4.5 D.3.a. Attached Facilities
√
§4.5 D.3.b. Detached 6' Minimum
√ §4.5 E. Design and Construction Standards
§4.5 E.1. Sidewalks and trails in R-O-W
rec
√
§4.5 E.2. Design elements in accord with Construction Standards
PW Director
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
PAGE 9-14 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS
§4.5 E.3. Pedestrian facilities in accordance with ADA
√
§4.5 E.4. Detached pedestrian facilities
√
§4.5 E.6. Owners required to landscape R-O-W between curb and sidewalk
√
§4.5 E.7. Transition sections
√
§4.5 E.8. Minimum 2' clearance around obstructions required for sidewalks
√
§4.5 E.9. Pedestrian facilities constructed concurrently with street
√ §4.5 F. Multi-Use Trails Design Standards
PW Director
§4.5 F.1. Subdivisions required to dedicate and install trails
rec
√
§4.5 F.2. 15' dedicated easement required if development is on a trail alignment
√
√
either §4.6 Landscaping, Buffering and Screening §4.6 B. Applicability §4.6 C. Approval of Landscaping and Buffering Plan
§4.6 C.1. Approved landscaping plan required for final development approval
√
§4.6 C.2. Alternative specifications for landscaping require approval
√
§4.6 C.3. Landscaping required for CO
√
§4.6 C.3.b. Delayed landscaping requires improvement agreement
√ §4.6 D. Landscaping Design Standards and Guidelines
§4.6 D.1. Aesthetic Enhancement Guidelines
√
§4.6 D.2.a. Use of Native or Adaptive Plant Materials
√
§4.6 D.2.b. Existing Plant Materials
√
§4.6 D. 2.b.iii. Root Zones
√
§4.6 D.2. d Plant Sizes
√
§4.6 D.3. Location and Arrangement of Required Landscaping
√
§4.6 D.3.a. Reasons for landscaping
√
§4.6 D.3.b. Must be located on the property they serve
√
§4.6 D.3.c. Not in the R-O-W unless associated with street buffer
√
§4.6 D.3.d. Place trees where pruning won’t be required
√
§4.6 D.3.e. Trees at least 7' from structures and with 55 square ft. non-paved area around trunk
√
§4.6 D.3.f No trees within 5' of water or sewer main lines
√
§4.6 D.3.g Planting near utility lines
√
§4.6 D.3.h Planting near fire hydrants
√
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-15
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS
§4.6 D.3.i No trees within 25' of intersections or 10' from fire hydrants and utility poles
√
§4.6 D.4. Restoration and Revegetation of Disturbed Areas
√
§4.6 D.5 Irrigation
√ §4.6 E. Landscaping Requirements for all Zone Districts1
Variance
§4.6 E.1. Minimum Tree and Shrub Plantings
Variance
§4.6 E.2 Living Plant Material requirement
√
§4.6 E.3 10% landscape area in Industrial zone district
√ §4.6 F. Buffering and Screening
§4.6 F.2 Waivers
√
§4.6 F.3 Zone District Boundaries
√
§4.6 F.3.a. Landscaped buffer required between zone districts.
√
§4.6 F.3.b. 20' wide buffer required
√
§4.6 F.3.c. Number of trees and shrubs per 100 linear feet
√
§4.6 F.4.c. Planting Requirements (see Figure 16)
√
§4.6 F.4.d Buffer Width
√ §4.6 F.4.e. Arterial and Collector Street Frontage Buffers
§4.6 F. 4.e.i 25' along street frontage
√
§4.6 F. 4.e.ii Number of trees and shrubs per lineal foot
√
§4.6 F.4.f. Number of trees and shrubs per lineal foot on Local Street frontage
√
§4.6 F.4.g. No Development in Street Frontage Buffer
√
§4.6 F.8.Responsibility for Buffering
√ §4.6 G. Parking Lot Landscaping
§4.6 G.2.a. Applicability
√
§4.6 G.2.b. General Requirements
√
§4.6 G.2.d. Walls/Fences
√
§4.6 G.2.e. Perimeter Planting Requirements
√
§4.6 G.3.a Applicability
√
§4.6 G.3.b. Minimum Requirement
√
§4.6 G.3.c. Landscaped Islands
√ §4.6 H. Fences and Walls
§4.6 H.1. Materials for fences or walls
√
§4.6 H.1.1 Materials
√
§4.6 H.1.b Fencing finished on all sides in non-residential except Industrial
√
§4.6 H.1.c Prohibited materials
√
§4.6 H.1.d Chain link
√
1 Ordinance #3, Series 2016
§4.6 H.1.e Barbed wire
√
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
PAGE 9-16 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS
§4.6 H.2.a Less than 4' in height in residential front yards
√
§4.6 H.2.b Fences or walls ≥6' require permit
√
§4.6 H.2.c Setbacks for fences and walls ≥ 8'
√
§4.6 H.2.d Compliance with driveway visibility
√
§4.6 H.2.e Offset for fences and walls adjacent to alleys
√
§4.6 H.2.f License Agreement
√
§4.6 H.2.g Maximum uninterrupted plane of 100'
√
§4.6 H.2.h. Plantings in conjunction with fences and walls
√ §4.6 I Screening
§4.6 I.1. Drive Thru Facilities
√
§4.6 I.1.a. Parking Lot Separation
√
§4.6 I.1.b Adjacent to residential zone district
√ §4.6 I.2. Service Areas
§4.6 I.2.a Location and screening
√
§4.6 I.2.b Limited to area on approved site plan
√ §4.6 I.3. Loading Areas
§4.6 I.3.a. 100% screening from residential properties and public rights-of-way
√
§4.6 I.3.b. Screening material
√
§4.6 I.3.c. Location of Type B loading docks
√ §4.6 I.4. Mechanical Equipment
§4.6 I.4.a. Screening
√
§4.6 I.4.b Roof-Mounted Screening Material
√
§4.6 I.4.c Ground-Mounted Screening Material
√
§4.6 I.5. Utilities
not applicable to accessways
§4.6 I.6. Trash Receptacles
√ §4.6 J. Maintenance Requirements
§4.6 J.1. Maintenance Required
√
§4.6 J.2. Maintenance of Landscape Structures
√
§4.6 J.3. Replacement
√
§4.6 J.4. Enforcement
√ §4.7 Outdoor Display and Storage §4.7 B. Outdoor Display §4.7 B.3. Obstruction Prohibited.
√
§4.7 B.4. Maintenance
√
§4.7.C. Outdoor Storage
§4.7 C.2. Area
√
§4.7 C.3. Screening
√
§4.7 C.4. a. Setbacks
√
§4.7 C.4.b. Rear Yards
√
§4.7 C.4.c. Side Yards
√ §4.8 Signs – Sign Standards are omitted from this review
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-17
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS §4.9 Outdoor Lighting §4.9 Applicability §4.9 B.1. Existing no increase in floor area
√
§4.9 B.2. Existing with increase in floor area
√ §4.9 C. Exemption
Not Applicable §4.9 D. Prohibited Light Sources
√ §4.9 E. Design Requirements
§4.9 E.1 Fixture (Luminaire)
√
§4.9 E.2 Fixture Height
√
§4.9 E.3 Mounting
√
§4.9 E.4 Limit Lighting to Periods of Activity
√ §4.9 F. Specific Standards
§4.9 F.1 Street Lighting
√
§4.9 F.2 Security Lighting
√
§4.9 F.3 Accent Lighting
Not Applicable
§4.9 F.4 Canopy Area Lighting
√
§4.9 F.5 Entrances Exits in Nonresidential and Multi-Family Development
√
§4.9 F.6 Off-street Parking Area Lighting
√ §4.9 G. Excessive Illumination
√ §4.10 Large Scale Retail §4.10 B. Applicability
√ §4.10 D. Single Building Site Development Standards
§4.10 D.1. General
√
§4.10 D.2. Orientation
√
§4.10 D.3. Front Parking
√ §4.10 F. Multiple Building Site Development Standards
√
§4.10 F.1 Location Standards
√
§4.10 F.2 Orientation
√
§4.10 F.3 Front Parking
√
§4.10 F.4 Phasing
√ §4.10 G. Vehicular Circulation
§4.10 G.1. Transportation Impact Study Requirements
√
§4.10 G.2 Access to Collector Streets
√
§4.10 G.3 Internal Drive Connectivity
√
§4.10 G.4 Passenger Loading Zones
√
§4.10 G.5 Traffic Control
√
§4.10 G.6 Speed Change Lanes
√
§4.10 G.7 Restricted Turning Movements
√ §4.10 H. Pedestrian Circulation Facilities
See §4.5 §4.10 I. Residential Protection
§4.10 I.1 Building Location
√
§4.10 I.2 Buffering and Landscaping
√ §4.10 J. Building Design Standards
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
PAGE 9-18 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS §4.10 J.2 Ground Floor Façades
§4.10 J. 2.a. Abutting public streets or parking lots
√
§4.10 J.2.b Liner and Pad Site Buildings
√ §4.10 J.3.Articulation
§4.10 J.3.a. Exterior Wall Plane
√
§4.10 J.3.b. Primary Façades.
√
§4.10 J.3.c. Secondary Façades
√ §4.10 K. Architectural Elements
√ §4.10 L. Building Entrances
√ §4.10 M. Materials and Colors
√
§4.10 M.1. 4-81Exterior building materials
√
§4.10 M.2 Façade colors
√
§4.10 M.4 Wall surface material
√
§4.10 M.6 Neon as an architectural accent prohibited
√ §4.10 M.8. Roofs
§4.10 M. 8.a. Parapets
√
§4.10 M. 8.b. Overhanging eaves
√
§4.10 M. 8.c. Sloping Roofs
√
§4.10 M. 8.d. Three or more roof slope planes
√ §4.10 N Abandoned Buildings
√ §5.1 Natural Resource Protection Standards §5.1 B. Stormwater Design and Construction Standards §5.1 B.1. City Stormwater Manual incorporated by reference
rec
√
§5.1 B.2. Design and construction in accordance with Stormwater Manual
See City of Gunnison Stormwater Management Manual Table 8-1 below:
TABLE 8-1 DRAINAGE REPORT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
Submittal Type
Drainage Submittal Requirements
Review Body
Map Amendment
Determined by the City Engineer
P&Z and City Council
Planned Development PUD-O or PUD-M
Phase II Drainage Report
P&Z and City Council
Site Development Application
Determined by City Engineer
Staff
Conditional Use
Determined by City Engineer
P&Z
Preliminary Subdivision Plat
Phase II Drainage Report
P&Z
Final Subdivision Plat/Replat
Phase III Drainage Report
P&Z and City Council
Minor Subdivision
Determined by City Engineer
P&Z and City Council
Exempt Subdivision
Determined by City Engineer
Staff
Note: The Drainage Report submittal requirements as outlined in this Table are general guidelines and do not represent all circumstances under which specific drainage submittals may be required. Prior to the submittal, the applicant shall consult with the City Engineer for submittal requirements regarding applications or processes not addressed in this Table.
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-19
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS
§5.1 B.3. Only historic runoff shall be released from the site.
√
§5.1 B.4. Drainage shall comply with state and federal requirements
√ §5.1 C. Floodplain
√ §5.2 Slope Protection Standards §5.2 A. Density Calculation for Residential Development on Slopes >10% §5.2 A.1. Applicability
√
§5.2A.3. Dimensional Standards
√
Variance §5.2 B. Development Restrictions on Steep Slopes
§5.2 B.2. New Structures—Existing Slopes in Excess of Ten Percent
√
§5.2 B. 2.a. New development subject to review
√
§5.2 B.2.b.i. Minimized Site Disturbance
√
§5.2 B.2.b.ii. Shared utilities and driveway access
√
§5.2 B.2.b.iii. No new construction in areas of instability
√
§5.2 B.b.iv. Applicant must demonstrate that site is not instable and development will not cause instability
√
§5.2 B.2.c. Measurement of steepness of slope
√
§5.2 B.3. Structure Clearance from Steep Slopes
√
§5.2 B.4. Grading, Clearing and Excavation – slope in Excess of Ten Percent
√
§5.2 B.5. Roads/Driveways – slopes in Excess of Ten Percent
√ §5.3 B. Grading Plan
rec
√
Subdivision
√
Site development §5.3 C. Plan Preparation
√ §5.3 D. Grading Standards §5.3 D.1.Approval/Permit Required
√
§5.3 D.2. Limits on Changing Natural Grade
√
§5.3 D.3. Cutting and Creating Benches
√
§5.3 D.4. Grading For Accessory Building Pads Discouraged
√ §5.3 D.5. Limits on Graded Filled Manmade Slopes
§5.3 D.5.b. slopes shall not exceed 3:1
rec
√
subdivision
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
PAGE 9-20 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS
√
Site development
§5.3 D.5.c. Situations for 2:1 slope for road construction
rec
√
subdivision
§5.3 D.6. Retaining Walls
√
§5.3 D.6.a.i. To provide breaks in slopes >30%
√
§5.3 D.6.a.ii. 6' height restriction
√
§5.3 D.6.a.iii. Engineering requirement
√
§5.3 D.6.iv. Horizontal terrace requirement
√
§5.3 D.6.v. Screening requirement
√
§5.3 D.6.vi. Compliance with Building Codes
√
§5.3 D.6.b. Filling or Dredging of Waterways Prohibited.
√
§5.3 D.6.c. Detention/Stormwater Facilities
√
§5.3 D.7. Restoration of Disturbed Areas
§5.3 D.7.a. Follow Natural Contours
√
§5.3 D.7.b. Revegetation Required
√
§5.3 D.7.c. Timeline
√
§5.3 D.7.d. Man-made Slopes Greater than 25 Percent
√
§5.3 D.7.e Man-made Slopes Greater than 50 Percent
√
§5.3 D.7.f. Topsoil Stockpiled
√ §5.3 D.8. Limitations of Disturbance §5.3 D.8.d. Development Standards
§5.3 D.8.d.i Approval of erosion and sedimentation control required.
√
§5.3 D.8.d.ii. No development outside LOD except as provided in §5.3 D.8.d.iii. (below):
√
§5.3 D.8.d.iii. Disturbance or construction may occur outside LOD with written consent of landowner and approval of staff for limited purposes.
√
§5.3 D.8.e. LOD shall be designated on Final Grading and Drainage Plans
rec
√
§5.3 D.8.f. Standards for Protection during Construction.
√ §5.3 E. Construction Stormwater Management Plan.
√ §5.4 Wetland and Streams Corridor Protection §5.4 C. Other Regulations
§5.4 C.1. This Section does not supersede other regulations. More stringent regulations apply.
rec
√
§5.4 C.2. No construction or disturbance within delineated wetlands
√ §5.4 E. Buffer/Setback Areas §5.4 E.1. Major Ditch and River Corridors
§5.4 E.1.a.i. Major Ditches
√
§5.4 E.1.a.ii. Gunnison River and Tomichi Creek Corridors
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 9-21
TABLE 9-1 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
CODE SECTION
NO WAIVER ALLOWED
CD DIRECTOR
P&Z
CC
OTHER / COMMENTS
§5.4 E.1.a.ii. a) Setbacks
√
§5.4 E.1.a.ii. b) Exception
√
§5.4 E.1.b. Parking Lot Setbacks
√
§5.4 E.2.a. Wetlands not included as part of platted development lot.
rec
√
§5.4 E.2.b. 50' setback from wetlands.
√
§5.4 E.3. Private Open Areas and Landscaping Credit
√ §5.4 F. Development Standards
§5.4 F.1. Prohibited Activities
√
§5.4 F.2 Utilities
√
§5.4 F.3 Recreation, Education or Scientific Activities
√ §5.4 G. Preservation of Vegetation
√ §5.4 H. Wetland Mitigation Requirements
§5.4 H.1. Restoration required
√
§5.4 H.2. Alteration of wetlands requires mitigation
√
§9.8 DECISION-MAKING FOR WAIVERS
PAGE 9-22 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
§10.1 GENERAL
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 10-1
Section 10. Amendments to the Land Development Codeand Official Zoning Map
GENERAL
The text of this LDC and the boundaries of zone districts, as depicted on the Official Zoning Map, may be amended, supplemented or repealed pursuant to the procedures and standards of this Section.
INITIATION
A. Initiation of Text Amendment. An amendment to the text of this LDC may be initiated by the City Council, the Commission, the Community Development Director, a resident of the city, any person who holds a recognized interest in real property within the city, and/or the property owner’s Authorized Agent as specified in §6.3.A.
B. Initiation of Zoning Map Amendment. An amendment to the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by the City Council, the Commission, the Community Development Director or the owner/authorized agent of, or holder of, a recognized interest in that real property whose zoning is proposed to be amended.
PROCEDURE
An applicant requesting an amendment shall follow the stages of the City of Gunnison land development process outlined below.
A. Preapplication Conference. Attendance at a preapplication conference is optional, but recommended, for a private applicant intending to submit an application for an Amendment to the text of this LDC or the boundaries of zoning districts as depicted on the Official Zoning Map.
B. Submit Application. The applicant shall submit a complete development application to the Community Development Director containing those materials listed in §10.4, Application Contents. The Community Development Director shall be responsible for submitting the application materials for an Amendment initiated by the City Council or Commission.
C. Staff Review. The Community Development Director shall review the application to determine whether it is complete, as specified in §6.6 A, Completeness Review. The Community Development Director shall forward a report to the Commission summarizing the application’s compliance with the applicable review standards contained in §10.5, or §10.6, and other applicable provisions of this LDC. The technical comments and professional recommendations of other agencies and organizations may be solicited in drafting the report.
D. Public Notice. Public notice that the Commission will conduct a hearing to consider the application for an Amendment to the text of this title or the boundaries of zoning districts, as depicted on the Official Zoning Map, shall be provided as specified in §6.7.
E. Action by Commission. The Commission shall hold a public hearing to review the conformance of the application with all applicable provisions of this LDC. The Commission shall make a recommendation that City Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application, or shall remand the application to the applicant with instructions for modification or additional information or action.
§10.4 APPLICATION CONTENTS
PAGE 10-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
F. Public Notice and Action by Council. The City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Commission at a public hearing. Public notice that the City Council will conduct a hearing to consider the recommendations of the Commission shall be provided as specified in §6.7. The Council shall, by ordinance, approve or deny the proposed Amendment or shall remand it to the applicant with instructions for modification or additional information or action.
G. Actions Following Approval. Upon approval of the amendment, and the filing and, if applicable, recordation of any documents required by the approval, the Community Development Director shall place the Amendment on the Official Zoning Map or shall cause the amended text of this LDC to be officially codified. Each Amendment shall be noted on the Official Zoning Map, together with the ordinance number and date, date of correction, and initials of the Community Development Director affirming the accuracy of the map change.
APPLICATION CONTENTS
An application for Amendment to the text of this LDC or the boundaries of zone districts, as depicted on the Official Zoning Map, shall contain the following:
A. Minimum Contents. The minimum contents for all applications specified in §6.5 C, Minimum Application Contents.
B. Text Amendment. In addition to the required Minimum Contents, a Text Amendment application to the LDC shall include:
1. A citation of the specific section/sub-section of the LDC that is proposed to be amended;
2. The precise amended wording, tabular data, or equations/measures that constitute the proposed Amendment;
3. A written statement by the applicant identifying the intended consequences of the amendment and how the application for amendment meets the review standards cited in §10.5.
C. Zoning Map Amendment. If the application requests an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, it shall include:
1. Zone Districts. The present zone district designation(s) of the property and the zoning of all adjacent properties.
2. Survey Map. A stamped survey map and legal description created under the direction of a surveyor licensed in the State of Colorado of the property proposed for Amendment, stating the area of the property proposed to be amended in square feet or acres.
3. Existing Uses. A description of existing uses on the property and on all adjacent properties.
4. Statement of Intended Development. A written statement by the applicant identifying the intended use or development of the subject parcel and the timing of said development, describing the community need for the change in zoning, and explaining the effect the change in zoning would have on surrounding uses, and how the application meets the review standards cited in §10.6. Review Standards for Zoning Map Amendments.
§10.5 REVIEW STANDARDS FOR TEXT AMENDMENTS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 10-3
REVIEW STANDARDS FOR TEXT AMENDMENTS
An application for an Amendment to the text of this LDC shall comply with the following standards:
A. Consistent with Purposes. The proposed Amendment shall be consistent with the purposes of this LDC.
B. No Conflict with Other Provisions. The proposed Amendment shall not conflict with any other applicable provisions of this LDC, or shall repeal or amend provisions of this LDC which are inconsistent, unreasonable or out-of-date.
C. Consistent with Master Plan. The proposed Amendment shall be consistent with the City of Gunnison Master Plan, or shall implement a new portion of the Master Plan, or shall implement portions of the Master Plan which have proven difficult to achieve under the existing provisions of this LDC.
D. Public Health, Safety and Welfare. The proposed Amendment shall preserve and/or enhance the public health, safety, general welfare and environment and contribute to the orderly development of the city.
REVIEW STANDARDS FOR ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS
An application for an Amendment to the Official Zoning Map shall comply with the following standards:
A. Consistent with Master Plan. The proposed Amendment shall be consistent with the City of Gunnison Master Plan.
B. Consistent with Purpose of Zone District. The proposed Amendment shall be consistent with the purpose of the zone district to which the property is to be designated.
C. Compatibility with Surrounding Zone Districts and Uses. The development permitted by the proposed Amendment shall be compatible with surrounding zone districts, land uses, and neighborhood character.
D. Changed Conditions or Error. The applicant shall demonstrate that conditions affecting the subject parcel or the surrounding neighborhood have changed, or that due to incorrect assumptions or conclusions about the property, one or more errors in the boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map have occurred.
ESTABLISHED REVIEW PROCESS, REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICTS
A. Purposes. In that the public health, safety and general welfare may be furthered in an era of increasing urbanization, commercial and industrial development, and growing demand for housing of all types and design, these procedures are intended to encourage Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) in the City for the following purposes:
1. to allow and encourage compatible uses to be developed in a manner sensitive to natural features and processes, and that are compatible with surrounding land uses;
2. to promote greater flexibility in the placement of structures so as to preserve and take advantage
§10.7 ESTABLISHED REVIEW PROCESS, REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICTS
PAGE 10-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
of the site's unique, natural resource or scenic features and to avoid or mitigate any hazardous area;
3. to encourage more efficient use of land, public streets, utilities, and governmental services;
4. to provide quality open space and recreational amenities, and create interesting public spaces and neighborhoods through exceptional and innovative design;
5. to achieve a compatible land use relationship with surrounding areas;
6. to promote architectural variety and design, focusing on enhancing the character and quality of the development; and,
7. to incorporate streetscape designs, landscaping, public spaces, and multi-modal transportation facilities, and building façades that enhance the community’s built environment.
B. Planned Unit Development Types. Two types of PUDs, summarized below, may be contemplated by the City.
1. Planned Unit Development - Zone District Overlay. A PUD Zone District Overlay is intended to promote infill and redevelopment. It permits greater flexibility in the application of §2.6, Base Zone District Dimensional Standards and Section 4, General Development Standards, established for the City’s traditional zone districts. Permitted uses in a PUD Zone District Overlay are restricted to those permitted and Conditional Uses of the underlying base zone district.
2. Planned Unit Development Mixed-Use Zone District. A PUD – Mixed-Use (PUD-M) is created to provide for the residential development in conjunction with Civic/Institutional or Accommodation/Retail/Service land use categories established in Table 2-3 (Principal Use Table) of the LDC. It is intended to promote developments with a balanced mix of residential use and compatible non-residential uses that provide services and employment opportunities in close proximity to housing. Planned Mixed-Use zone districts are only allowed in existing RMU, R-3 and Commercial zone districts.
C. Established Review Process. The initial application for PUD zoning or a Major Change to an existing PUD shall constitute a Zoning Amendment and will follow §10.3 (Procedure) of the LDC.
D. PUD Zoning Amendment Application Submittal
1. PUD Plan Submittal. Along with the submission of the application as defined in §10.3 B, the applicant shall provide to the Community Development Director:
a. the minimum contents listed in §10.4 A, and the map amendment information in §10.4 C;
b. four copies of the PUD zoning plan map which shall be 24 inches by 36 inches in size; with north arrow and scale; with title and date in the lower right corner at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger, depicting the area within the boundaries of the proposed PUD; and, which depicts all of the information as follows:
i. a zoning plan indicating the broad concept of the proposed development, the location
§10.7 ESTABLISHED REVIEW PROCESS, REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICTS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 10-5
of each use and the location of existing lots, blocks or other parcels within each area. The plan shall indicate:
generally, where each type of use is located within the PUD and an indication of the total acreage which will be devoted to each use;
proposed zone districts labeled on the plan with the symbol of the most similar zoning classification in the LDC. In the case of residential zone districts, the symbol shall be followed by a hyphen and a numerical representation of the maximum density allowed in that zone district. For example: a single-family residential zone district with a minimum lot size of 12,000 square feet would be labeled R1-12,000.
for areas designated for residential uses, the maximum number of dwelling units per net acre permitted for each residential area including sizes of building lots and types of dwellings anticipated;
the minimum acreage which will be dedicated to common open space, the proposed use and location of open space;
internal circulation systems including locations of arterial streets, collector streets, pedestrian and bike trails;
the acreage and location of areas to be dedicated for school sites or other public uses;
descriptions of the general character of all proposed land use zone districts in the PUD and plans showing the location and size of each zone district within the PUD;
provisions for water, irrigation ditches, sewer, refuse collection, stormwater collection, telephone, electricity, gas and cable television, if applicable;
descriptive overview of the written statement development standards and the intent and benefits derived by the PUD from existing standards established by the LDC; and,
written and graphic material demonstrating to the Commission and City Council how modifications will produce a living environment, landscape quality and lifestyle better than that produced by the existing standards.
ii. a site topographic map showing at least two-foot contour intervals for slopes of 10 percent or less; five-foot contour intervals for slopes over 10 percent; major vegetation elements; streams, rivers, ditches and areas subject to 100-year flooding;
iii. a written statement of concept for the PUD containing the following information:
an explanation of the objectives to be achieved by the PUD and a statement of purpose for each zone district within the PUD;
§10.7 ESTABLISHED REVIEW PROCESS, REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICTS
PAGE 10-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
a development schedule indicating the improvements included in each phase and the approximate dates when construction of the various stages of the PUD are anticipated to begin and be completed;
copies of any special covenants, conditions and restrictions which will govern the use or occupancy of the PUD; provided, that the applicant may impose additional covenants, conditions and restrictions on any particular area in connection with the platting of such area;
the written statement shall include a detailed PUD Development Standards document, which will include but not be limited to defined permitted uses; dimensional standards; design standards, special use standards; buffer and screening standards; floodplain development standards; wetland avoidance; access requirements; grade and slope restrictions; parking standards; landscape standards; general development standards, natural resource protection standards; and other technical code standards;
a report containing detailed statements and data relevant to §4.1 (Adequate Public Facilities), prepared by a Colorado licensed engineer, which shall provide evidence of the following:
i) based on anticipated demand, the proposed water source is adequate to serve the PUD;
ii) based on anticipated demand, the proposed method of sewage treatment and existing sewage treatment facilities are adequate to serve the PUD;
iii) based on development and design standards applied to the PUD, adopted Fire Code standards are fully met;
iv) based on contemporary traffic analysis in conjunction with development site design, the proposed streets are safe, efficient, aesthetically appealing, and built to meet the existing City of Gunnison Construction Standards;
v) based on site-plan designs the rights-of-way are of adequate size to easily accommodate utility extensions and functional snow storage;
vi) based on site-layout and electrical demands the proposed electrical utility system meets City of Gunnison Construction Standards; and,
vii) based on site layout and landscape function the proposed irrigation system complies with existing City of Gunnison Construction Standards.
a report and detailed statements and data relevant to Section 5 (Natural Resource Protection Standards) which shall provide evidence to the following:
i) the general manner in which storm drainage will be handled that shall meet or exceed policies and standard of the City of Gunnison Stormwater Management Manual;
§10.7 ESTABLISHED REVIEW PROCESS, REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICTS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 10-7
ii) based on existing soils and geology data and the proposed land use, that adequate slope protection standards are in place to accommodate future development;
iii) based on existing land uses, buffer standards and other mitigation measures, the proposed land use and future development meet minimum standards for the protection of wetlands and stream corridors; and
iv) the general manner in which provision will be made for any potential natural hazards in the area such as steep slopes, erosive soils, avalanche areas, landslide areas, floodplain areas and unstable soils.
easements showing vested legal access for ingress and egress from a public road to the PUD in accordance with Section 4 (General Development Standards);
evidence that the PUD has been designed with consideration of the site’s natural environment and the surrounding area and does not unreasonably destroy or displace wildlife, natural vegetation or unique natural or historic features; and,
any other information or exhibits which the applicant or the Community Development Director deems pertinent in evaluating the proposed PUD.
E. PUD Requirements and Standards. All requirements and standards identified herein shall be applied to PUD applications, regardless of the type of PUD and are subject to approval by the decision-making body.
1. Permitted/Conditional Uses. Uses in a PUD Zone District Overlay shall only include permitted and Conditional Uses contemplated by the underlying zone district. Uses within a PUD-M zone district shall be limited to residential uses contemplated in the RMU and Commercial zone districts.
2. Dimensional Standards. Dimensional standards may be amended but must comply with the following provisions:
the maximum height of any building, structure or facility shall be 35 feet;
setbacks may be amended but provisions providing solar access to all lots and/or occupied buildings must be made in the PUD zone district development standards;
the maximum residential density shall only be that of the RMU zone district in the PUD-M.
3. Landscaping Standards. Amendment to the City’s landscaping standards must comply with the following provisions:
Percent Coverage. The minimum landscape area percent coverage (§2.6, Base Zone District Dimensional Standards) may not be reduced.
Landscaping. Excepting the minimum percent coverage, buffering and landscaping standards may be amended only if they are determined by the decision making body to be a higher standard than those established by §4.6 of this LDC.
§10.7 ESTABLISHED REVIEW PROCESS, REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICTS
PAGE 10-8 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
4. Special Use Regulations. Specific Use Regulations (Section 3) shall be maintained.
5. Road Standards. Street section dimensions may be modified. The designated width of rights-of-way and other geometric designs established in §4.2 may be amended for dedicated public rights-of-way, but only if the amendments provide safe and efficient accommodation for pedestrians and vehicles; adequate emergency access; functional utility services; and integrated streetscape design.
6. Off-Street Parking. The standards for minimum off-street parking may be amended, but only if they are justified by a parking study prepared by the applicant as contemplated in §4.4 D.2 of this LDC. Disabled access parking ratios may not be reduced.
7. Pedestrian Circulation. Pedestrian circulation standards may be amended only if they are determined by the decision making body to be a higher standard than those established by §4.5 of this LDC.
8. Subdivision Regulations. The requirements of Section 12, Subdivision, shall apply to all PUDs unless otherwise specifically exempted by this Section of the LDC.
9. Open Space Areas. Open space in a PUD zone district shall be limited to indoor and outdoor recreation and community facilities characterized by potentially light or moderate impact on traffic, the natural environment, and surrounding neighborhoods. Such facilities include, but are not limited to: country clubs; golf courses; athletic fields; skateboard parks; swimming, bathing, wading, and other therapeutic facilities; tennis, handball, and basketball courts; and ice skating rinks. Open space land area may also include natural areas such as public parks, trails, greenbelts or natural land preservation areas. Open space land area may not be used for high intensity commercial recreation such as aerial tramway; alpine or water slides; amusement rides; auto, cycle and go-cart race tracks; campgrounds; stadiums; drive-in theaters; horse or dog racing tracks; shooting ranges; stables; zoos or other similar commercial recreation uses.
10. Required Open Space Area. At a minimum, a PUD development shall set aside 15 percent of the site’s total gross area for open areas, plazas, courtyards, sitting areas and other similar public-accessible spaces. At its discretion, the decision-making authority may require additional private open areas or public trail dedications based on a review of the following factors:
the City of Gunnison Master Plan and adopted sub-area master plans;
unique drainage, topographic, vegetation or other such physical conditions;
type and density of development; or
overall need for open space and recreational facilities.
11. Open Space Ownership and Maintenance. All open areas or trails provided in a PUD shall be owned and maintained as common (private) open areas by the developer, owner of the property or an organization established for the ownership and maintenance of common open areas, unless the City Council accepts public dedication of the open areas.
12. Phased Development and Open Space. When a PUD is developed in phases, a proportional amount of any required open space, recreation areas and other community benefits shall be
§10.7 ESTABLISHED REVIEW PROCESS, REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICTS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 10-9
included in each phase such that the project, as it is built, will comply with the overall density and open space requirements of this LDC at the completion of each phase of development.
F. PUD Review Criteria. In addition to meeting the Review Standards for a zoning amendment (§10.6), PUD zoning applications must meet the following review criteria:
1. The proposed PUD encourages innovation in residential, commercial and industrial development so that the needs of the population may be met by greater variety in type, design and layout of buildings and land uses and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space.
2. The proposed PUD encourages land development that, to the greatest extent possible, preserves natural vegetation; respects natural topographic and geologic conditions; incorporates the unique, natural and scenic features of the landscape; and refrains from adversely affecting flood corridors, soil, drainage, and other natural ecological conditions.
3. The proposed PUD design standards combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms, and structural/visual relationships within an environment that allows mixing of different land uses in an innovative and functionally efficient manner.
4. The proposed PUD allows efficient design and use of solar access.
5. The PUD provides for adequate, accessible, and properly located open and recreation space, schools or other facilities.
6. The PUD promotes the efficient use of land resulting in a network of utilities, streets and other infrastructure features that maximize the allocation of fiscal and natural resources.
7. The PUD proposes specific uses permitted within a PUD zone district and must be of a type and so located as to be compatible with surrounding neighborhoods, community character, the City of Gunnison Master Plan and other adopted plans.
8. The PUD plan protects environmentally sensitive areas, and occurs on land physically suited to construction.
9. The PUD proposes residential density and maximum non-residential floor area that will be compatible with the internal neighborhood design and will not have an adverse effect on the adjacent community area.
10. The PUD plan proposes at least 15 percent of the total gross area for common open space, and at least one half of this common open space shall be developed for recreation which may include playing fields, tennis courts, picnic sites, trails, fishing access and similar recreation sites.
11. The PUD plan provides a higher quality development than found in traditional zone districts.
12. The boundary between a PUD and adjacent land uses shall provide an adequate transition between land uses.
G. Development Plan. If a PUD zoning plan falls within Section 12, Subdivision, and requires subdivision approval as defined in §12.3, within one year of a PUD zoning plan approval the
§10.7 ESTABLISHED REVIEW PROCESS, REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICTS
PAGE 10-10 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
applicant shall submit a Land Use Development for the PUD according to the requirements of Section 6, Development Review Procedures. If the developer cannot submit a development plan within one year of the zoning plan approval, the developer shall submit a letter requesting an extension of time to the Community Development Director prior to expiration of the one-year period. The Community Development Director may grant extensions for reasonable waiver requests for up to a total of three years from the date of the zoning plan approval. Should a developer not be able to submit a development plan in a timely manner, the City has the right to rezone the property in accordance with this LDC.
H. Changes. The PUD shall be developed only according to the approved zoning plan and development plan and all supporting data. The final PUD zoning plan and development plan and supporting data, together with all recorded amendments, shall be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees, and assigns and shall limit and control the use of premises and location of structures in the PUD as set forth therein. Changes to the final PUD zoning plan may be made as follows:
1. Major Changes. Changes which alter the concept or intent of the planned unit development including increases in density, changes in the height of buildings, reductions in proposed open space, changes in the development sequencing, changes in road standards, or changes in the final governing agreements, provisions, or covenants may be approved only by submission and reconsideration of a new PUD zoning plan and supporting data.
If major changes are proposed, a new public hearing shall be required during resubmission of the PUD zoning plan.
2. Insubstantial Changes. The Community Development Director may approve changes in the Planned Unit Development which insubstantially change the concept, intent or substance of the development. Insubstantial changes shall be limited to changes addressing the engineering or technical constraints discovered during the development which could not be anticipated during the original approval process, or any other change which has no material effect on the character of the approved PUD zoning plan, the representations made by the applicant or the conditions of the approval.
§11.1 PURPOSE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 11-1
Section 11. Nonconformities
PURPOSE
Within the city there exist uses, structures and lots which were lawfully established pursuant to the zoning and building regulations in effect at the time of their development that do not now conform to the provisions of this LDC. The purpose of this Section is to regulate and limit the continued existence of these nonconforming uses, structures and lots. It is the intent of the City to permit these nonconformities to continue, but not to allow them to be enlarged or expanded, so as to preserve the integrity of the zone districts and the other provisions of this LDC.
NONCONFORMING USES
A. Authority to Continue. Nonconforming uses may continue in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Maintenance and Reconstruction
1. Normal Maintenance. Normal maintenance, repairs or alterations may be performed to permit continuation of a nonconforming use.
2. Reconstruction. If a nonconforming use is damaged by fire or other cause to the extent of more than 80 percent of its replacement cost as determined by the zoning administrator, it shall only be reconstructed in compliance with the provisions of this LDC.
C. Extensions. A nonconforming use shall not be extended or enlarged. This limitation shall be construed so as to prevent:
1. Extension of Area. Enlargement of a nonconforming use by extension of the area of the structure which it occupies or by extension of the structure itself.
2. Additional Land Area. Occupancy of additional land area by the nonconforming use.
3. Exceptions. An exception to the limitations on extension of a nonconforming use may be permitted by the zoning administrator to comply with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), provided it is demonstrated that the only way to comply with the ADA would be through an extension which increases the use’s nonconformity, and that the extension is the minimum necessary to comply with the ADA.
D. Relocation. A structure containing a nonconforming use shall not be moved to another location unless it shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the zone district into which it is moved.
E. Change in Use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another use unless the new use shall conform to the provisions of the zone district in which it is located. If a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use for any period of time, it may not thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use.
F. Discontinuance. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 18 consecutive months, then such use may not be reestablished or resumed, and any subsequent use must conform to the provisions of this LDC.
§11.3 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
PAGE 11-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
A. Authority to Continue. Nonconforming structures may continue in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Maintenance and Reconstruction
1. Normal Maintenance. Normal maintenance, repairs and alterations may be performed to permit continuation of a nonconforming structure.
2. Reconstruction. If a nonconforming structure is damaged by fire or other cause to the extent of more than 80 percent of its replacement cost as determined by the zoning administrator, it shall only be reconstructed in compliance with the provisions of this LDC.
C. Extensions. A nonconforming structure shall not be extended by an enlargement or expansion that increases its nonconformity.
1. Permitted Extensions. A nonconforming structure may be extended or altered in a manner that does not increase its nonconformity.
2. Americans with Disabilities Act. An extension to a nonconforming structure may be permitted by the zoning administrator to comply with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), provided it is demonstrated that the only way to comply with the ADA would be through an extension which increases the structure’s nonconformity, and that the extension is the minimum necessary to comply with the ADA.
D. Relocation. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved to another location unless it shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the zone district into which it is moved.
NONCONFORMING LOTS
A. Development Permitted. A building containing uses permitted in the zone district may be developed on a lot which is nonconforming as to minimum lot size or minimum lot frontage, provided it can be located on the lot so that all other dimensional standards are met, or a Variance from such dimensional standards is obtained pursuant to Section 8, Variances, and provided the development complies with all other standards of this LDC.
B. Conforming Lots Shall Not Be Made Nonconforming. No lot that is conforming as to minimum lot size or minimum lot frontage as of the effective date of this LDC may be reduced in size or subdivided in such a way that it creates a nonconforming lot or causes any structure or use to become nonconforming.
C. Lot Reduction Shall Not Increase Nonconformity. No lot that is nonconforming as to minimum lot size or minimum lot frontage as of the effective date of this LDC may be reduced in size in such a way that its nonconformity would increase, or that causes the nonconformity of any use to increase.
D. Nonconforming Lots Shall Not Be Subdivided. No lot that is nonconforming as to minimum lot size or minimum lot frontage as of the effective date of this LDC may be subdivided.
§11.5 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 11-3
NONCONFORMING SIGNS
A. Authority to Continue. Any sign in existence on the effective date of this LDC which does not conform with any provisions of the LDC shall be allowed to remain and to be maintained in good repair, so long as the sign is used in conjunction with an existing business.
B. Discontinuance. In the event a nonconforming sign refers to a business which ceases to exist, or if the nonconforming sign is taken out of service for any period of time as a result of either an intentional act of the owner (other than for maintenance), an unintentional act of another or an Act of God, the replacement sign shall be constructed in conformance with the provisions of this LDC.
NONCONFORMING MOBILE HOME PARKS
A. Authority to Continue. Nonconforming mobile home parks may continue in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
B. Replacement of Mobile Homes. A mobile home within a nonconforming mobile home park may be replaced with another mobile home, even if the dimensions of the replacement mobile home result in an increase in the degree of nonconformity of the mobile home park with respect to the minimum setbacks set forth in §3.3 I.4; provided, however, that the installation of the replacement mobile home shall not result in any of the following:
1. International Fire Code. A violation of the fire safety separation requirements of the International Fire Code as adopted by the City.
2. Encroachment. Encroachment of the mobile home into any adjoining street, alley, or property not a part of the mobile home park.
3. Off-Street Parking. Reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces which existed prior to the replacement of the home.
C. Discontinuance. In the event a nonconforming mobile home park is not occupied by any inhabited mobile homes for a period of 12 consecutive months, then its use as a mobile home park may not be reestablished or resumed except in conformance with the provisions of this Land Development Code. The discontinuance of the use of one or more, but less than all, of the mobile home lots in a nonconforming mobile home park for inhabited mobile homes shall not prohibit the replacement of a mobile home upon said mobile home lot in accordance with the terms of this section.
§11.6 NONCONFORMING MOBILE HOME PARKS
PAGE 11-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
§12.1 PURPOSE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-1
Section 12. Subdivision Standards
PURPOSE
The subdivision of land is a significant step in the process of urban development. The arrangement of land parcels for residential, commercial, industrial, recreational, utility, and other public purposes will determine to a large degree the qualities of health, safety, convenience, environment, and general welfare of the City.
These regulations are intended to and shall be administered in a manner to:
A. Implement Master Plan. Implement the City of Gunnison Master Plan.
B. Accurate Records. Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision.
C. Compatible Development. Compatibly relate the development of tracts of land to the existing community and facilitate the future development of adjoining tracts, when appropriate.
D. Public Improvements. Provide for adequate, safe and efficient public utilities and improvements, proper design of storm water drainage, and streets and other public facilities.
E. Public Spaces. Provide for light, air, parks, and other spaces for public uses.
F. Protection from Hazards. Provide for protection from fire, flood, air traffic, and other natural and manmade hazards.
G. Development Improvement Cost. Provide provisions and documentation ensuring that defined improvement funding borne by the developer for public utilities and facilities are secure and protect the fiscal well-being of the City (Ordinance #3, Series 2016).
H. Protection of Environment. Protect the natural resources, air and water quality, wildlife habitat, scenic characteristics, and other features of the environment from adverse impacts of development.
I. Creative Planning. Encourage the use of creative land planning and development techniques.
APPLICABILITY
Land within city limits. These subdivision regulations shall apply to all land located in the city and all land which is annexed to the city.
OVERVIEW OF SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
A. Subdivision Types. Three types of subdivision applications may be submitted to the City. An overview of these three types of subdivisions is provided herein. The Sketch Plan, Preliminary Plat and Final Plat review procedures, application contents and review standards as they may apply to each type of subdivision are described in greater detail in the sections which follow this overview.
1. Subdivision Exemption. Activities exempted from the subdivision regulations are limited to boundary line adjustments, condominiums (§38-33-101 et.seq. C.R.S.) and common interest ownership plats (§38-33.3-101 et. seq., C.R.S.) and insubstantial changes to a recorded plat. A
§12.3 OVERVIEW OF SUBDIVISION
PROCEDURE
PAGE 12-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
subdivision exemption is reviewed and acted upon by the Community Development Director as described in §12.4, Subdivision Exemption.
2. Minor Subdivision.A Minor Subdivision is a subdivision which proposes not more than eight lots or units and which subdivides a parent parcel of less than four acres or an approved subdivision reclassification. A Minor Subdivision is subject to an expedited subdivision three-step review process, wherein the Sketch Plan and review by the Commission has been deleted. The applicable review steps are as follows:
a. Step One. Review of the preliminary plat by the Commission at a public hearing, as described in §12.6, Preliminary Plat Review.
b. Steps Two and Three. Review of the Final Plat by the Commission and City Council, as described in §12.7, Final Plat Review. (Ordinance 3, 2015)
3. Major Subdivision.A Major Subdivision is a subdivision which proposes more than eight lots or units, or which subdivides a parent parcel of four acres or greater. A major subdivision is subject to the full four-step subdivision review process, as follows:
a. Step One. Review of the Sketch Plan by the Commission as described in§12.5, Sketch Plan Review.
b. Step Two. Review of the Preliminary Plat by the Commission at a public hearing, as described in §12.6, Preliminary Plat Review.
c. Steps Three and Four. Review of the Final Plat by the Commission and City Council, as described in §12.7, Final Plat Review.
B. Subdivision Reclassification. Major Subdivisions may, at the discretion of the Community Development Director, be reclassified as a Minor Subdivision, prior to the application submittal.
1. Purpose. A subdivision reclassification is intended to afford a means for a defined Major Subdivision to be reclassified to a Minor Subdivision, if the proposal provides a demonstrated community benefit that may include, but not be limited to, preservation of public open space, development of affordable housing, trail development or to facilitate the purpose of an organization providing a valuable community benefit.
2. Process. Prior to the submittal of a formal subdivision application, the applicant may submit a formal written document to the Director requesting the reclassification of a Major Subdivision to a Minor Subdivision. The written request shall explain how the specific characteristics of said subdivision comply with the Reclassification Review Standards. The Director will provide a written notification of the decision to the applicant and the Commission. The Commission is authorized to deny the Directors decision.
§12.3 OVERVIEW OF SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-3
3. Reclassification Review Standards. An application for a Subdivision Reclassification shall comply with the following standards:
a. Community Benefit. The proposed subdivision will provide a derived community benefit as described in the Purposes of this subsection.
b. Utility Services. Public utility services (water, wastewater, electrical, gas, stormwater) are easily available to the land tract proposed for subdivision and only private service extensions are anticipated.
c. Dedications. The land tract is serviced by existing city streets and easements (trails, utilities) and/or the dedication of public streets and easements can be addressed through the Minor Subdivision Review process.
d. Non-Motorized Facilities. The extension of non-motorized transportation facilities can be addressed though the Minor Subdivision process.
e. Consistency with the Master Plan. The intended uses shall be consistent with the City of Gunnison Master Plan.
4. Subdivision Requirements. A reclassification approval shall not be construed as a waiver from any of the established requirements for subdivision established by the Land Development Code. (Ordinance 3, 2015)
C. Planned Unit Development Subdivision (PUD). The Commission may authorize a subdivision to be developed as a Planned Unit Development (PUD). A PUD is a form of subdivision development in which certain zone district and improvement standards may be applied in a refined manner that encourages innovative land planning practices and achieves desired public purposes as determined by the Commission.
1. Procedures. Regardless of parcel size or lot number, a subdivision which is developed as a PUD shall comply with all of the procedures specified for a Major Subdivision.
2. Application Contents. The application contents for the PUD shall be the same as those for a subdivision; provided, that as part of the Sketch Plan and Preliminary Plat applications, the applicant’s narrative also shall describe how the proposed development departs from the City’s traditional development standards and how, on balance, it improves upon what otherwise would be developed on the property and achieves the purposes of PUD.
3. Concurrent PUD and Zoning Amendment Applications. If the application for a PUD subdivision is being processed contemporaneously to a PUD zoning amendment application, it will follow the procedures described herein:
Public Notice and Action by Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall hold a public hearing for the PUD zoning amendment, following the provisions of §10.3 E., at the same meeting that a public hearing for Preliminary Plat is conducted. The Commission recommendation for the PUD zoning amendment will be forwarded to the City Council while the final PUD application is reviewed by the Commission.
§12.4 SUBDIVISION
EXEMPTION
PAGE 12-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Public Notice and Action by City Council. The City Council shall hold a public hearing for the PUD Zoning Amendment, following the provisions of §10.3 F. The City Council shall not consider the final PUD application until such time that the second reading of the PUD Zoning Amendment Ordinance is acted upon. A City Council determination of denial or remand of the PUD Zoning Amendment shall constitute a denial or remand of the PUD Subdivision application.
4. Review Standards. PUD Subdivision Standards are established in §10.7.
SUBDIVISION EXEMPTION
A. Procedure. An applicant requesting Subdivision Exemption approval shall follow the stages of the land development process outlined below.
B. Preapplication Conference. Attendance at a preapplication conference is optional, but recommended, for an applicant intending to submit an application for a Subdivision Exemption.
C. Submit Application. The application for Subdivision Exemption shall follow the submittal requirements cited below, depending upon the application type:
1. Boundary Line Adjustment/Insubstantial Change to a Plat of Record. If the application is either a Boundary Line Adjustment or Insubstantial Change to a Plat of Record, the application contents shall apply with the provisions of §12.7 B. and §12.7 C.
2. Common Interest Community Plats-Required Map Data. The application for condominium or planned community shall include the following data and plat map information:
a. the plat map shall contain certificates pursuant to §12.7 C. items 1-4, and approval signature statements pursuant to §12.7. E;
b. the plat map shall define all common areas, usages of buildings and grounds and plans for the interior division of the building showing horizontal and vertical boundaries of all units;
c. a draft copy of the declaration applicable to the common interest community;
d. a draft copy of applicable bylaws;
e. any proposed restrictive covenants;
f. all utility lines, meters, and easements; and,
g. any other information required by the Colorado Common Interest Ownership Act of the State of Colorado (§38-33.3-101 et seq., C.R.S.).
D. Staff Review. The Community Development Director shall review the application to determine whether it is complete. The Community Development Director shall assess the application to determine compliance with the standards outlined in §12.8, Subdivision Review Standards. Based on this assessment, the Community Development Director may approve, deny, or remand the application to the applicant with instructions for modification or additional information or action. The Community Development Director may solicit the assistance of other agencies and organizations in drafting the report.
§12.4 SUBDIVISION EXEMPTION
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-5
E. Public Notice. Public notice that an application for a Subdivision Exemption is being considered by the Community Development Director shall not be required.
F. Actions Following Approval
1. Signature. Following approval of the Subdivision Exemption, the applicant shall submit two Mylar copies of the exemption plat to the Community Development Director, who shall be authorized to sign the exemption plat on behalf of the City and have it attested by the City Clerk. The Community Development Director shall deliver one copy of the signed exemption plat to the Gunnison County Clerk and Recorder for recordation.
2. Expiration. The exemption plat shall be submitted to the Community Development Director within one year after the exemption application has been approved, or such approval shall expire.
3. Extension. An applicant may request an extension of the deadline for recordation of the exemption plat by submission of a written request to the Community Development Director prior to the expiration date, which shall demonstrate good cause for granting the extension. The approval shall be deemed extended until the Community Development Director has acted on the request for extension. The Community Development Director shall be authorized to extend the approval by a period of up to one year and to impose additional conditions, if necessary.
G. Review Standards. An application for Subdivision Exemption shall comply with the standards applicable to all subdivision applications, contained in §12.8, Subdivision Review Standards, and if applicable, §12.9, Planned Unit Development Subdivision Review Standards. The following additional standards shall also apply to certain types of Subdivision Exemption applications, as specified herein.
1. Boundary Line Adjustment. The lot lines between contiguous lots which are under separate or single ownership may be adjusted if the following conditions are met:
a. Purpose. The adjustment shall be for the purpose of correcting a surveying or engineering error in a recorded plat, permitting an insubstantial boundary change between contiguous parcels or addressing a specific hardship.
b. Consent. The owners of affected properties whose lot lines are being adjusted shall provide written consent to the application.
c. Further Division. The adjustment shall not create the opportunity to further subdivide either lot to create a new lot for resale or development.
d. Conformance. All resulting lots shall meet the standards of this Land Development Code. If any of the lots or structures thereon is nonconforming prior to the adjustment, then no adjustment shall be allowed that increases the net nonconformity of the lots or structures.
2. Insubstantial Change to Recorded Plat. An Insubstantial Change may be made to a recorded plat as follows:
a. Limitations. An Insubstantial Change shall be limited to changes to address engineering or technical constraints discovered during development which could not be anticipated during the original approval process, or any other change to a plat which has no material
§12.5 SKETCH PLAN
REVIEW
PAGE 12-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
effect on the character of the approved plat, the representations made by the applicant or the conditions of approval. Street locations and street rights-of-way shall not be changed.
b. Conformance. Following approval of the Insubstantial Change, the recorded plat shall continue to conform to all applicable standards of this LDC.
c. Amendments. A change to a plat which is not insubstantial, including any resubdivision of a lot other than a boundary line adjustment, shall be considered an Amendment and shall follow the review procedures applicable to Minor Subdivisions.
SKETCH PLAN REVIEW
A. Procedure. An applicant requesting Sketch Plan approval shall follow the stages of the land development process outlined below.
1. Preapplication Conference. Attendance at a preapplication conference is mandatory for an applicant intending to submit an application for Sketch Plan approval.
2. Submit Application. The applicant shall submit a complete application to the Community Development Director, containing those materials listed in §12.5B, Application Contents. The Community Development Director shall notify the Commission of receipt of the application.
3. Staff Review. The Community Development Director shall review the application to determine whether it is complete, as specified in §6.6 A., Completeness Review. The Community Development Director shall forward a report to the Commission which summarizes the application’s compliance with the review standards contained in §12.8, Subdivision Review Standards, and other applicable provisions of this LDC. The technical comments and professional recommendations of other agencies, departments and organizations may be solicited in drafting the report.
4. Public Notice. Public notice that an application for a Sketch Plan approval is being considered by the Commission shall be required.
5. Public Action by Commission. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing and review the conformance of the application with all applicable provisions of this LDC. The Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, deny the application, or remand it to the applicant with instructions for modification or additional information or action. The Commission may, as a part of their approval, waive preliminary subdivision plan application contents if requested by the Community Development Director or applicant if it is determined that the waiver is justified and not contrary to the subdivision purposes.
6. Actions Following Approval
a. Effect of Sketch Plan Approval. Approval of a Sketch Plan shall not constitute final approval of the subdivision or permission for development to occur. Sketch Plan approval shall only constitute authorization to proceed with an application for preliminary plat approval.
b. Expiration. If an application for preliminary plat approval is not submitted to the City within one year of the date of approval of the Sketch Plan, the Sketch Plan approval shall
§12.5 SKETCH PLAN REVIEW
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-7
expire.
c. Extension. An applicant may request an extension of the submission deadline for the Preliminary Plat by submission of a written request to the Community Development Director prior to the expiration date, which shall demonstrate good cause for granting the extension. The approval shall be deemed extended until the Commission has acted on the request for extension. The Commission shall be authorized to extend the approval by a period of up to one year and to impose additional conditions if necessary.
B. Application Contents. An application for Sketch Plan approval shall contain the following information:
1. Minimum Contents. The minimum contents for all applications specified in §6.5 C, Minimum Application Contents, as well as the submittal data included herein.
2. Conceptual Site Plan. A graphic conceptual site plan or plans of the proposed development shall be prepared at a map scale large enough for effective public presentations, but generally no less than one inch equals 200 feet. An applicant may provide several alternative plans to show how the preferred alternative was arrived at and address how the features of the land and goals of the Master Plan were taken into consideration. Topography shall be depicted using five-foot contour intervals except for sites with grades less than 4 percent where maximum two-foot contours will be provided. Graphics shall be used to accurately represent the key aspects of the proposal, without misleading exaggeration of scale or emphasis. The site plan shall include the following, as applicable:
a. Topographic Features. Significant topographic features including natural and artificial drainage ways, ditches, bodies of water, approximate 100-year floodplain, wetlands, vegetative cover, soil types and prominent geologic features.
b. Development Scheme. Schematic representation of the proposed development including general lot location and size, type and density of housing units, total number of square feet of proposed nonresidential space by type and general location, parks, recreation and open space areas, off-street parking areas, and proposed landscaping.
c. Utility and Facility Plans. Conceptual plans to address water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater facilities, solid waste collection, fire protection, irrigation ditch system, and proposed school and other public facility sites.
d. Circulation Plan. The proposed internal road and pedestrian access scheme and the surrounding road system (existing and future) which provides access to the site. Typical geometric cross-sections shall be shown and proposed roads shall be designated as either private or public.
e. Land Survey. Sufficient land survey data (section corners, quarter corners, township and range, etc.) to identify the land to be subdivided, and two ties to quarter-section and/or section corners, or other monuments acceptable to the Community Development Director.
f. Easements. All recorded easements or rights-of-way which could affect the proposed development.
§12.6 PRELIMINARY PLAT
REVIEW
PAGE 12-8 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
g. Existing Conditions. All existing structures, utilities and other physical features which could affect the proposed development, including existing roads and driveways within 350 feet of the subdivision site.
3. Narrative. The Sketch Plan shall be accompanied by a narrative description which provides a conceptual description of the proposed land uses, densities, intentions for design and landscaping and road and utility plans. The narrative shall provide a tabular summary which offers sufficient information to demonstrate that the Sketch Plan conforms to all applicable dimensional standards and off-street parking requirements and shall also include such other data essential to the evaluation as may be requested by the City to enable an adequate conceptual evaluation of the proposed subdivision.
4. Vicinity Map. A vicinity map shall be submitted along with the Sketch Plan. The vicinity map shall show the location of the proposed subdivision, all adjacent lands owned or under option by the applicant, commonly known landmarks and federal, state and local streets with names, and the zone district(s) in which the proposed subdivision and adjacent properties are located.
5. Preliminary Plan Application Content Modification Request. At the time of Sketch Plan submittal, the applicant may request modification from the preliminary subdivision application submittal requirements. This modification is subject to approval by the Commission as specified in §12.5 A.5. The applicant must demonstrate that the modification is justified and not contrary to the purposes stated in §12.1 for subdivisions.
PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW
A. Procedure. An applicant requesting Preliminary Plat approval shall follow the stages of the land development process outlined below.
1. Preapplication Conference. Attendance at a preapplication conference is mandatory for an applicant intending to submit an application for preliminary plat approval.
2. Submit Application. The applicant shall submit a complete application to the Community Development Director containing those materials listed in §12.5 B., Application Contents.
3. Staff Review. The Community Development Director shall review the application to determine whether it is complete, as specified in §6.6 A, Completeness Review. The Community Development Director shall forward a report to the Commission which summarizes the application’s compliance with the review standards contained in §12.8 Subdivision Review Standards, and other applicable provisions of this LDC. The technical comments and professional recommendations of other agencies, organizations and consultants shall be solicited in drafting the report as necessary.
4. Public Notice. Public notice that an application for Preliminary Plat approval is being considered by the Commission shall be provided as specified in §6.7, Stage 4: Provision of Public Notice.
5. Public Action by Commission. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing to review the conformance of the application with all applicable provisions of this Land Development Code. If the Commission finds the application is in conformance, it shall approve the application. If not, then the Commission may approve the application with conditions, remand the application to the applicant for additional information, or deny the application.
§12.6 PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-9
6. Actions Following Approval
a. Effect of Preliminary Plat Approval. Approval of a Preliminary Plat shall not constitute final approval of the subdivision or permission for development to occur. Preliminary Plat approval shall only constitute authorization to proceed with an application for Final Plat approval.
b. Expiration. If an application for Final Plat approval is not submitted to the City within one year of the date of approval of the Preliminary Plat, the Preliminary Plat approval shall expire. The Final Plat may reflect the entire Preliminary Plat or any logical part thereof. In the case of a partial submission, the approval of that portion of the development shall automatically gain an extension of six months for the remaining area before another phase of the plat is required to be submitted in final form.
c. Extension. An applicant may request an extension of the submission deadline for the Final Plat by submission of a written request to the Community Development Director prior to the expiration date, which shall demonstrate good cause for granting the extension. The approval shall be deemed extended until the Commission has acted on the request for extension. The Commission shall be authorized to extend the approval for a period of up to one year and to impose additional conditions if necessary.
B. Application Contents. An application for Preliminary Plat approval shall contain the following information:
1. Minimum Contents. The minimum contents for all applications specified in §6.5 C, Minimum Application Contents, unless a waiver has been granted by the Commission as part of the Sketch Plan approval.
2. Form. Preliminary Plans clearly and legibly drawn in ink and shall show the proposed layout of the subdivision and all information required by the LDC.
3. Preliminary Plat. A Preliminary Plat reflecting the layout of the lots, blocks and structures in the proposed subdivision. The preferred scale of the plat is one inch equals 100 feet; the minimum allowable scale is one inch equals 200 feet. Sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches. If it is necessary to draw the plat on more than one sheet, a sheet index shall be placed on the first sheet. The Preliminary Plat shall contain the following:
a. name of subdivision;
b. legal description;
c. name(s) and addresses of owner(s), subdivider, land planner and land surveyor registered in the state of Colorado;
d. scale of the plat;
e. north arrow;
§12.6 PRELIMINARY PLAT
REVIEW
PAGE 12-10 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
f. date the plat was prepared;
g. draft certificates and approval signature statements as required by §12.7 C. of the LDC;
h. boundary lines of proposed subdivision (shown as a heavy solid line), proposed zoning boundary lines, approximate dimensions of all lots, blocks and all land intended to be held in common for use by all property owners in the proposed subdivision—survey data will include the length of all arcs, chords, radii, and curvature and tangent bearings;
i. proposed street names; and,
j. the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed streets, alleys, easements, ditches, and utilities within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
4. Vicinity Map. A vicinity map shall be submitted along with the Preliminary Plat. The vicinity map shall show the location of the proposed subdivision; all adjacent lands owned or under option by the applicant; commonly known landmarks; federal, state and local streets with the names; and, the zone district(s) in which the proposed subdivision and adjacent properties are located.
5. Existing Conditions. A map of existing conditions, including but not limited to the following:
existing buildings and structures;
location and approximate dimensions of all existing or recorded section lines, streets, alleys, easements, irrigation ditches and existing utilities;
identification and delineation of stream/river corridors, wetlands, special flood hazard areas and floodways;
areas of geologic and wildfire hazard;
existing topography, depicted as contours at a vertical interval of not more than five feet where the slope is greater than ten percent and not more than two feet where the slope is ten percent or less—topographical data shall reference USGS datum. In addition, the submittal shall include an analysis of the area and percentage of the total site that falls into the following slope categories:
i. 0% to 10%;
ii. 10.1% -20%;
iii. 20.1% - 25%; and
iv. 25.1% and over.
other important natural or physical features within and adjacent to the tract to be subdivided.
6. Location of Public Facilities. Location and approximate dimensions for all proposed streets,
§12.6 PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-11
alleys, irrigation ditches, easements and stormwater facilities/drainage ways to be reserved for public use. Sight distance measurements shall be included for each street intersection.
7. Sidewalks. Sidewalk location and width when required.
8. Land Dedications. Approximate dimensions of all proposed land dedications for public trail purposes.
9. Lot Square Footage and Gross Acreage. Approximate square footage of each lot and the total gross acreage of the subject property.
10. Limits of Disturbance. A proposed delineation of the limits of disturbance (LOD) for road and utility construction and/or overlot grading boundary.
11. Drainage Report. A Phase II Drainage Report prepared by a licensed engineer, showing all proposed drainage facilities, prepared according to the criteria established in the latest revision of the City of Gunnison Stormwater Management Manual.
12. Utilities. Identification of provisions for water, sewer and electricity.
13. Commitment Letter. A commitment letter from private utility providers stating that they will provide services. This includes providers of natural gas, telephone, and cable.
14. Preliminary Drawings. Preliminary drawings prepared by a licensed engineer for water, sewage, drainage systems, electrical system and street lighting plan.
15. Road Plans prepared and certified by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor. Drawings shall include plan view and delineated center line profile with designated stations and road sections.
16. Grading Plan prepared and certified by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor. The plan shall include the following items:
A contour map showing the existing and proposed topography of the entire site. The map shall have a minimum of five-foot contour intervals at a minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet where terrain modification is not proposed. In areas where terrain modification is proposed, two-foot intervals at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or at alternative scale approved by the Director are required. Staff may require greater detail, including but not limited to depiction of slopes on adjacent properties and how proposed resulting slopes and finished grades will relate or transition to slopes existing on adjacent properties.
Reference to any specific grading recommendations made in a required hazard mitigation plan.
Location, type and height of proposed retaining structures showing top and bottom elevations.
Gradient of proposed cut-and-fill slopes must be shown in horizontal:vertical notation.
An erosion control plan for all disturbed areas.
§12.6 PRELIMINARY PLAT
REVIEW
PAGE 12-12 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
i. The erosion control plan shall include the phasing and timing for implementation of erosion control measures to prevent and minimize erosion during and after construction.
ii. Erosion control plans shall be developed in accordance to Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity General Permit Application and Stormwater Management Plan Preparation Guidance (CDPHE Water Quality Control Division).
A phasing schedule showing when each stage of the project will be completed, including the total area of soil surface which is to be disturbed during each stage and an estimate of starting and completion dates.
Other items that may be required at the discretion of the staff if necessary to necessitate a complete and reasonable review of the development, including but not limited to:
i. cross-sections at identified locations;
ii. identification of all structures on, or adjacent to the site that may be affected by grading and development, and presentation of detailed mitigation measures to reduce any negative impact to existing structures during development.
17. Hazard Mitigation Plans for identified hazard areas.
18. Specific designation of all lots that contain any slope greater than 10 percent.
19. Anticipated phases of development and timing.
20. Title Insurance. A commitment for title insurance showing the ownership to the property in the proposed subdivision.
21. Site Development Tabulation. A tabular summary of the development proposal which identifies the total proposed development area in acres, with a breakdown of the percentages and amounts devoted to specific land uses; total number and type of proposed residential units; total number of square feet of proposed nonresidential space; number of proposed lots; and sufficient information to demonstrate that the Preliminary Plat conforms with all applicable dimensional standards and development standards.
22. Development Report. A written report, with accompanying technical and graphic material as necessary, which shall address the factors listed below, to demonstrate that the proposal conforms to the City of Gunnison Master Plan and the standards of this LDC. The extent of the analysis of each factor shall depend on the applicability of the particular factor to the subject property and its impact on the surrounding area.
a. Site Characteristics. A description of site features such as streams, areas subject to 100-year flood frequency, lakes, high ground water areas, topography, vegetative cover, and other features are pertinent to evaluation of the proposed development.
b. Soils. A description of those soil characteristics of the site which would have a significant influence on the proposed use of the land, with supporting soil maps, soil logs, and
§12.6 PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-13
classifications sufficient to enable evaluation of soil suitability for development purposes. Data furnished by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service or a licensed engineer shall be used. The data shall include the engineering soil group designation, shrink/swell potential of the soils, the ground water levels, and the resulting foundation requirements. Additional data may be required by the City if deemed to be warranted due to unusual site conditions.
c. Geology. A report on the geologic characteristics of the area including any potential natural or manmade hazards which would have a significant influence on the proposed use of the land, including, but not limited to, hazards from steep or unstable slopes, rock fall, avalanches, faults, ground subsidence or radiation, a determination of what effect such factors would have, and proposed corrective or protective measures.
d. Water Supply and Sewage Disposal. Data addressing the population planned to occupy the proposed subdivision and future development phases and other developments that may need to be served by extensions of the proposed water supply and sewage disposal systems pursuant to §4.1 of this LDC. The resulting domestic, irrigation, and fire flow demands shall be expressed in terms of gallons of water needed on an average day and at peak time and the resulting amounts of sewage to be treated shall be expressed in gallons per day.
i. Ability to Serve. An analysis shall be submitted of the current ability of the City to provide domestic and irrigation water and water for fire flows and to collect and treat sewage generated by the property to be subdivided.
ii. Water Rights. A statement shall be submitted addressing the quantity, quality and availability of any water that is attached to the land.
e. Cost of Improvements, Phases and Covenants. A preliminary estimate of the cost of all required public improvements, tentative development schedule (with development phases identified), proposed or existing covenants and proposed maintenance and performance guarantees. The subdivider shall submit, at least in summary or outline form, any agreements as may be required by §12.10, Subdivision Improvements Agreement, relating to improvements and dedications.
f. Solar Energy. A description of the steps that have been taken to protect and enhance the use of solar energy in the proposed subdivision. This shall include how the streets and lots have been laid out and how the buildings will be sited to enhance solar energy usage.
g. Floodplain. If applicable, a report shall be submitted identifying the location of the 100-year floodplain and the drainage ways near or affecting the property being subdivided. If any portion of a 100-year floodplain is located on the property, the applicant shall also identify the floodway and floodway fringe area. The applicant shall also describe the steps that will be taken to ensure that development locating in the floodway fringe area is accomplished in a manner which meets Federal Insurance Administration standards.
h. Wetlands. If applicable, a report shall be submitted on the location of wetlands, as defined by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, on or affecting the property being subdivided. The report shall outline the development techniques planned to ensure compliance with federal, state and local regulations.
§12.7 FINAL PLAT
REVIEW
PAGE 12-14 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
i. Traffic Analysis. The Community Development Director and/or Commission may require the developer to submit a traffic analysis prepared by a qualified expert, to determine the impacts of a proposed development on surrounding city streets and to evaluate the need for road improvements to be made.
j. Irrigation Ditch System. An analysis shall be provided of the current ability of the City to provide irrigation water to the subdivision, and a description of the water needed to serve the proposed subdivision.
k. Landscape Plan. A preliminary landscape plan meeting the specifications of §4.6, Landscaping, Buffering and Screening.
l. Parking. A depiction of how the required off-street parking requirements will be met in the development.
23. Schematic Plan. In the event that the Preliminary Plan covers only a portion of the subdivider’s entire ownership, a schematic plan of the anticipated land development plan for the entire tract, including street and utility systems and proposed easements, shall accompany the Preliminary Plan.
24. Final Plan Application Content Modification Request. At the time of Preliminary Plan submittal, the applicant may request modification from the final subdivision application submittal requirements. This modification is subject to approval by the Commission as specified in §12.5 A.5. The applicant must demonstrate that the modification is justified and not contrary to the purposes for subdivisions as stated in §12.1.
25. Final Plan Application Waiver
FINAL PLAT REVIEW
A. Procedure. An applicant requesting Final Plat approval shall follow the stages of the land development process outlined below.
1. Preapplication Conference. Attendance at a preapplication conference is optional, but recommended, for an applicant intending to submit an application for Final Plat approval.
2. Submit Application. The applicant shall submit a complete application to the Community Development Director containing those materials listed in §12.7 B, Application Contents.
3. Staff Review. The Community Development Director shall review the application to determine whether it is complete, as specified in §6.6. A, Completeness Review. The Community Development Director shall forward a report to the Commission which summarizes the application’s compliance with the review standards contained in §12.8, Subdivision Review Standards, and other applicable provisions of this LDC. The technical comments and professional recommendations of other agencies, organizations and consultants shall be solicited in drafting the report, as necessary.
4. Public Notice. Public notice that an application for a Final Plat approval is being considered by the Commission shall not be required.
§12.7 FINAL PLAT REVIEW
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-15
5. Public Action by Commission. The Commission shall conduct a meeting to review the conformance of the application with all applicable provisions of this LDC. If the Commission finds the application is in conformance, it shall make a recommendation that the City Council approve of the application. If not, then the Commission may recommend approval with conditions, remand the application to the applicant for additional information or modification or deny the application.
6. Action by Council. The City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Commission at a meeting, for which public notice shall not be required. The Council shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application or shall remand it to the applicant with instructions for modification or necessary additional information.
7. Actions Following Approval
a. Signature. Immediately following approval of the Final Plat, the applicant shall submit two Mylar copies of the plat to the Community Development Director to be signed by the Mayor and the Chair of the Commission and to be attested by the City Clerk. The Community Development Director shall deliver one copy of the signed plat to the Gunnison County Clerk and Recorder for recordation.
b. Expiration. The Final Plat shall be submitted to the Community Development Director for recordation within one year after the Final Plat application has been approved or such approval shall expire.
c. Extension. An applicant may request an extension of the deadline for recordation of the Final Plat by submission of a written request to the Community Development Director, prior to the expiration date, which shall demonstrate good cause for granting the extension. The approval shall be deemed extended until the City Council has acted on the request for extension. The City Council shall be authorized to extend the approval by a period of up to one year and to impose additional conditions if necessary.
B. Application Contents. An application for Final Plat approval shall contain the information required herein:
1. Final Plat Requirements. The Final Plat shall contain all information on the approved Preliminary Plan or plat, except contours, plus the requirements set forth below. Site staking may also be required to be updated or added.
Legibility, Format and Number of Copies
i. The final subdivision plat, including all drawings and signatures, shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black waterproof ink on Mylar. Each sheet shall be twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches in size with a one-inch marginal line from each edge. The title, all drawings, affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements, acceptances of dedication and notarial seals shall be within the marginal lines.
ii. The original, two Mylar reproducible copies, and four prints shall be filed in the office of the City of Gunnison Community Development Department.
iii. An 11" x 17" reduction of each of the sheets comprising the Final Plat shall also be
§12.7 FINAL PLAT
REVIEW
PAGE 12-16 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
filed in the Community Development Department.
iv. The Final Plat and final construction plans shall be submitted in a digital format compatible with City systems:
AutoCAD r12 or newer DWG
ArcView 10.0 or newer
Boundary, Scale and Sheet Number. The boundary of the tract shall be designated by a border line applied on the face of the tracing and on the inside of the boundary line. Every sheet comprising the plat shall bear the title, scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch, north point (designated as true north) and sheet number, the latter to be set forth in the lower right-hand corner of the plat.
Key Diagram and Vicinity Map
i. If more than one sheet is used, a key diagram showing the area covered by each sheet shall appear on the title sheet. Cut-lines will be shown on individual sheets.
ii. A vicinity map shall be included showing the area adjacent to the proposed subdivision or annexation. Said vicinity map shall have a maximum scale of one inch equals one thousand two hundred feet (1" = 1,200') or an alternative scale approved by staff prior to submittal.
Affidavits, Dedications, Certificates and Approval Signatures. Affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements, acceptances of dedication and notarial seals shall appear only once and upon the first, and such other as may be required, of several sheets. These provisions shall be the forms defined in§12.7 C.
Dimensions. Accurate dimensions for all lines, angles and curves used to describe boundaries, streets, alleys, easements, areas to be reserved for public use and other important features shall be provided. Sufficient data shall be shown to readily determine bearing and length of every lot line and boundary line. No ditto marks shall be used. Lots shall show net acreage to the nearest one-thousandth. Length, radius and total delta and chord bearings of each curve and the bearing of radial lines to each lot corner on a curve shall be shown, and defined in a table format on the plat. The map or plat shall show all easements to which lots are subject in such manner that the easements may be retraced in the field. Easements for storm drains, sewers, building lines and other purposes shall be denoted by fine dashed lines. The centerline of all streams and natural drainage channels which are not offered for dedication to public use on the map or plat shall be shown by dashed lines.
Lots subject to slope development standards (Table 5-1) should be specified by plat notations.
Relation to Adjacent Areas. The map or plat shall show corners of all adjoining subdivisions, or portions thereof, by lot or block number and tract name. The relation of the tract to adjoining subdivisions shall be shown by ties consisting of courses and distances. The map or plat shall show all city boundaries crossing or adjoining the subdivisions clearly designated and tied in.
Block and Lot Numbers. In tracts containing more than one block, the blocks shall be
§12.7 FINAL PLAT REVIEW
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-17
designated in alphabetical or numeric order. Lots shall be designated numerically, beginning with the number “1,” in each block.
Street Names. Street names that have been approved by the Community Development Director, in coordination with the E-911 Communications Director.
Notation of Monuments. The character, type and position of all monuments and covers shall be noted on the final map or plat to the nearest hundredth of a foot.
Monument and Mathematical Checking. All permanent monuments and lot pins shall be placed prior to the approval of the final map or are subject to placement by the Subdivision Improvements Agreement. The City Engineer, or a designated representative, shall, by a field examination of the subdivision, determine whether or not all monuments shown on the map or plat have been set as required by this LDC. The Engineer shall determine that the outside boundaries of the property included within the addition or subdivision close mathematically.
Dedication of Property. An enumeration of the streets, alleys, easements, trails, public parks/open areas and other public facilities as shown on the map or plat, and a dedication thereof to the public use, shall be indicated.
Future Street Dedication. The staff shall determine whenever a street is necessary for future additions or subdivisions, but which street is not presently warranted for construction, that the necessary dedication for such future street is provided on the map or plat.
2. Final Subdivision Utility and Civil Engineer Plan Requirements
Improvements Generally. No final map or plat shall be approved unless the improvements required by §12.8 C. have been installed, or the installations of the same have been guaranteed in accordance with the provisions of §12.10. Final construction plans for all improvements (two paper copies and one digital copy) shall be submitted at the time of Final Plat submittal. As-built plans (one Mylar, two paper copies and one digital copy) shall be submitted at the time the first building permit is issued or construction of the improvements is completed, whichever comes first.
Preparation of Plans. All profiles and plans, including each sheet, shall be twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36") and prepared, stamped and signed by a registered professional engineer in the State, with an approval block for the City Engineer.
Subsequent to Final Approval. Subsequent to Final Plat approval, site-specific lot surveys and corner lot pins shall be provided to each lot and shall be used in the preparation of the lot for development.
Plan View and Street Profile. The existing and proposed centerline plan view profile of each street with grades, and existing profiles at right and left sidelines of the right-of-way.
Road Cross-Section. The cross-section of all roads showing the shoulder, valley pans, curb and gutter, and surface width taken for each block at the point of greatest cross-slope and showing the width of sidewalks, irrigation ditches and the location and size of utility mains.
§12.7 FINAL PLAT
REVIEW
PAGE 12-18 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Road Construction Cost Estimate. The plan will include material unit price and quantity lists, and estimated labor and equipment costs.
Sanitary Sewer Plan and Profile. A plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers with grades and pipe sizes indicated.
Domestic Water. A plan of the proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes and location of valves and fire hydrants. Plans shall include material unit price and quantity list and labor and equipment costs. Design and construction standards shall be in accordance with the current requirements of the City of Gunnison Construction Standards, or as determined by the City Engineer.
Electrical Distribution. A plan of the electrical distribution system to include the location of transformers and street lights and will include material unit price, quantity list, labor costs, and equipment costs.
Stormwater Drainage Report. A report and plans required for a Phase III Drainage Report as defined by Section 3.5 of the City of Gunnison Stormwater Management Manual.
Irrigation Systems. A design of the irrigation ditch system to include ditch grade, culvert size, ditch sumps, head gates, and material unit price, quantity list, labor costs and equipment costs.
3. Treasurer’s Certificate. A treasurer’s certificate of taxes reflecting that taxes are not delinquent.
4. Deed. A general warranty deed and title insurance policy which deeds to the City, or other appropriate public agency, all lands other than streets which are to be held for or used for public purposes.
5. Subdivision Improvements Agreement. A complete Subdivision Improvements Agreement, in accord with §12.10, any other applicable agreements, and any proposed covenants for the subdivision.
C. Certificates. Certificates required to appear on the final subdivision plat shall be in a form substantially as set forth herein.
1. Certificate of Dedication and Ownership
Know all men by these presents, that the undersigned, being all of the Owner(s), Mortgagee(s) and Lien-holder(s) of certain land in the City of Gunnison, Gunnison County, Colorado, described as follows:
Beginning , containing acres, more or less, have by these presents laid out, platted and subdivided the same into lots, blocks or tracts, as shown on this plat, under the name and style of and do hereby dedicate to the City of Gunnison as public roads, the streets and roads as shown on said plat, these being . The undersigned hereby further dedicate to the public all utility easements and dedicate to the City of Gunnison for public use all water and water rights, both
§12.7 FINAL PLAT REVIEW
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-19
tributary and nontributary, arising upon, flowing upon or lying under the property as described and as shown hereon.
The undersigned hereby further dedicates to the public utilities the right to install, maintain and operate mains, transmission lines, service lines and appurtenances to provide such utility services within this subdivision or property contiguous thereto, under, along and across public roads as shown on this plat and also under, along and across utility easements as shown hereon.
The lands comprising this subdivision are subject to certain covenants which are recorded in Book at Page of the records of Gunnison County, Colorado.
Executed this day of , 20 .
Owner(s): Mortgagee(s) and Lienholder(s):
SS
County of Gunnison
The foregoing dedication was acknowledged before me this day of 20 , by . Witness my hand and seal.
My Commission expires .
Notary Public
2. Certificate of Street and Utility Maintenance
Public notice is hereby given that neither the dedicated public roads nor the public utilities shown on this plat will be maintained by the City of Gunnison until and unless the subdivider constructs the streets and roads and utilities in accordance with the subdivision agreement, if any, and the subdivision regulations in effect at the date of the recording of this plat and approval of the City has been issued to that effect. When the City approves a street or utility for maintenance, the street or utility shall become public in all senses of the word and the subdivider has no further obligations in regards to that particular street or utility.
3. Surveyor’s Certificate
I, ____________________, a Registered Professional Land Surveyor in the State of Colorado, do hereby certify that the survey represented by this plat was made under my supervision and the monuments shown thereon actually exist and this plat accurately represents said survey.
__________________________
Registered Land Surveyor
4. Title Certificate
I, _________________________, an attorney at law duly licensed to practice before the Courts of Record in the State of Colorado, certify that I have examined title to all lands herein dedicated and shown upon this plat, and title to such lands is in the dedicator free and clear of all liens, taxes and encumbrances except as follows:
EXCEPTIONS
Signed this _____ day of ___________, 20 .
§12.7 FINAL PLAT
REVIEW
PAGE 12-20 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
____________________________
Attorney at Law
D. Exempt Plat Approval. Exempt Plats will contain the following signature statement in-lieu of the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council Signature Statements cited in sub-paragraph E., below.
1. Community Development Director Approval
This plat of (plat name), is determined to meet all development standards of the City of Gunnison, Colorado, Land Development Code.
Community Development Director
City of Gunnison
Date:
E. Approval Signature Statements of Approval Bodies
1. Planning and Zoning Commission Approval
This plat is approved by the City of Gunnison Planning Commission this ______ day of _____________, 20 .
___________________________
Chairman
2. City Council Approval
This plat is approved for filing and the City hereby accepts the dedication of the streets and roads shown hereon subject to the provisions in “Street Maintenance” set forth above, and further accepts the dedication of the easements shown hereon.
Signed this ______ day of ___________, 20 .
CITY OF GUNNISON
BY: _________________________
Mayor
3. Recorder’s Certificate
This plat was filed for record in the Office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Gunnison County at M on the day of , 20 , reception no. ________.
County Clerk and Recorder
§12.8 SUBDIVISION REVIEW STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-21
BY:
Deputy
SUBDIVISION REVIEW STANDARDS
In order to achieve the intent and purpose of this LDC, the proposed subdivision shall comply with the following standards:
A. Master Plan. The proposed subdivision shall carry out the purpose and spirit of the Master Plan and conform to all of the plan’s applicable intent statements, specific directions and recommended actions. It shall be designed to be compatible with surrounding land uses, to protect neighbors from undesirable noise, glare and shadows and shall not cause adverse effects on their privacy, solar access and views.
B. Zone District Standards. The proposed subdivision shall comply with the use and dimensional standards of the underlying zone district and shall provide off-street parking as required for the use(s).
C. Improvements. The proposed subdivision shall be provided with improvements which comply with Section 4 and Section 5.
1. Streets. Existing and proposed streets shall be suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic within and in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision.
2. Utilities. Existing and proposed utility services shall be suitable and adequate to meet the needs of the proposed subdivision. As a condition of obtaining water service, any water rights which run with the property shall be dedicated to the City.
3. Landscaping. Landscaping, buffering and screening as required by §4.6 shall be achievable given the underlying lot widths and rights-of-way dimensions.
4. Phases. If the subdivision is to be developed in phases, each phase shall contain the required parking spaces, landscape areas, utilities, and streets that are necessary for creating and sustaining a stable environment.
D. Natural Features. The layout of lots and blocks shall provide desirable settings for structures by making use of natural contours and maintaining existing views, affording privacy for residents and protecting them from adverse noise and vehicular traffic. The system of roadways and the lot layout shall be designed to take advantage of visual qualities of the area. Natural features and native vegetation shall be preserved whenever possible.
E. Floodplains. Tracts of land or portions thereof lying within the 100-year floodplain may only be subdivided for open space until the subdivider has shown that compliance with the requirements of the City’s floodplain regulations can be met.
F. Future Streets.When a tract is subdivided into lot(s) or parcel(s) which are intended for future re-subdivision, such lot(s) or parcel(s) shall be so arranged so as to permit the logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for adequate utility easements and connectors for such resubdivision.
G. Common Recreation Facilities. Where a development is proposed to contain common recreation facilities, such facilities shall be so located within the development so as to be easily accessible to
§12.9 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION REVIEW
STANDARDS
PAGE 12-22 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
the residents and to least interfere with neighboring developments.
H. Lots and Blocks
1. Pattern. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate to the design and location of the proposed subdivision and to the type of development contemplated. Where appropriate, lots shall be laid out to respect the existing city pattern. Blocks generally shall not be less than 300 feet nor more than 1,200 feet in length.
2. Frontage. Residential lots should front only on local streets; however, when necessary, lots designated to face a collector street shall provide adequate means for automobile turnaround within the lot.
3. Right Angles. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial to street lines.
4. Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots are prohibited, except where they are necessary to provide for the separation of residential development from collector or arterial streets or to overcome specific limitations of topography or orientation. A planting and screening easement of at least 10 feet shall be provided along the portion of the lot which abuts such a Collector or Arterial street. There shall be no right of access across a planting and screening easement. The screening easement shall be maintained by the property owner.
5. “T” Intersections. The building area of lots shall not, to the maximum extent feasible, face directly into the oncoming traffic of an intersecting street of a “T” intersection.
6. Solar Energy. For purposes of protecting and enhancing the potential for utilizing solar energy in the proposed subdivision, detached single-family lots are encouraged to be laid out in such a manner that the houses will be oriented so that their long axis will run east/west and so that the houses will not block the solar access of adjacent houses.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISION REVIEW STANDARDS
In addition to the Subdivision Standards in §12.8 above, all PUDs are subject to requirements and standards and criteria contained in §10.7 E. and F.
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT
A. Written Agreement. Prior to the approval of the Final Plat, the subdivider shall submit a written agreement to construct all required public improvements shown in the Final Plat documents and perform repairs occasioned by such improvements.
1. Estimate of Costs. The written agreement shall reflect an estimate of the cost, including inflation, of the various improvements and repairs and a time schedule for their completion, as well as an estimate from the City Engineer of the cost to inspect said public improvements.
2. Time Limit. Public improvements shall be installed within a time limit determined by the City and the developer. This time shall be reflected in the agreement.
B. Financial Guarantee. The subdivider shall deposit with the City a performance and payment bond, an irrevocable letter of credit, line of credit, cash, and/or other acceptable means which is sufficient in the judgment of the Council to assure the completion of the improvements or repairs required under §12.10 A. Said security shall be due to the City in conjunction with the recordation of the
§12.11 VACATION OF RECORDED PLAT, RIGHT-OF-WAY OR EASEMENT
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-23
Final Plat and shall be in an amount equal to 125 percent of the cost of supplying and installing the improvements depicted on the approved Final Plat, based on estimates provided by the applicant and approved by the City Engineer.
C. Release. As improvements are completed and as “as built drawings” are submitted, the subdivider may apply to the Public Works Director for a release of part or all of the collateral deposited with the City in conformance with §4.2.I (Street Dedications) and §4.2.J (Acceptance of Streets and Public Utilities). Upon inspection and approval, the Public Works Director may release all or part of the collateral.
1. Deficiencies. If the Public Works Director determines that any of such improvements are not constructed in substantial compliance with specifications, it shall furnish the subdivider a list of specific deficiencies and shall be entitled to withhold collateral sufficient to ensure substantial compliance.
2. City May Complete Improvements. If the Public Works Director determines that the subdivider has not constructed any or all of the improvements in a timely manner or in accordance with all of the specifications, the City may withdraw and employ from the deposit of collateral such funds as may be necessary to construct the improvement or improvements in accordance with the specifications.
D. Development Permit. When the subdivider or developer is ready to begin construction of the public improvements set forth on each filing of the Final Plat and in the Subdivision Improvements Agreement, a site development permit shall be obtained from the Community Development Department. Construction shall begin within 30 days of issuance of the permit, or the permit shall expire.
1. Inspection Fee. Before the development permit is issued, the developer shall pay the inspection fee as determined by the City Engineer.
2. Review Plat and Agreement. At the time the development permit is issued, the developer and the City shall review the Final Plat and the Subdivision Improvements Agreement to assure that all requirements, inspections, etc., are known to the developer and will be met during the construction period. A preconstruction meeting with all involved parties, including the City, inspectors, developer and contractor, should be conducted.
E. Common Property in a PUD
1. Ownership Covenant.Where there is more than one ownership interest in the land upon which the PUD is to be situated or in the above airspace and all such interests are not coextensive, the PUD approval shall be conditioned upon a covenant running with the land that establishes an organization among all owners to own and maintain common open space, if any.
2. Failure to Maintain. Failure to maintain shall be deemed as a violation of the LDC and is subject to Section 15, Violations, Penalties and Enforcement.
VACATION OF RECORDED PLAT, RIGHT-OF-WAY OR EASEMENT
An applicant requesting to vacate a recorded subdivision plat, public right-of-way or a dedicated easement shall follow the stages of the City of Gunnison land development process outlined below.
§12.11 VACATION OF RECORDED PLAT, RIGHT-OF-WAY OR
EASEMENT
PAGE 12-24 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
A. Preapplication Conference. Attendance at a preapplication conference with the Community Development Director is optional, but recommended, for an applicant intending to submit an application to vacate a recorded subdivision plat, public right-of-way or a dedicated easement.
B. Submit Application. The applicant shall submit a complete development application to the Community Development Director which contains those materials listed in §6.5 C, Minimum Application Contents.
C. Staff Review. The Community Development Director shall review the application to determine whether it is complete, as specified in §6.6 A, Completeness Review. The Community Development Director shall forward a report to the Commission which summarizes the application’s compliance with the review standards contained in this Section and other applicable provisions of this LDC. The technical comments and professional recommendations of other agencies, organizations and consultants may be solicited in drafting the report.
D. Public Notice. Public notice that the Planning and Zoning Commission will conduct a hearing to consider an application to vacate a recorded subdivision plat, public right-of-way or a dedicated easement shall be provided as specified in §6.7, Stage 4: Provision of Public Notice.
E. Action by Commission. The Commission shall hold a public hearing to review the conformance of the development application with all applicable provisions of this LDC, including the review standards listed herein below.
1. Access to a Public Road. No roadway shall be vacated so as to leave any adjoining land without a means of access to another public road. Furthermore, there shall be an express reason for and a derived benefit to the City for a vacated roadway request.
2. Easements. In granting a vacation, the City may reserve easements for the installation or maintenance of utilities, ditches and similar improvements.
3. Master Plan. A subdivision plat, public right-of-way or dedicated easement may be vacated if the vacation would be consistent with or implement the applicable intent statements, specific directions and recommended actions of the Master Plan.
4. Transfers or Sales of Lots. A subdivision plat may be vacated if none of its lots has been sold or transferred; or if there have been sales or transfers there has been no development on any lots in the subdivision and all of the owners agree to the vacation of the plat.
The Commission shall make a recommendation that the City Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application, or shall remand it to the applicant with instructions for modification or additional information or action.
F. Action by Council. The City Council shall consider the recommendations of the Commission at a public meeting. The Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed vacation or shall remand it to the applicant with instructions for modification or additional information or action.
G. Actions Following Approval. Whenever the City shall approve an application vacating a public right-of-way, the City shall provide abutting land owners with a quit claim deed for the vacated
§12.11 VACATION OF RECORDED PLAT, RIGHT-OF-WAY OR EASEMENT
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 12-25
lands. Each abutting land owner shall be deeded that portion of the vacated right-of-way to which the owner’s land is nearest in proximity.

§13.1 PURPOSE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 13-1
Section 13. Incentives
PURPOSE
The purpose of this Section is to provide incentives for specific types of land uses and/or creative site plans that exceed the minimum requirements of this LDC. Another purpose is to accomplish high-priority planning goals, including the preservation of open space and natural features and development of affordable housing.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Types of Incentives. Incentives established herein are: density bonuses, which allow for greater density than that allowed in the underlying zone district; and, increased flexibility in dimensional standards to allow smaller lot sizes and reduced frontage than that of the underlying zone district.
B. Eligibility. Except for parcels in an R-1 zone district, all residential subdivisions and developments in residential zone districts are eligible for incentive bonuses.
C. County Affordable Housing Guidelines. For the purposes of administering incentives associated with the development of affordable housing, all related applications shall comply with all of the provisions of the Gunnison Valley Regional Affordable Housing Guidelines (Guidelines), and as they are amended on an annual basis.
D. Exceptions. Any proposed reduction in the minimum net livable square foot requirements that may be approved by the Gunnison Valley Regional Housing Authority, pursuant to provisions of the adopted Guidelines, shall be subject to final City review and approval following the procedures established in §13.4.
E. Combination with Other Bonuses. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the density bonuses of this Section may be combined, provided that the total cumulative density bonus shall not exceed the maximum density allowed by the underlying zone district by more than 50 percent.
F. No Guarantee of Density. The provisions of this Section shall not be interpreted as guarantees of achievable density. Developments using bonus provisions shall be subject to all other applicable regulations of this LDC. These other regulations or site-specific conditions may prevent maximum bonus density levels from being achieved due to the character of the land or surrounding uses.
REVIEW PROCESS
A. New Land Use Development Applications. Requests for bonus incentives for land that has not been platted, or for land that is being re-platted, shall be reviewed during the Subdivision Preliminary Plat application process, as set forth in Section 12.
B. Approved Subdivisions. Requests for bonuses for projects that have been approved through the subdivision process shall be subject to the review procedures set forth in this Section.
C. Rezoning Not Required. A separate rezoning process shall not be necessary to approve the density increases granted through these processes.
§13.4
PROCEDURE
PAGE 13-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
PROCEDURE
Applications for bonus incentives shall follow the procedures outlined below.
A. Pre-application Conference. Attendance at a pre-application conference is mandatory for an applicant intending to submit an Incentive application.
B. Submit Application. The applicant shall submit a complete application to the Community Development Director, containing those materials listed in §13.5.
C. Staff Review. The Community Development Director shall review the application to determine whether it is complete, as specified in §6.6.A., Completeness Review. The Community Development Director shall forward a report to the Commission summarizing the application’s compliance with the General Review Standards contained in §13.6 and all other Review Standards that may apply.
D. Review by External Consultants or Agencies. The technical comments and professional recommendations of other agencies, organizations and consultants may be solicited in drafting the report.
E. Public Notice. Public notice that the Commission will conduct a hearing to consider the application for a Density Bonus Incentive shall be provided as specified in §6.7, Stage 4: Provision of Public Notice.
F. Public Action by Commission. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing to review the conformance of the application with all applicable provisions of this LDC. The Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application or remand it to the applicant with instructions for modification or additional information or action.
G. Action Following Approval. The applicant may apply for a site development permit following approval of the Density Bonus Incentive and the filing and, if applicable, recordation of any document required by the permit approval.
APPLICATION CONTENTS
A. Minimum Contents
1. Basic Site Plan. The site plan of the subject property showing existing and proposed features, buildings, roads, alleys, easements, utilities, wetlands, floodplains, etc., which are relevant to review of the development application. Current land uses of properties on all sides of the property and across streets and alley must be included on the site plan or accompanying map.
2. Specific Site Plans for Applications Proposing Dimensional Standards Incentives
Site dimensions and boundaries
The location, size and use of all public utilities (water, sewer, stormwater, electrical, irrigation) and easements associated with all public utilities that will be used to serve individual development sites and a written description of the general manner in which on-site water supply, sewage disposal, electric supply, natural gas, storm water drainage, telephone, street lighting, irrigation, water, cable television, and trash collection services
§13.6 GENERAL REVIEW STANDARDS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 13-3
will be provided.
Roads
Building and Accessory Structures Setback lines
Driveways, Internal Circulation and Parking
Grading and drainage plans showing and describing the existing and proposed means of handling on-site drainage.
B. Legal Documents. Deed restriction or other executable documents or agreements that may be integral to the execution of the incentive being considered.
GENERAL REVIEW STANDARDS
The Community Development Director may recommend, and the Commission may impose, such conditions as are necessary to maintain the integrity of the City’s zone districts and to ensure the use is: consistent with the City of Gunnison Master Plan; conforms with this LDC; appropriate to its location and compatible with neighboring uses; served by adequate public facilities; and, does not cause undue traffic congestion or significant deterioration of the environment. Authorized conditions include but are not limited to:
A. Consistency with the Master Plan. The proposed bonus incentive shall be consistent with the City of Gunnison Master Plan.
B. Zoning District Standards. Developments approved with bonus incentives shall meet dimensional standards for height, setbacks, percent open space, percent impermeable surface coverage, buffering, lighting, fencing, signage, off-street parking and similar site planning features of the proposal. However, the bonus incentive may specifically increase the maximum allowed density and/or allow for the reduction of the minimum lot size and front lot line pursuant to standards set forth in this Section.
C. Specific Use Standards. All bonus incentive developments shall comply with all applicable Special Use Regulations set forth in Section 3.
D. General Development Standards. All bonus incentive developments shall comply with all applicable regulations, criteria and standards set forth in Section 4 of this LDC.
E. Natural Resource Protection Standards. All bonus incentive developments shall comply with all applicable regulations, criteria and standards set forth in Section 5 of this LDC.
F. Traffic. All bonus incentive developments shall not cause undue traffic congestion, dangerous traffic conditions or incompatible service development, parking or loading problems.
G. Facilities. There shall be adequate public facilities in place to serve the proposed development or the applicant shall propose necessary improvements to address service deficiencies.
§13.7 SPECIFIC STANDARDS APPLIED TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING
INCENTIVES
PAGE 13-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
SPECIFIC STANDARDS APPLIED TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES
A. Dispersal Required. Affordable housing units shall be dispersed within a residential subdivision or development.
B. Deed Restriction Required. Affordable housing units developed pursuant to this Section shall be deed-restricted to assure the availability of the unit for sale or rent to persons meeting the income guidelines and definition set forth in Gunnison Valley Regional Affordable Housing Guidelines. The mechanism used to restrict the unit shall be approved by the City Attorney and be consistent with deed restriction provisions established by the Gunnison Valley Regional Housing Authority.
C. Maximum Permitted Density Bonus. Except in the R-1 zone district, subject to the standards and review criteria set forth in this Section, for every one affordable housing unit provided, the applicant shall be eligible for a bonus of one-half (0.5) unit that may only be used for the development of additional affordable units. In no case shall the development density exceed 50 percent of the maximum density permitted in the underlying base zone district.
D. Minimum Lot Size/Area. Notwithstanding the minimum lot area requirements set forth in the underlying base zone district, the following requirements shall apply to residential subdivisions and developments that include affordable housing units.
1. Single-Family Detached Affordable Units. The minimum lot size shall be 4,500 square feet and the minimum lot frontage may be reduced to 25 feet per unit, provided that at least 40 percent of the total housing units in the subdivision or development are affordable. If less than 40 percent of the total units are affordable, then the minimum lot size shall be no less than 90 percent of the underlying base zoning district lot area requirement and no reduction in frontage will be granted.
2. Two-Family Affordable Units. The minimum lot size shall be 5,000 square feet (2,500 sq.ft./unit) and the minimum lot frontage may be reduced to 25 feet per unit, provided that at least 40 percent of the total housing units in the subdivision or development are affordable. If less than 40 percent of the total units are affordable, then the minimum lot size shall be no less than 90 percent of the underlying base zoning district lot area requirement for two-family residential uses and no reduction in frontage will be granted.
3. Multi-Family Developments Containing Affordable Units. The minimum lot size for a multi-family structure or development containing at least 40 percent affordable housing units may be reduced by 12 percent of the required lot area defined in Table 2-4 Residential Dimensional Standards, and the minimum lot frontage may be reduced to 80 feet. If less than 40 percent of the total units area affordable, then the minimum lot size shall be no less than 95 percent of the underlying base zoning district lot area requirement for multi-family residential uses and no reduction in frontage will be granted.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
Reserved for Future Use
OPEN SPACE AND NATURAL FEATURES
Reserved for Future Use
§14.1 PURPOSE
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 14-1
Section 14. Large Scale Retail Design Review Procedure
PURPOSE
This Section establishes the required review and approval procedures for Design Review, which is the review procedure for determining compliance with the site planning and building design standards of this LDC.
APPLICABILITY
Design Review must be successfully completed in accordance with the requirements of this Section prior to the start of any of the following activities in any zone district:
A. New Development. Development of new large retail sales establishments.
B. Building Additions. Any addition of more than 10,000 square feet to the building floor area of an existing retail sales establishment with an existing building floor area larger than 40,000 square feet.
C. Building and Site Alterations. Any alteration or addition to an existing large retail sales establishment affecting the external building appearance, number or location of buildings, function of on-site vehicular/pedestrian circulation, or landscape, screening and buffering features.
D. New or Modified Pad Sites. Any alteration, deletion, or addition to pad and/or liner building sites that were included in the original design review approval.
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A design review approval is a binding development order and all improvements reflected on approved site plans must be completed. All restrictions and conditions of Design Review approval must be fulfilled as follows:
A. Permit Applications. No development application or building permit shall be approved unless the site plan reflects all required improvements.
B. Certificate of Occupancy. All improvements reflected on approved site plans must be constructed prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy (CO). All terms and conditions of Design Review approval must be met at the time of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
C. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. A Temporary Certificate of Occupancy (TCO), with a maximum one-year duration, may be issued where an improvement cost estimate, prepared by a Colorado-licensed civil engineer, is submitted along with a Development Improvement Agreement secured by corporate surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash and/or other means acceptable to the Community Development Director. The collateral amount for the agreement shall equal 125 percent of the cost as determined to be satisfactory by the Community Development Director.
§14.4 APPLICATION, REVIEW, AND
DECISION
PAGE 14-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
APPLICATION, REVIEW, AND DECISION
A. Preapplication Conference. Prior to the submission of development applications, applicants shall attend a preapplication conference as set forth in §6.4, Stage 1: Preapplication Conference. The purpose of the conference is to respond to questions the applicant may have regarding application procedures, standards, or regulations required by this chapter.
B. Submittal Requirements. A complete application for Design Review shall be submitted to the Community Development Director as set forth in §6.6, Stage 3: Staff Review of Development Application. In addition to the minimum submittal requirements specified in §6.5 C, Minimum Application Contents, a complete, scaled site plan shall be submitted showing all the existing and proposed uses, lot dimensions for the specified property, and shall, at minimum, include the following:
1. a narrative addressing the proposed development explaining and tabulating the land uses for the entire site including: planned open spaces; potential traffic generation; overall character and architectural style; the relationship of the proposed development to existing developments within 700 feet of the proposed
development’s boundaries; and other related development features;
2. architectural elevations for all façades, a description and sample of building materials, and a description of design elements;
3. existing topographic contours at two-foot intervals;
4. final grades and grading plan, with topographic contours at two-foot intervals;
5. erosion control plans;
6. site information, including:
a. gross area of the site;
b. percent of area devoted to streets and vehicular circulation;
c. percent of area devoted to open space and common open space;
d. square footage of the building footprint of each structure;
e. percent of area devoted to each land use type proposed;
FIGURE 35 DESIGN REVIEW PROCEDURE
§14.4 APPLICATION, REVIEW, AND DECISION
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 14-3
f. calculations of gross and net densities, including estimated total floor area for any nonresidential uses per acre;
g. bearing, distance and curve radii of property boundaries;
h. existing and proposed structures in relation to the exterior property lines, existing and proposed streets;
i. setbacks, including corner setbacks and intersection visibility triangles;
j. curb lines and sidewalks;
k. floodplains, drainageways, and any proposed detention/retention locations;
l. drainage plan prepared by Colorado-licensed engineer;
m. landscaping and screening plan established by a landscape architect who is an active member of the American Institute of Architects;
n. fences and walls, in plan view and section;
o. loading and accessibility spaces;
p. ingress and egress points and intersection design, with sections showing turn lanes, etc;
q. off-street parking layout and internal circulation plan, in plan view;
r. refuse locations;
s. existing and proposed utility lines and fire hydrants;
t. a master sign plan consisting of five elements that shall govern all signs within the development: location, materials, size, color and illumination;
u. outdoor lighting plan including the tear sheets for all proposed fixtures, location, mounting height and shielding characteristics of each lighting fixture, both proposed and any already existing on the site;
v. location map relative to off-site streets and properties;
w. detailed traffic study per §4.10 G.1, Transportation Impact Study Requirements;
x. baseline automobile and truck traffic data for all adjacent neighborhoods within 700 feet of the development site served by local and minor collector streets that link to the development site;
y. proposed Waivers, calling out each Waiver using illustrative plans and elevations, and describing in narrative form how each proposed Waiver complies with the provisions of
§14.5 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
WAIVER
PAGE 14-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
§14.5, Waivers; and
z. any additional information requested on a Community Development Department checklist or that may be necessary as requested by the Director to clearly define the intended use of the property and compliance with the applicable standards.
C. Completeness Review. The application’s completeness review shall be accomplished in accordance with the requirements of §6.6 A, Completeness Review.
D. Posting and Public Notification. Once the application is deemed complete by the Community Development Director, the required public notices shall be issued as set forth in §6.7, Stage 4: Provision of Public Notice.
E. Review and Decision. The Commission shall review each application for Design Review and act to approve, approve with conditions, remand back to the applicant, or deny the application pursuant to §6.8 C, Action by Decision-Making Body. Design Review applications that are being processed concurrently with rezoning or Conditional Use permits must be reviewed and approved concurrently with the other required approvals.
F. Notice of Decision. Within five working days of action by the decision-making body on a Design review application, the Community Development Director shall mail notice of the decision to the applicant.
G. Expiration of Approval. An approved Design Review application shall expire 12 months from the date of approval unless a complete building permit application has been submitted and all required fees paid. The applicant may request vesting of the approved site-specific development plan as described in §6.9, Stage 6: Actions Following Development Approval.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS WAIVER
In order to provide flexibility in the administration of this LDC by the City, certain development standards contained in Section 4 may be considered for a waiver pursuant to the directives established in Section 9 of this LDC.
Submittals must comply with the provisions of §14.4 B, Submittal Requirements, those materials listed in §6.5 C. Minimum Application Contents.
DESIGN REVIEW STANDARD OBJECTIVES
Approved Design Review applications shall comply with the applicable standards of the LDC, including those of §4.10, Large Scale Retail. In carrying out the purpose of this Section with respect to the external design and siting of the buildings, it is the intent of this Section that the City shall exercise the minimum control necessary to achieve the overall objectives thereof. Approval shall be considered in accordance with the following objectives:
A. Architecture. Encourage architectural design features that mitigate the visual impacts of the size and scale of large retail sales establishments.
B. Neighborhood Compatibility. Assure that large retail development site planning promotes compatibility with surrounding residential, commercial areas, and other areas in the city.
§14.6 DESIGN REVIEW STANDARD OBJECTIVES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 14-5
C. Pedestrian Friendly. Promote pedestrian-friendly design and public transit access.
D. Environmental Sustainability. Encourage best development practices for energy conservation, watershed management, and air quality protection.
E. Efficient Transportation Design. Advance transportation design elements that provide safe and efficient internal circulation and are integrated with the external transportation system.
F. Master Plan Compliance. Require that the development design elements and location are in compliance with the City of Gunnison Master Plan.
§14.6 DESIGN REVIEW STANDARD OBJECTIVES
PAGE 14-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
§15.1 ENFORCEMENT BY DIRECTOR
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE P AGE 15-1
Section 15. Violations, Penalties and Enforcement
ENFORCEMENT BY DIRECTOR
The Director shall have the authority to enforce this LDC. Under the powers of this Section, the Director shall have the authority to enter onto property within the City limits to inspect or to investigate suspected violations of this LDC.
A. Premises Occupied. If the building or premises upon which the suspected violation is located is occupied, the Director shall present proper identification and request access. If access is denied, the Director may obtain a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction.
B. Premises Unoccupied. If the building or premises upon which the suspected violation is located is unoccupied, the Director shall make reasonable efforts to locate persons having charge of the premises. If entry is refused, the Director shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
A. The City may enforce the requirements of the LDC by withholding building permits. It is unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, or change the use of any building or other structure without approval of a site development plan and a building permit. The City may not issue a building permit unless the plans for the proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or use fully conform to the provisions of this LDC.
B. Any person aggrieved by a violation or apparent violation of the provisions of this LDC may file a written complaint with the Director, who shall investigate such complaint and take the appropriate action to have the violation penalized or removed, if such violation is found to exist. When it is determined that there has been a violation of any provision of the LDC, the Director shall serve written legal notice of violation in the following manner:
1. determine and include a list of violations, refer to the section(s) of the LDC violated;
2. specify a time for compliance with relevant LDC provisions 21 days from the service of the notice; and
3. serve the notice on the owner, occupant, operator, lessee, agent or other responsible party in person, provided that such notice and requirement shall be deemed to be properly served on such responsible party if a copy thereof is delivered to, posted on, or sent by registered or certified mail to his/her last known mailing address, residence or place of business.
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
A. Misdemeanor. Penalties for violation of any portion of the Land Development Code shall be as provided in Chapter 4.20, Section 4.20.010 of the Gunnison Municipal Code.
B. Each Day a Separate Offense. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense.
C. Each Lot a Separate Offense. Each lot or parcel offered for sale, agreed to be sold, sold, or transferred in violation of the provisions of this LDC shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
§15.4 REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS
PAGE 15-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS
Whenever the Director shall find a violation of any of the provisions of this LDC, the Director shall be authorized to order the following remedies.
A. Discontinuance of Use Violation. The Director may order any use of land, buildings or structures which violates the provisions of this LDC to be discontinued or abated. The Director shall order the immediate repair or removal of hazardous conditions, including hazardous signs. If a use, sign or structure poses an immediate threat to life, property or the environment, the Director may take whatever actions necessary to have it removed.
B. Removal of Buildings. The Director may order any buildings, structures or additions, alterations or structural additions thereto which violate the provisions of this LDC to be removed. Any sign placed upon or over City property or a public right-of-way may be impounded as evidence.
C. Stoppage of Illegal Development. The Director may order any development activities being accomplished which violate the provisions of this LDC to be stopped.
D. Enjoin Illegal Transfers. The Director may notify the City Attorney, who may enjoin, by action for injunction brought in any court of competent jurisdiction, any offer to sell, agreement to sell, sale, or transfer of any subdivided property before a Final Plat has been approved by the City and recorded or filed in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder.
E. Other Actions. The Director may order such other actions to be taken as are necessary and as are authorized by the Gunnison Municipal Code, by statute, or by law to ensure compliance with, or to abate violation of, the provisions of this LDC.
F. Remedies Are Cumulative. All remedies provided for in this Section are cumulative, are not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
APPLICATION OF THE LAWS
If any of the provisions of this Section are inconsistent with the provisions of any other law or laws, presently existing or enacted in the future, of the City or the State, in that the requirements regarding signs or the respective provisions differ, the provisions containing the more restrictive requirements will apply.
§16.1 ABBREVIATIONS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE P AGE 16-1
Section 16. Definitions
ABBREVIATIONS
BMPs Best Management Practices
CDOT Colorado Department of Transportation
dBa Decibels Above Reference Noise, adjusted
DBH Diameter at Breast Height
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
FCC Federal Communications Commission
ft. Feet
LDC Land Development Code
LID Low Impact Development
LOD Limits of Disturbance
LOS Level of Service
sq. ft. Square Feet
TIA Traffic Impact Analysis
UDFCD Urban Drainage and Flood Control District
USGS United States Geologic Survey
GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
Terms used shall have the following meanings as used throughout this LDC:
Definitions
Abutting
The property directly touches another piece of property.
Accessory building, structure or use
A detached building, structure, or use on the same lot with, or of a nature customarily incidental or subordinate to, and of a character related to the principal use or structure. See §3.12.
Accessway
Developed strips or sections which provide pedestrian access to private property. See §4.5B.
Adjoining
A lot or parcel of land which shares all or a part of a common boundary line with another lot or parcel of land. Parcels shall also be considered adjoining when they are only separated from each other by an alley, easement, or right-of-way.
Agriculture
The use of land for agricultural purposes, including: farming; dairying; pasturage; apiculture; horticulture; floriculture; viticulture; and animal and poultry husbandry; and, the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation, of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the principal use.
Alley
A single lane that provides alternative vehicular and service access.
Allowed use
Use which is allowed in a zone district, subject to all of the restrictions applicable to that zone district and all of the standards of this LDC.
Alteration
Any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy of an existing structure or sign; any change, grading or construction within a regulated floodplain.
Antenna
A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals. Such shall include, but not be limited to radio, television, cellular, paging, personal telecommunications services (PCS), microwave telecommunications and services not licensed by the FCC, but not expressly exempt from the City’s siting, building and permitting authority.
Applicant
The owner of land submitting a development application or the legal authorized representative.
Apron (driveway)
That portion of the driveway that may extend from the curb-cut to the building face or garage.
Architectural projection
Non-functional or ornamental building feature.
As-built plans
A set of detailed plans and document specifying how required public improvements were actually constructed.
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
PAGE 16-2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Definitions
Assisted Living
A residential building occupied by not more than 8 persons who are 60 years of age or older who do not require skilled or intermediate care facilities; or a residential building containing a state-licensed facility for the exclusive use of not more than 8 developmentally disabled person having such illnesses as cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, mental retardation, autism or epilepsy.
Automobile repair garage
Any building or structure where motorized vehicles are stored, repaired, painted, or equipped for compensation.
Average Slope
The average measurement of a hillside slope as calculated in §5.2 of this LDC. See Figure 28.
Awning
A movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and of a type which can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building; or a covered space frame structure.
Base flood
The flood having a 1% chance being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement
A story partly or wholly underground.
Bathroom
Separate room containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub, or shower.
Bedroom
Room in a dwelling unit that is marketed and designed for sleeping, or otherwise has the potential to function primarily for sleeping.
Best management practices, water
Effective, practical, structural or nonstructural methods which prevent or reduce the movement of sediment, nutrients, pesticides and other pollutants from the land to surface or ground water. (§3.10 E.2.)
Bicycle lane
That portion of a roadway set aside and designated for the use of bicycles.
Bicycle path
A paved facility that physically separates bicycle riders from motor vehicle traffic.
Bike route
A facility designated by signing to help make motorists aware of the presence of bicycles, which share the right-of-way with motor vehicles.
Block
A parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets or highways, public walks, public green strips, rural land or drainage channels, boundaries of a municipality, or a combination thereof.
Boarding or rooming house
Building, other than a hotel, cafe, or restaurant, where for direct or indirect compensation, lodging and/or meals are provided for 3 or more boarders and/or roomers, exclusive of the occupant’s family. (§3.2 B.)
Buffer
Screening that is intended to help mitigate the physical, visual and environmental impacts created by development on adjacent properties. (§4.6.E.)
Building
Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy within the purview of the International Building Code as adopted by the City.
Building coverage
The maximum portion of the lot that is covered by buildings, including both principal structures and accessory buildings. (§1.7.)
Building line or setback line
A line designating the area in which buildings may be erected, except as otherwise provided by this LDC.
Building official
The designated official responsible for enforcement of building codes and the supervision of building inspections in the city of Gunnison.
Building separation
The required separation between any two buildings located on the same lot or parcel of land. (§1.7 E.)
Building, principal
A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential zone district, any dwelling is deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
Caliper
The diameter of plant material, measured at six inches above grade for calipers of up to four inches, and 12 inches above grade for larger calipers.
Campground
Parcel of land used or intended to be used, let, or rented for overnight or short term occupancy by campers, trailers, tents, or recreational vehicles.
Canopy
Permanent roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway or other similar area, which may be wholly supported by a building or may be wholly or partially supported by columns, poles or braces extending from the ground.
Carport
A permanent roofed structure open on at least two sides, and designated for or occupied by “private” passenger vehicles.
Cemetery
A place used or to be used and dedicated or designated for interments of human remains or pet animal remains.
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 16-3
Definitions
City
The incorporated City of Gunnison, Colorado.
City Council
The governing or legislative authority of the City of Gunnison, Colorado.
City Engineer
City Engineer of the City of Gunnison.
City Manager
City Manager of the City of Gunnison.
City Property
Any dedicated public right-of-way or property owned by the City of Gunnison.
Club
Membership organization, catering exclusively to members and their guests, whose facilities are limited to use by the membership, except on occasion, and whose activities may or may not be conducted principally for monetary gain.
Colorado Medical Marijuana Code
Article 43.3 of Title 12, Colorado Revised Statutes
Columbarium
A place for the respectful and usually public storage of cinerary urns (cremated remains of the deceased).
Commercial Lodging
Hotels, motels, lodges, or convention centers with sleeping accommodations and similar commercial facilities that provides temporary lodging in guest rooms; which have common facilities for reservations, reception and maintenance: and in which meals, entertainment, and various personal services for the public may or may not be provided for remuneration.
Common interest community
Real estate described in a declaration with respect to which a person, by virtue of such person’s ownership of a unit, is obligated to pay for real estate taxes, insurance premiums, maintenance or improvement of other real estate described in a declaration.
Congregate Living
Occupancy of a structure by a group of people who do not comply with the standards for Households. Including, but not limited to: boarding houses, dormitories; fraternities and sororities; homeless shelters; monasteries and convents; nursing and convalescent homes.
Conditional Use
Land uses which are generally compatible with the permitted uses in a zone district, but which require site-specific review of their location, design, intensity, density, configuration, and operating characteristics, and which may require the imposition of appropriate conditions, in order to ensure compatibility of the use at a particular location and mitigate its potentially adverse impacts. (Section 7. )
Condominium
Common interest community in which portions of real estate are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate ownership portions. A common interest community is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners.
Consumer (Medical)
A person twenty-one years of age or older who purchases marijuana or marijuana products for personal use by persons twenty-one years of age or older, but not for resale to others.
Construction
On-site erection, fabrication, installation, alteration, demolition or removal of any structure, facility, or addition thereto, and all related activities; including, but not restricted to, clearing of land, earthmoving, blasting and landscaping.
Construction plan
Maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of these regulations.
Convenience Store
A building used for the sale of prepackaged food items and tangible consumer goods, primarily for self-service by the consumer. A convenience store may or may not have gasoline pumps.
County
Unincorporated Gunnison County, Colorado.
County Clerk and Recorder
The Gunnison County Clerk and Recorder of Gunnison County, Colorado.
Covenant
A private legal restriction on the use of land contained in the deed to the property or otherwise formally recorded.
Crematorium
A building used for the cremation of human remains.
Cut-off angle
The angle, measured up from the nadir, between the vertical axis and the first line of sight at which the bare source (the bulb or lamp) is not visible.
Day care center
Residence, facility, or pre-school which provides regular care and supervision for more than 12 children at any one time during the day for compensation.
Day care home
A residence, facility or pre-school which provides regular care and supervision for more than 3 but not more than 8 children at any one time during the day for compensation. The care and
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
PAGE 16-4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Definitions
supervision of 3 or less children at any one time during the day shall be considered to be in-home babysitting, and not subject to this LDC.
Day care school
A residence, facility or pre-school which provides regular care and supervision for more than 8 but not more than 12 children at any one time during the day for compensation.
Density
The total number of dwelling units permitted on any parcel of property planned for residential development. Density is calculated based on the total area of a lot and the zoning district of said lot. (§1.7 K.)
Developer
A person or firm that improves raw land with labor and capital, and arranges for utilities and essential services in order to sell subdivided parcels of land or to build structures for rent and/or sale.
Development
The subdivision of land into two or more parcels, the construction or reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill, land disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land.; any activity which requires a development application under this LDC, including but not limited to: site development plan, rezoning, planned development review, conditional use permit review, subdivision review, or site plan review.
Development application
Any application for development under this LDC, including but not limited to: site development plan, rezoning, planned development review, conditional use permit review, subdivision review, or site plan review.
Director
The Community Development Director of the City of Gunnison, Colorado; the City employee primarily responsible for administering the provisions of this LDC, or his or her designee.
Drilling, mining, or excavation
Commencement of drilling (except for a water well or to obtain soil samples), mining, excavation, or deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste on a parcel of land.
Drive-in facility
An establishment providing such products and services as, but not limited to: food, beverages, or financial services, to customers in vehicles.
Driveway
A private residential or nonresidential roadway located on a parcel or lot used for vehicle access.
Dwelling
Building or a portion of a building containing one room, or several rooms connected together, including a separate bathroom and a single kitchen, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, or rental or lease on a monthly or longer basis, physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and served by no more than one gas meter and one electric meter. Dwellings include: alley-loaded house, multi-family dwelling, single-family detached, townhouse, two-family house, upper story residential and zero lot line houses. (§2.3.)
Easement
A grant of one or more of the property rights by the owner to, or for the use by, the public, a corporation, or another person or entity.
Essential Services
Essential Services are the activities, utilities, and infrastructure necessary to provide and maintain the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. These services are provided by public utilities, private utilities or municipal departments. Specifically excluded as essential services are overhead towers, poles, wires and similar equipment where not an upgrade, rebuild, replacement or already in existence on a property; and operation and maintenance facility buildings.
Family
One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or between whom there is a legally recognized relationship, or not more than five unrelated persons who occupy a single dwelling unit.
Fence
Any constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
Fire Marshal
The Fire Marshal of the City of Gunnison.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
Official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones. (GMC §14.60.)
Flood insurance study
Official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the flood rate insurance rate map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Flood or flooding
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land area or of two or more properties (at least one of which is the policyholder’s
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 16-5
Definitions
property) from overflow of inland waters, unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, mudflow; or: collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or similar body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels that result in a flood as defined above. (GMC §14.60.)
Floodplain
That ground covered by water in the case of the flood of 100 year frequency, as delineated by Federal flood insurance maps and the Floodplain Ordinance of the City of Gunnison. (GMC §14.60.)
Floodway
Channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one-half foot. (GMC §14.60.)
Floor area
A gross calculation measured from the exterior wall plane or the centerline of the common wall (party wall) separating two units in a building, but shall not include mechanical rooms and chases, closet or storage areas. (§1.7 F.)
Frontage
The dimension of a property that is adjacent to a street.
Full cutoff fixture
A luminary that, by design of the housing, has a cutoff angle of less than 90 degrees. Full cutoff fixtures must be installed in a manner which maintains a cutoff angle of less than 90 degrees.
Funeral home
A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and display of the deceased before burial or cremation. A funeral home, as defined in this LDC, includes a funeral chapel.
Governing body
The City Council of the City of Gunnison.
Government administrative facilities, services and buildings
Office buildings, maintenance facilities and operations centers owned and operated by a governmental agency.
Grade, finished
Final elevation of the ground surface after development.
Grade, natural
Elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, prior to man-made alterations.
Ground cover
Any natural vegetative growth or other material which renders the soil surface stable against accelerated erosion.
Guest room
A room or suite used as living accommodations for one or more paying visitors.
Height
The vertical distances between the average grade of a structure and the highest point of the structure or to the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the highest ridge of a sloping roof. (§1.7 G.)
Home Business
The conduct of a business, occupation or trade as an accessory use entirely within a residential building or accessory structure for gain or support by residents of the dwelling and employees residing off-premises, which may serve patrons on the premises. (§3.3 L.)
Home Occupation
The conduct of a business, occupation or trade as an accessory use entirely within a residential building or accessory structure for gain or support, only by residents of the dwelling, which does not serve patrons on the premises, except in an incidental manner. (§3.3 L.)
Homeowners’ Association
An incorporated non-profit organization operating under recorded covenants for the purpose of maintaining any physical facilities, structures, improvements, systems, areas or grounds held in common.
Household
The residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a single family. (§3.2 A.)
Impervious Surface
The maximum portion of the lot covered by buildings, paved areas, or other features that inhibit percolation of water into the soil. (§1.7 C.)
Improvement
Grading, paving and curbing of streets; the installation of fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and drains and irrigation ditches; pedestrian ways, crosswalks, and such other construction as may be designated by the City Council.
Indoor amusement and entertainment establishment
Bowling alleys, game rooms/video arcades, pool/billiard halls, skating rinks, theaters and similar establishments. Not including sexually oriented businesses.
Indoor and outdoor eating and drinking establishment
Permanent building containing a restaurant, bar or tavern which serves food and/or beverages, prepared or consumed on the premises within a building or on an outdoor patio, served to the customer at tables or counters.
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
PAGE 16-6 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Definitions
Industrial Hemp
The plant of the genus cannabis and any part of such plant, whether growing or not, with Delta-9 Tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that does not exceed three-tenths percent on a dry weight basis.
Junk yard
Building, structure, or parcel of land, or portion thereof, used for the collection, storage, or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, salvaging, or demolition of vehicles, appliances, machinery, or other materials.
Kennel
An establishment for the keeping or breeding of dogs for profit, or having four dogs or more on any premises. This term does not mean veterinary clinic.
Kitchen
Kitchen sink, cooking appliance, and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches in front.
Land disturbance
Land disturbance done in preparation for or in conjunction with construction, including clearing or removal of vegetation, soil grading or filling, or paving.
Land surveyor, registered
A professional land surveyor licensed and registered in the State of Colorado.
Landscape area
Area which has been improved through the planting and maintenance of living plants such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetables, vegetative ground cover and turf grasses. Landscape area may include natural nonliving elements such as rock, stone and bark, as well as structural features, including but not limited to walks, trail connections, fences, benches, works of art, reflective pools or fountains and outdoor recreation facilities, such as swimming pools, tennis courts and the like, but shall not include areas covered by buildings, parking or access areas. In subdivisions, PUDs, mobile home and RV parks, landscape area may mean an unimproved natural area, including land under water, wetlands, floodplains and similarly sensitive lands when approved by the Commission.
Large scale retail establishment
A building containing a store or stores, with a floor area greater than 50,000 square feet, in which retail sales of goods and services are transacted between a commercial outlet and the ultimate consumer.
Loading, off-street
A completely off-street space on the same lot for the loading or unloading of materials with ingress and egress to a street or alley (§4.4 K.).
Lot
A portion or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or use and its accessories. A buildable lot is subject to zone district minimum lot sizes (§2.6). A lot shall be an integral unit of land held under unified ownership in fee or under legal control tantamount to such ownership, which may be intended for transfer of ownership or for development. The word “lot” shall include: plot, parcel or tract. (§1.7 H.)
Lot frontage
That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
Lot lines
The lines bounding a lot.
Lot lines, front
The property line dividing a lot from a street right-of-way. On a corner lot, both lot lines along the street right-of-way shall be considered front lot lines.
Lot lines, rear
The property line opposite the front lot line. On a corner lot adjacent to an alley, the rear lot line shall be that line contiguous with the alley right-of-way. On a corner lot where no alley exists, the rear lot line shall be the property line opposite the longer of the front lot lines.
Lot lines, side
Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
Lot, corner
A lot located at the intersection of abutting two or more streets.
Lot, double frontage
A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
Lot-of-record
A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
Manufactured housing
Factory-built dwelling units manufactured or constructed to comply with the standards of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. Manufactured homes shall meet the standards of §3.3, Residential Use Standards. Any manufactured home which does not meet any of the standards of §3.3 shall be considered a mobile home, and shall comply with all standards of this LDC applicable to such use.
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 16-7
Definitions
Marijuana or Marihuana
All parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. “Marijuana” or “Marihuana” does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topic or oral administration, food, drink or other product.
Marijuana Accessories
Any equipment, products, or material of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for the use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.
Marijuana Club
A place of private assembly, operated for purposes of inviting members to use or consume marijuana on-site.
Marijuana Cultivation Facility
An entity licensed to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and to sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers.
Marijuana Establishment
Marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana testing facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, or retail marijuana store.
Marijuana Product Manufacturing Facility
An entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package marijuana products; and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers.
Marijuana Products
Concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and tinctures.
Marijuana Testing Facility
An entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana.
Medical Marijuana Center
An entity licensed by a state agency to sell marijuana and marijuana products pursuant to Article XVII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code.
Massage Parlor
A commercial establishment or place primarily in the business of providing massage services, but not licensed pursuant to the Colorado Massage Parlor Code (§12, Article 48.5 C.R.S.)
Master Plan
The City of Gunnison Master Plan; the long-range comprehensive physical development plan for the City of Gunnison, Colorado, as adopted by the City Council to provide long-range development policies for the area subject to urbanization in the foreseeable future and which includes, among other things, the plan for land use, land subdivision circulation, transportation, and community facilities.
Medical marijuana
Marijuana that is grown and sold for a purpose authorized by Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution.
Medical marijuana center
A person authorized to be licensed to operate a business as described in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code that sells medical marijuana to registered patients or primary caregivers, as defined in Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, but is not a primary caregiver, and which a municipality is authorized to prohibit as a matter of law.
Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer
A person licensed pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code to operate a business known as a Medical Marijuana-Infused Products Manufacturing License, and which a municipality is authorized to prohibit as a matter of law.
Mobile home
A dwelling eight feet or more in width and 40 feet or more in body length, designed to be transported on its own permanent chassis after fabrication, and which is designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without permanent foundation, when the required plumbing, heating, and electrical facilities are connected. Mobile homes shall comply with one of the following circumstances:
1. Comply with HUD Code. New or used mobile homes installed after the effective date of this LDC shall comply with the standards of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 9174 (hereinafter referred to as the HUD Code). Such mobile homes
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
PAGE 16-8 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Definitions
shall have a roof capable of bearing a minimum 40-pound snow load.
2. Pre-date HUD Code. Mobile homes built prior to the HUD Code shall have a roof capable of bearing a minimum 30-pound snow load.
Mobile home park
A plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes, either occupied or intended to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, is located, regardless of whether a charge is made for such accommodations.
Mobile home space
The area of a mobile home park allotted and designed for the location of one mobile home.
Multi-use trails
Multi-use trails are minimum 15-foot wide rights-of-way or easements dedicated for public use and have a minimum 8 foot wide tread way surface centered on the easement center line.
(§4.5 B.3.)
Nonconforming lot
Any lot lawfully established pursuant to the zoning and building regulations in effect at the time of its development, but which does not conform to the standards of this LDC for the zone district in which the lot is located regarding minimum lot size or minimum lot frontage. (§11.4.)
Nonconforming sign
Any sign lawfully established pursuant to the zoning and building regulations in effect at the time of its development, but which does not conform to the standards of this LDC for the zone district in which the sign is located regarding sign type, maximum sign area and sign standards.
(§11.5.)
Nonconforming structure
Any structure lawfully established pursuant to the zoning and building regulations in effect at the time of its development, but which does not conform to the standards of this LDC for the zone district in which the structure is located regarding minimum setbacks, maximum height, maximum lot coverage, maximum density, minimum landscape area, minimum building width, minimum floor area or the applicable standards for off-street parking, landscaping, or improvements.
(§11.3.)
Nonconforming use
Any use of a structure or land lawfully established pursuant to the zoning and building regulations in effect at the time of its development, but which use is not designated in this LDC as a permitted or conditional use in the zone district in which the use is located. (§11.2)
Nudity or state of nudity
The appearance of the human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female human breasts; or, a state of dress which fails opaquely and fully to cover human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or areola or nipple of the human breast.
Nursing home
A facility, however named, which is advertised, announced, or maintained for the express or implied purpose of providing nursing or convalescent care for three or more persons unrelated to the licensee. A nursing home is a home for chronic or convalescent patients, who, on admission, are not as a rule, acutely ill and who do not usually require special facilities such as an operating room, X-ray facilities, laboratory facilities, and obstetrical facilities. A nursing home provides care for persons who have remedial ailments or other ailments, for which medical and nursing care are indicated; who, however, are not sick enough to require general hospital care.
Office
A room, group of rooms, or building whose primary use is the conduct of a business, professional service, or governmental activity of a non-retail nature; including administration, record keeping, clerical work, and similar functions. This definition is not meant to include manufacturing, processing, repair, or storage of materials or products.
Optional Premises Cultivation Operation
A person licensed pursuant to the Colorado Medical marijuana Code to operate a business known as an optional premises grow facility in order to grow and cultivate marijuana for a purpose authorized by Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, and which a municipality is authorized to prohibit as a matter of law.
Outdoor Display
The outdoor display of merchandise readily available for sale. See §4.7 B.
Outdoor Storage
Merchandise or material in boxes, crates, on pallets or other kinds of shipping containers; fleet vehicles; and other similar merchandise, material or equipment. See §4.7 C.
Owner
Person, firm, association, syndicate, joint venture, partnership, governmental unit or corporation having charge of any real property according to the records held by the County Clerk and Recorder.
Parcel
Means “lot” as defined herein. (§1.6 H 3.)
Parks and open
An area open to the general public and reserved for recreational, education or scenic purposes.
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 16-9
Definitions
space
Parking lot
An area not within a building, where motor vehicles may be stored for the purpose of temporary, daily, or overnight off-street parking (§4.4).
Parking space
A designated off-street area designed to accommodate the parking of one vehicle. (§4.4 C.).
Parking, off-street
Parking area located wholly within the limits of a parcel of land.
Patient
Has the meaning provided in Section 14(1)(c) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution.
Pedestrian-friendly design
Those commercial developments which can demonstrate a high capacity to encourage pedestrian and bicycle traffic to and from the development and inter connectivity with adjacent land uses.
Place of worship
A building primarily used by a non-profit organization for organized religious services and supporting uses.
Plan, sketch
A map of a proposed subdivision or other development, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of this LDC to evaluate feasibility and design characteristics at an early stage in the planning. (§12.5.)
Plat, final
The map or maps of a proposed subdivision drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of this LDC as an instrument for recording real property interests with the County Clerk and Recorder. (§12.7.)
Plat, preliminary
The map or maps of a proposed subdivision and specified supporting materials, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of this LDC to permit the evaluation of the proposal prior to detailed engineering and design. (§12.6.)
Primary caregiver
Has the meaning provided in Section 14(1)(f) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution.
Primary façade
The building wall plane that faces the primary street frontage, faces parking lots meant to be used by consumers, or is within 200 feet of a public street. Any wall plane that faces either Highway 50 or Highway 135 shall be considered a primary façade.
Primary residence
The place that a person or family member, by custom and practice, makes his or her principle domicile and address and to which the person or family member intends to return, following any temporary absence, such as vacation. Residence is evidenced by actual daily physical presence, use, and occupancy of the primary residence and the use of the residential address for domestic purposes, such as, but not limited to, slumber, preparation of and partaking of meals, regular mail delivery, vehicle and voter registration, or credit, water and utility billing. A person or family member shall have only one primary residence.
Professional engineer
An engineer licensed and registered in the State of Colorado.
Public facility
A building or area owned or used by any department or branch of the City of Gunnison, the State of Colorado, or the Federal Government.
Public use
Any area building or structure held and/or controlled exclusively for public purposes by department or branch of any government, without reference to the ownership of the building or structure.
Public utility
A business or service which is in the business of regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of public consequence and need, such as electricity, gas, water, sewage disposal, transportation or communications.
Radio or television studio
A building used for radio (audio) or television (visual) recording and production.
Recreational vehicle
A pickup camper, motor home, travel trailer, tent trailer, vehicle and tent or similar mobile unit which has wheels, is intended to be transported over streets, roads and highways as a motor vehicle or attached to a motor vehicle, and is designed primarily for use as a temporary unit for human occupancy. Recreation vehicles shall be used for human occupancy only when located within a lawful recreational vehicle park, except that recreational vehicles may be inhabited for no more than seven days on private property within a 30-day period. (Ordinance 3, 2015)
Recreational Vehicle (RV) park
Land used or intended to be used, let, or rented for occupancy by vacationing transient campers traveling by automobile or otherwise, or for occupancy by tents, or other movable or temporary sleeping quarters of any kind, together with automobile parking spaces and incidental utility structures and facilities required and provided in connection with the use. This definition shall not
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
PAGE 16-10 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Definitions
include trailer sales lots where unoccupied trailers are parked for inspection and sale.
Resort
Group of buildings designed for recreational purposes and used to accommodate individuals on a temporary or term occupancy basis.
Retail marijuana store
An entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers.
Retail sales establishment
A store selling retail items in which sales of goods are transacted between a commercial outlet and the ultimate consumer.
Rights-of-way
All streets, roadways, sidewalks, alleys and all other areas reserved for present or future use by the public as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian travel or for other public purposes.
Roadway
The improved or unimproved portion of a street intended for the accommodation of vehicular traffic.
Roof line
The top edge of the roof or the top edge of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette, but not including equipment structures.
School, public or private
A public or private institution offering a curriculum of education authorized by the State of Colorado giving regular instruction at the primary, secondary level, or a school for the mentally or physically disabled. Included in this definition are preschool programs. However, this definition does not include day care facilities, individual instruction, or classes in a specialized subject.
School, trade, or business
An institution offering instruction beyond high school level with a course of study in vocational, technical or other special subjects.
Screening
The method by which a view of one site from another abutting site is shielded, concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques include fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features.
Secure Area
An area within the primary residence or associated accessory structure accessible only to the person possessing, growing or processing the marijuana plant for personal use. Secure areas shall be partitioned space with doors, walls, ceilings and floors constructed with rigged wood, sheet rock or other typical construction materials and locked to prevent access by children, visitors, casual passersby, vandals, or anyone not authorized to possess marijuana.
Self-storage facility
A building or group of buildings consisting of individual, self-contained units leased to individuals, organizations, or businesses for self-service storage of personal property.
Setback
The required distance between the nearest lot line and the furthermost projection of the building wall-plane along a line at right angles to setback lines. See §1.7 L.
Sexually-oriented business
Sexually-oriented businesses shall be those listed herein, as defined:
a. Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a significant portion of its stock in trade books, films, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas.
b. Adult mini motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas.
c. Adult motel means a motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas.
d. Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas.
e. Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 16-11
Definitions
describing sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas.
f. Cabaret means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, “go-go” dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas.
g. Massage parlor means any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with sexual conduct, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes specific anatomical areas.
h. Model studio means any establishment or business which provides, as a substantial or significant part of its business, the service or modeling of adults distinguished or characterized by emphasis on depicting sexual conduct or specific anatomical areas by means of photography, painting, sketching, drawing or sculpture by persons paying any form of consideration or gratuity.
h. Sexual encounter center means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in sexual conduct or exposing specific anatomical areas.
Sidewalk
Strips or sections of concrete or stone a minimum of four feet in width, typically parallel to adjacent streets, intended for use as a public walkway for pedestrians. Sidewalks are located within dedicated road rights-of-way or public easements. (§4.5 B.1.)
Signs
Any writing, pictorial representation, decoration (including any material used to differentiate sign copy from its background), form, emblem or trademark, flag or banner, or mural to attract business, or any other display of similar character which:
1. is a structure or any part thereof (including the roof or wall of a building;
2. is written, printed, projected, painted, constructed or otherwise placed or displayed upon or designed into a building, board, plate, canopy, awning, vehicle, or upon any material object or device whatsoever; and,
3. by reason of its form, color, wording, symbol, design, illumination, motion or other feature attracts or is designed to attract attention to the subject thereof or is used as a means of identification, advertisement or announcement.
Site plan
A plan prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensions, the boundaries of the site and the location of all buildings, streets, uses, and principal site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land.
Site-specific development plan
A plan of land development submitted to the City pursuant to Title 24, Article 68, Colorado Revised Statutes, for purpose of obtaining approval on the creation of vested property rights through one of the following zoning or land use permits or approvals: subdivision plat, zoning amendment, conditional use permit, variance, large scale retail design review or common interest communities.
Solar access
Access which protects reasonably placed solar energy systems from shadow blocking exposure to the sun during hours of high insolation which are between 10:00 A.M. and 3:00 P.M. local time on December 21.
Specified anatomical area
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the areola; or
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified sexual activities
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, or tumescence;
2. Masturbation, actual or simulated;
3. Sex Acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; and
4. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks, or female breasts.
Street
A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic and pedestrian use. Includes the
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
PAGE 16-12 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Definitions
following street classifications.
1. Arterial. The major street in the street hierarchy, which has a high traffic volume and is not intended to be a residential street. An Arterial provides connections with, or is a major state or interstate roadway and is often the location of significant community facilities as well as retail, commercial and industrial facilities. Main Street/Highway 135 and Tomichi Avenue/Highway 50 are Arterial streets.
2. Collector. A street whose function is to conduct traffic between Arterial streets and/or activity centers. It is a principal traffic artery within residential areas and carries relatively high volume. A Collector can sustain minor retail or other commercial establishments along its route which will influence the traffic flow. Major Collectors include streets such as Virginia Avenue and Colorado Street; minor collectors include Boulevard Street and Wisconsin Street.
3. Local. A street whose primary purpose is to conduct traffic to and from dwelling units to other streets within the hierarchy. Occasionally a Local street will connect with two or three small places or other Local streets.
4. Sub-local. A street whose primary purpose is to conduct traffic to and from dwelling units to other Local streets. Sub-local streets have a 60-foot right-of-way width and must be approved by City Council. See §4.2 B.2.
5. Cul-de-sac. A Local street with only one outlet, which is terminated at the other end by a vehicular turnaround. The length of the cul-de-sac is measured from the Center of the nearest intersection to the center of the Cul-de-sac turnaround. (§4.2 C.)
6. Alley. A strip of land dedicated to public use, located at the side or rear of lots and providing a secondary means of vehicular access to the property.
Street frontage
Portion of the boundary of a parcel of land that is parallel with any single public street or way. (Corner lots are deemed to have 2 street frontages.)
Street frontage, primary
Street frontage on which the residential or business address applies.
Street, public
Any county road dedicated to the public annexed to the City of Gunnison or any street or road dedicated to the City of Gunnison for public purposes.
Structure
Any building, carport, deck, fence, gazebo, pole, antenna, satellite reception or transmission device, storage tank, tower, bridge, dam, pier, or any other construction or erection, except porches, slabs, patios, decks, walks, or steps that are uncovered and do not exceed 30 inches above grade.
Subdivider
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
Subdivision
Any parcel of land which is to be used for condominiums, multi-family dwellings, or any other multiple-dwelling units, unless such land was previously subdivided and the filing accompanying such subdivision complied with municipal regulations applicable to subdivisions of substantially the same density, or the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It includes resubdivision and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. It includes mobile home subdivisions which is a parcel of land intended to be used exclusively for and occupied solely by mobile homes and within which the homes and the land are owned by occupants. (§12.3 A.)
Telecommunications facility
A signal distribution system used or operated by a telecommunications carrier under a license from the FCC consisting of a combination of improvements and equipment including (i) one or more antennas; (ii) a supporting structure and the hardware by which antennas are attached; (iii) equipment housing; and, (iv) ancillary equipment such as signal transmission cables and miscellaneous hardware. (§3.10 B. and §3.11 B.)
Temporary commercial activity
Temporary commercial activity” means a general retail sales or other commercial use operated outside of a building on a seasonal basis. Conditional Use permits are required for all “temporary commercial activities” excluding farm stands, farmers’ markets, holiday tree sales, rafting and similar recreational operations, carnivals, circus, temporary private events, construction field
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE 16-13
Definitions
office, and model homes units.
Use
Purpose for which any land, structure, or building is designed, maintained, or occupied. (§2.4.)
Utilities Major
Any facility or equipment, including but not limited to electrical power plant, substation, pump stations, or community wells.
Utilities Minor
Minor utilities include but are not limited to electrical transformers, powers and poles, water valves, and home energy production facilities.
Variance
A deviation from the literal terms of this LDC that would not be contrary to the public interest in cases where the literal enforcement of the provisions of this LDC would result in undue or unnecessary hardship. (Section 8. )
Veterinary clinic
Building or area in which animals requiring special medical care are treated, or temporarily housed. The term shall not be construed to include kennel.
Waiver
Authorizations to differ from the literal terms of established standards. (Section 9. )
Wetland Boundary
The line delineating a jurisdictional wetland as administered by the Army Corps of Engineers.
Yard
The portion of a lot which does not have a structure located thereon and which is unobstructed form the ground to the sky, except for the permitted projections in §1.7 L.
Yard, front
A yard extending across the width of the lot and measured from the front line of the lot to the nearest line of the building. (§1.7 L.)
Yard, rear
A yard extending across the width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot or street frontage and the nearest line of the building. (§1.7 L.)
Yard, side
A yard on each side of the building between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the year yard. (§1.7 L.)
Zone District, base
The base zone district dimensional standards which establish maximum density and intensity, lot sizes, height standards, and lot coverage criteria for all development applications. (§2.6.)
Zone District, planned
A land area such that varying land uses and innovative design and layout of the development provide significant benefits to both the developer and the City over those land use patterns developed and regulated under conventional zoning districts and development standards.
(§2.2 D.)
Zone District, special purpose
Western State Colorado University (WSCU). (§2.2 C.)
§16.2 GENERAL TERMS DEFINED
PAGE 16-14 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
APPENDICES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Section 17. Appendices
APPENDICES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
APPENDIX A –PREFERRED PLANTING LIST
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE P AGE A- 1
APPENDIX A – PREFERRED PLANTING LIST
PREFERRED PLANTING LIST FOR GUNNISON RECOMMENDED BY THE CSU EXTENSION
HARDINESS RATINGS:
WATER:
SUN:
1. Good
M – Moist
, = Full Sun
2. Acceptable
A – Adaptable
- = Partial Shade
3. May be tolerant
D – Dry
+ = Shade
TREES – CONIFERS
Botanical Name
Common Name
Hardiness
Water
Sun
Spread/Height
Comments
Abies concolor
White Fir
1
M/A
,
20'/30'
Native to CO
Juniperus scopulorum
Common Juniper (upright)
1
D
,
12'/30'
Native to Gunnison County
Picea pungens
Colorado Blue Spruce
1
A
,/-
30'/60'
Native to Gunnison County
Pinus arustata
Bristlecone Pine / Foxtail Pine
1
D
,/-
20'/40'
Native to Gunnison County
Pinus engelmannii
Englemann Spruce
1
M/A
,/-
Native to Gunnison County
Pinus flexilis
Limber Pine
1
D
,
30'/50'
Native to Gunnison County
Pinus nigra
Austrian Pine
2
A/D
,
40'/60'
Pinus ponderosa
Ponderosa Pine
1
D
,
25'/60'
Native to Gunnison County
Pseudotsuga menziesii
Douglas Fir
1
A
,/-
25'/80'
Native to Gunnison County
TREES – DECIDUOUS
Botanical Name
Common Name
Hardiness
Water
Sun
Spread/Height
Comments
Acer ginnala
Amur Maple
2
M/A
,
20'/20'
Acer tataricum
Tatarian Maple
2
M/A
A
20'/25'
Alnus incana
Gray Alder
1
M
,/-
20'/30'
Native to Gunnison County
Betula occidentalis
Western River Birch
1
M
,
25'/25'
Native to CO
Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Green Ash
2
A/D
,
40'/50'
“Patmore” and “Marshall” seedless
Malus cultivars
Crabapple
2
A
,
25'/25'
Choose cold-hardy cultivars
Populus alba
White Poplar
2
A
,
40'/50'
Populus angustifolia
Narrow Leaf Cottonwood
1
M/A
,
30'/60'
Native to Gunnison County
Populus deltoids
Plains Cottonwood
1
M/A
,
40'/60'
Native to CO
Populus tremuloides
Aspen
1
M/A
,
30'/50'
Native to Gunnison County
Prunus virginiana
Chokecherry
1
A
,
25'/30'
Cultivar “Canada Red”
Sorbus acuparia
European Mountain Ash
2
A
,
25'/25'
SHRUBS - EVERGREEN
Botanical Name
Common Name
Hardiness
Water
Sun
Spread/Height
Comments
Cytissus purgans
“Spanish Gold” Broom
2
A/D
,
3'/5'
Juniperus chinensis cultivars
Chinese Juniper
1
A/D
,
12'/3'
Choose cold-hardy cultivars
Juniperus horizontalis cultivars
Creeping Juniper
2
A
,
8'/1'
Choose cold-hardy cultivars
Juniperus Sabina cultivars
Savin Juniper
2
A/D
,
8'/2'
Choose cold-hardy cultivars
Pinus mugo
Mugo Pine
1
A/D
,
10'/10'
SHRUBS - DECIDUOUS
Botanical Name
Common Name
Hardiness
Water
Sun
Spread/Height
Comments
Acer glabrum
Rocky Mountain Maple
1
D
,
10'/15'
Native to Gunnison County
Amelanchier alnifolia
Saskatoon Serviceberry
1
A/D
,/-
12'/12'
Native to Gunnison County
Amelanchier Canadensis
Canadian Serviceberry
1
A
,
12'/12'
Artemisia tridentate
Big Sagebrush
1
D
,
4'/4'
Native to Gunnison County
APPENDIX A –PREFERRED PLANTING LIST
PAGE A- 2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
SHRUBS – DECIDUOUS (CONTINUED)
Botanical Name
Common Name
Hardiness
Water
Sun
Spread/Height
Comments
Caragana arborescens
Siberian Peashrub
1
D
,
12'/15'
Cercocarpus intricatus
Little Leaf Mountain Mahogany
1
D
,
4'/4'
Native to CO
Cercocarpus ledifolius
Curlleaf Mountain Mahogany
1
D
,
8'/8'
Native to CO
Cercocarpus montanus
Mountain Mahogany
1
D
,/-
6'/6'
Native to Gunnison County
Cornus sericea
Red-osier Dogwood
1
M/A
A
3'/3'
Native to Gunnison County
Cotoneaster acutifolia
Peking Cotoneaster
1
D
,/-
6'/3'
Ericameria nauseosus
Rabbit Brush
1
D/A
,
4'/4'
Native to Gunnison County
Fallugia paradoxa
Apache plume
1
D/A
,
4'/4'
Native to Gunnison County
Holodiscus dumosus
Rock Spiraea
1
A/D
,/-
5'/5'
Native to Gunnison County
Lonicera involucrate
Twinberry Honeysuckle
1
M/A
,/-
6'/8'
Native to Gunnison County
Lonicera tartarica
Honeysuckle
1
A/D
,/-
8'/8'
Philadelphus microphyllus
Little Leaf Mock Orange
1
A
,
6'/6'
Native to CO
Physocarpus opulifolius
Common Ninebark
2
A
,
8'/8'
Native to CO
Potentilla fruticosa
Potentilla
1
A
,
3'/3'
Native to Gunnison County
Prunus besseyi
Sand Cherry
1
A/D
,
6'/6'
Native to CO
Prunus tomentosa
Nanking Cherry
1
A
,
12'/10'
Prunus x cistena
Purple Leaf Sand Cherry
1
A
,
6'/8'
Quercus gambelii
Gambel Oak
2
D
,/-
12'/20'
Native to Gunnison County
Rhus glabra
Smooth Sumac
1
A/D
,
8'/10'
Rhus trilobata
Three-leaf Sumac
1
D
,
6'/6'
Native to Gunnison County
Rhus typhina
Staghorn Sumac
2
A
,
10'/10'
Nice fall color, yellow, orange, red
Ribes alpinum
Alpine Currant
1
A
,/-
6'/6'
Ribes Aureum
Golden Currant
1
A/D
,/-
8'/8'
Ribes cereum
Wax Currant
1
D
,
4'/4'
Native to Gunnison County
Robina neomexicana
New Mexican Locust
2
D
,
12'/20'
Rosa foetida bicolor
Copper Rose
1
A/D
,
8'/10'
Rosa rugosa
Rugosa Rose
1
A/D
,
6'/4'
Rubus cultivars
Cultivated Raspberries
1
A/M
,
5/10'
Rubus deliciosus
Thimbleberry
1
A
,
6'/6'
Native to Gunnison County
Salix purpurea
Dwarf Arctic Willow
1
M/A
,/-
6'/6'
Sambucus canadensis
Black Elderberry
2
M/A
,
12'/12'
Sambucus racemosa
Red Elderberry
1
M/A
,/-
12'/12'
Native to Gunnison County
Sheperdia argentea
Silver Buffaloberry
1
D
,
12'/15'
Chepherdia Canadensis
Buffaloberry
1
A/D
,
4'/6'
Native to Gunnison County
Spirea nipponica
Nippon Spiraea
2
A
,/-
5'/5'
Spirea x bumalda
Hybrid Japanese Spiraea
2
A
,/-
4'/3'
Spirea x vanhouttei
Vanhoutte Spiraea
2
A
,/-
8'/6'
Symphoricarpos rotundifolius
Snowberry
2
A/D
,/-
6'/3'
Native to Gunnison County
Syringia vulgaris
Common Lilac
1
A/D
,
12'/20'
Viburnum opulus var. americanum
American Cranberry Bush Viburnum
1
M/A
,
6'/6'
APPENDIX A PREFERRED PLANTING LIST
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE A - 3
FLOWERS - PERENNIALS
BOTANICAL NAME
COMMON NAME
HARDINESS
WATER
SUN
SPREAD/HT.
FLOWER COLOR
BLOOM TIME
NATIVE
Achillea filipendulina
Yarrow, tall yellow
1
D
,
2'/5'
yellow
summer
Achillea millefolium
Yarrow, common white
1
D
,
3'/2'
white
Summer
Aguilegia chrysantha
Golden Columbine
1
A
,/-
18"/36"
Yellow
summer
X
Aquilegia caerulea
Rocky Mt Columbine
1
A
-/+
18"/24"
blue w/ white center
summer
X
Alcea rosea
Hollyhocks
1
D/A
,
3'/6'
various
early summer-fall
Alyssum montanum
Basket of Gold
1
A
,
18'/12'
mustard yellow
mid spring
Artemisia frigid
Fringed Sage
1
D
,
1'/2'
Gray/blue foliage
Summer
X
Campanula rotundiflora
Harebell (Bluebell Bellflower)
1
D
,/-
18"/18"
Blue
Late spring-summer
X
Cerastium tomentosum
Snow in Summer
1
A
,/-
10"/10"
White
Spring-summer
X
Chamerion angusifolim
Fireweed
1
A
,
2'/2'
Pink
Summer
X
Chrysanthemum coccineum
Painted Daisy
1
A
,
18"/24"
Various
Late spring-summer
Chrysanthemum maximum
Shasta Daisy
1
A
,
2'/3'
White
Summer
Convallaria majalis
Lily of the Valley
1
M
-/+
15"/12"
White
Late spring
Coreopsis lanceolata
Lance-leaf Coreopsis
1
A
,
2'/2'
Yellow
Early-mid summer
Coreopsis tinctoria
Plains Coreopsis
1
A
,
15"/15"
Yellow w/ red center
Mid-summer
Delphinium spp. and cultivars
Larkspur
1
A
,
3'/5'
Various
Summer
Dianthus spp. and cultivars
Dianthus
1
A
,
12"/12"
Various
Mid-summer
Dicentra spectabillis
Bleeding Heart
1
A
+
2'/3'
Pink
Late spring early summer
Digitalis grandiflora
Floxglove
1
M/A
,/-
18"/30"
Yellow, pink, white
Late spring– early summer
Echinacea purpurea
Purple Coneflower
1
A/D
,
2'/3'
Lavender-purple
Mid-late summer
Erigeron speciosus
Fleabane
1
A
,
2'/2'
White
Summer
X
Eroigonum umbellatum
Sulfur Flower / Buckwheat
1
D
,
6"/2'
Yellow
Summer
X
Erythrocoma triflora
Prairie Smoke
1
M/A
,/-
9"/10"
Pink
Early summer
X
Gaillardia aristata
Blanketflower
1
D
,
2'/2'
Yellow w/ red center
X
Hemerocallis cultivars
Daylily
1
D
,
3'/3'
Orange, yellow
Mid-summer
Hosta cultivars
Plantain Lily
2
A
+
2'/2'
White
Late summer
Iberis sempervirens
Candytuft
1
A
,
2'/1'
White
Late spring early summer
Ipomopsis aggregate
Scarlet Gilia
1
D/A
,
1'/2'
Red
Summer
X
Iris cultivars
Iris
1
M
,
18"/36"
Many
summer
Liatris punctata
Dotted Blazing Star
1
A/D
,
18"/24"
Lavender-purple
Mid-late summer
Linum lewisii
Blue Flax
1
D
,
18"/24"
Blue
Late spring-mid summer
Lupinus cultivars
Lupine
1
A
,
2'/3'
Various
Spring-summer
Lychnis chalcedonica
Maltese Cross
1
A
,
18"/24"
Scarlet
Mid-summer
Monarda fistulosa
Beebalm
1
D/A
,
1'/1'
Pink
Summer
Oenothera caespotosa
Evening Primrose
1
D
,
1'/3'
White/yellow
Summer
Papaver nudicaule
Iceland Poppy
1
A
,
18"/24"
Various
Spring-summer
Papaver orientalis
Oriental Poppy
1
M/A
,
18"/18"
Orange
summer
APPENDIX A –PREFERRED PLANTING LIST
PAGE A- 4 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
FLOWERS - PERENNIALS
BOTANICAL NAME
COMMON NAME
HARDINESS
WATER
SUN
SPREAD/HT.
FLOWER COLOR
BLOOM TIME
NATIVE
Penstemon spp and cultivars
Penstemon
1
A
,
2'/3'
Many
Spring-summer
Perovskia atriplicifolia
Russian Sage
2
D/A
,
4'/4'
Purple
Summer
Phlox paniculata
Phlox
1
A
,
2'/3'
Various
Mid-late summer
Physostegia virginiana
Obedient Plant
1
A
,/-
2'/3'
White
Late summer-fall
Polemonium caeruleum
Jacob’s Ladder
2
A
-/+
18"/24"
Blue
Late spring-summer
X
Pulsatilla patens
Pasque Flower
1
D/A
,/-
9"/9"
Purple
Spring
X
Ratibida columnifera
Mexican Hat
1
A
,
2'/3'
Golden
Summer
X
Ruidbeckia fulgida
Black-Eyed Susan
1
A/D
,
2'/2'
Yellow w/ green eye
Summer
Rudibeckia hirta
Black-Eyed Susan
1
A/D
,
2'/3'
Yellow w/ brown eye
summer
X
Solidago canadensis
Goldenrod
1
A
,
24"/24"
Yellow
Late summer
X
Thermopsis Montana
Golden Banner
1
A
,/-
2'/3'
Golden
Spring
X
Tradescantia andersoniana
Spiderwort
1
A
,/-
2'/2'
Magenta pink
Early summer
Veronica spicata
Speedwell
1
A
,
18"/18"
Various
summer
Viola Corsica
Corsican Violet
1
A
,
6"/12"
Purple
Spring and summer
Yucca harrimanaea
Yucca
1
D
,
3'/3'
White
Summer
X
BULBS
BOTANICAL NAME
COMMON NAME
HARDINESS
WATER
SUN
FLOWER COLOR
BLOOM TIME
Chionodoxa lucilae
Chionodoxa
1
A
,
Various
Spring
Crocus
Crocus
1
A
,
Purple & white
Early spring
Hyacinthus orientalis
Hyacinth
1
A
,
Blue
Spring
Narcissus
Daffodils
1
A
,
Various
Spring
Tulipa
Tulips
1
A
,
Various
Spring
GROUND COVERS
BOTANICAL NAME
COMMON NAME
HARDINESS
WATER
SUN
SPREAD/HT.
NATIVE
Ajuga reptans
Bugleweed
2
A/D
-
6"/3'
Antennaria sp.
Pussytoes
1
D
,
3"/3'
Native to Gunnison County
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
Kinnikinnick
1
A/D
-
6"/3'
Native to Gunnison County
Cerastium tomentosum
Snow in Summer
1
D/A
,
6"/3'
Fragaria Americana
Wild Strawberry
1
A/D
,
6"/3'
Galium odoratum
Sweet William
2
A
-/+
6"/10"
Geranium cultivars
Cranesbill
2
A
,/-
6"/4'
Heuchera cultivars
Coral Bells
1
A
-/+
1'/2'
Mahonia repens
Creeping Barberry
1
A/D
,/-
1'/3'
Native to Gunnison County
Nepeta x faassenii
Catmint
1
D
,
2'/3'
Paxistima myrsinites
Mountain Lover
2
A
-/+
2'/2'
Native to Gunnison County
Phlox subulata
Creeping Phlox
2
A/D
,/-
6"/3'
Sedum cultivars
Stonecrop
2
D/A
,/-
6"/3'
Thyumus pseudolanuginosis
Wooly Thyme
2
A/D
,
3"/3'
Veronica liwanensis
Turkish Veronica
1
A
,/-
3"/3'
Vinca minor
Periwinkle
2
A
,/-
6"/10'
VINES
BOTANICAL NAME
COMMON NAME
HARDINESS
WATER
SUN
COMMENTS
Clematis x jackmanil
Purple Clematis
2
A
,
Euonymus fortune
Wintercreeper
1
A/D
A
Parthenocissus quinquifolia
Virginia Creeper
1
A
,/-
Quinquefoia englemannii
Engleman Ivy
1
A
,/-
APPENDIX B – LANDSCAPE SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE P AGE B - 1
APPENDIX B - LANDSCAPE SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
Landscaping and Buffering Plan drawings (scale of 1" = 20') shall show the following:
1. Location and character of existing and proposed landscaping, including types of surfaces to be used for specific areas. Include planting schedule and species, sizes and quantities of planting material.
2. Location, character and species of all individual trees measuring eight (8) inches DBH and larger located inside of and within twenty-five (25) feet of the proposed limits of disturbance. All trees greater than eight (8) inches DBH that are proposed to be removed shall be noted on the plan.
3. Location, dimensions and materials to be used for fences, walls, berms, screening (where applicable) and retaining walls. Include proposed typical designs for all fencing.
4. Location and dimensions of all buffer areas from zone district boundaries, wetlands and stream/river corridors.
5. Cost estimate of proposed landscaping improvements.
6. Proposed maintenance plan for landscaping improvements.
7. Location, height and type of exterior lighting fixtures.
P AGE B - 2 CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
APPENDIX C – PROTECTION OF TREES AND VEGETATION DURING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
CITY OF GUNNISON LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE PAGE C - 1
APPENDIX C - PROTECTION OF TREES AND VEGETATION DURING CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
A. Fencing
Within the limits of disturbance, fencing, at a minimum, should be placed around each significant tree and around stands of more than 12 trees, and at a distance equal to the size of the individual or outermost tree’s drip zone.
For purposes of this subsection, the drip zone is calculated by measuring the diameter of the tree at breast height; every inch of diameter is equal to one and one-half feet of drip zone. For example, a 12 inch diameter tree will require a minimum 18 foot wide drip zone.
No construction, grading, equipment or material storage, or any other activity shall be allowed within this area, and the fencing shall remain in place until all land alteration, construction and development are completed.
B. Root Protection
If it is necessary to fill over the root zone, compacted soils shall be avoided by sandwiching fabric, rocks and more fabric under the area to be filled.
Fill placed directly on the roots shall not exceed a maximum of six inches in depth.
The topography adjacent to trees or shrubs shall be drained so that the vegetation is not drowned by the pooling of rainfall or irrigation.
Utility trenches near trees should be avoided. If a line must be near a tree, tunneling, auguring or other mitigation measures shall be used. Cutting more than 30 percent of the roots endangers the health of the tree, and over 40 percent affects the tree’s stability.
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK