HOME RULE CHARTER AND CODE OF THE CITY OF GREENWOOD VILLAGE, COLORADO 
Republished in 2017 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF GREENWOOD VILLAGE 
Mayor 
Ron Rakowsky 
City Council 
Dave Bullock 
Tom Dougherty 
Dr. Judith Hilton 
Anne Ingebretsen 
Dave Kerber 
George Lantz 
Steve Moran 
Jerry Presley 
City Manager 
Jim Sanderson 
City Clerk 
Susan Ortiz 
City Attorney 
Tonya Haas Davidson 
SUPPLEMENTATION 
The Town of Greenwood Village, Colorado Municipal Code, originally published by Colorado Code Publishing Company, will be kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
Supplements to this Code provide periodic updating through the removal and replacement of pages. This inter-leaf supplementation system requires that each page which is to be removed and replaced is identified so that the updating may be accurately accomplished and historically maintained. 
Instructions for supplementation are provided for each supplement, identified by Supplement number, date and inclusive ordinance numbers. The Instructions for posting the removal and replacement of pages must be followed and accomplished in sequence, with the most recent supplementation posted last . 
When supplementation is completed and the removal and replacement of all pages are accomplished, the Instructions should be placed under the Supplementation tab, with the most recent Instruction sheet on top. Previous Instructions should not be removed, so that the user may refer to this tab section to verify whether the code book is fully updated with all supplements included. 
The maintenance of a Municipal Code with all supplementation is an important activity which deserves close attention so that the value of the code is maintained as a fully comprehensive compilation of the legislative ordinances of the municipality. 
AMENDMENTS 
Amendments may be made to the Code by additions, revisions or deletions therefrom. Those changes may be made as follows: 
Additions: Additions may be made by ordinance to the Code as follows: 
The "Greenwood Village Municipal Code" is amended by the addition thereto of a new Section 2-2-90, which is to read as follows: 
(Set out full section number, title and contents) 
or, if the location of the new section number or numbers is undetermined, the Code may be amended as follows: 
The "Greenwood Village Municipal Code" is amended by the addition of the following: 
(Set out section title and contents) 
Revisions: A revision of the Code may be accomplished as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Greenwood Village Municipal Code" is repealed in its entirety and readopted to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the readopted code section) 
or as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Greenwood Village Municipal Code" is amended to read as follows: 
(Set out section number, title and entire contents of the amended code section) 
Repeal: Sections, articles and chapters may be repealed as follows: 
Section 2-2-90 of the "Greenwood Village Municipal Code" is repealed in its entirety. 
CITY OF GREENWOOD VILLAGE, COLORADO HOME RULE CHARTER 
1968 
Supplemented by 

> 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Greenwood Village, Colorado, under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Colorado and in order to exercise the rights, privileges and responsibilities of self-government granted to us by the said Constitution, do ordain and establish this Home Rule Charter for the City of Greenwood Village, Colorado. 
ARTICLE I - General Provisions 

Section 1.01 - Name and Boundaries. 
    The municipal corporation heretofore existing as the City of Greenwood Village in Arapahoe County, State of Colorado, shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate. It shall be known as the City of Greenwood Village. It shall maintain its present boundaries until changed in a manner authorized by law. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 1.02 - Powers. 
    The City shall have all the power of local self-government and home rule and all power possible for a city to have under the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado. The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter is not meant to limit the general powers granted in this section. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 1.03 - Construction of Words. 
    Words used in this Charter to refer to singular or plural number may be construed to include both. The word "Person" may extend to include persons, firms and corporations except when the Charter's express provisions exclude such construction or where the subject matter or content indicates a different interpretation. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 1.04 - Definitions. 
    Agency - Any organizational unit of the City. 
    City - The City of Greenwood Village, Colorado, a municipal corporation, and also the town which preceded it. 
    Council - The City Council of the City. 
    Direct Financial Interest - Any interest by which a person, a member of his or her family, or his or her designee and/or business association could gain or lose money or anything of value other than as may naturally accrue generally to all residents of the city by reason of such residence in the city. 
    Elector or Qualified Elector - Any person who is registered to vote at a particular time. 
    Emergency - A condition which immediately endangers public property, health, peace or safety. 
    Employee - Any compensated person in municipal service who is covered by the merit system. 
    Franchise - A special privilege granted by the City permitting the continuing use of public property, such as City streets, and usually involving the elements of monopoly and regulations. 
    Officer - An elected member of the City Government or an official, other than a board or commission member, appointed with the approval of Council and not covered by the merit system. 
    Proposition - Any question concerning policy of the City which is referred to the vote of the electors. 
    State Law - The Constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado as they now exist and as they may be amended, changed, repealed or otherwise modified by legal procedure. 
    Statutes - Applicable laws of the State of Colorado as they now exist and as they may be amended, changed, repealed or otherwise modified by legal procedure. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 1.05 - Rights and Liabilities. 
    By the name of the City of Greenwood Village, the municipal corporation shall: 
(a)  Have perpetual succession; 
(b)  Own, possess, and hold all property, real and personal, previously owned, possessed and held by the City. 
(c)  Assume, manage and dispose of all trusts legally assigned, granted or devised to the city; 
(d)  Succeed to all the rights and liabilities of the City; 
(e)  Acquire all benefits and assume and pay all bonds, obligations, and indebtedness of the City; 
(f)  Have power to sue and defend, purchase, lease, receive, hold and enjoy, or sell and dispose of real and personal property provided that any real property owned by the City and designated as open space on or after November 1, 2011 is hereby determined to be in use for a public purpose. No open space land owned by the City may be rezoned, sold, leased, traded, or otherwise conveyed, nor may any exclusive license or permit on such open space land be given, until approval of such disposal by the registered electors of the City at any regular or special election. 
(g)  Have a common seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990; amended at election held Nov. 1, 2011) 
Section 1.06 - Present Ordinances. 
    All ordinances of the City in force at the time this Charter becomes effective shall continue in force except if they are in conflict with the provisions of this Charter or if they are amended or repealed by ordinance enacted under authority of this Charter. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 1.07 - Annexation. 
    Territory not within the boundaries of the City may be annexed to and become a part of the City of Greenwood Village, as provided by the statutes of the State of Colorado. No ordinance annexing lands used or zoned for residential purposes shall become effective unless such ordinance is first referred by the Council to the registered electors of the City and said ordinance is approved by a majority of the electors voting on said ordinance at the next regular election or at a special election called for such purpose. If a special election is called for such purpose, the election shall be conducted by mail ballot election, in accordance with the applicable provisions of Colorado Law. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 7, 1995: amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 1.08 - Annexation of or Consolidation With Another Municipality. 
    The Council may propose changes in this Charter as a part of any annexation or consolidation plan submitted to the voters of the city. If the plan is approved by a majority of the voters at a general or special election called for such purpose, and if the ballot title in such election included notice of amendment of the Charter, portions of this Charter proposed to be amended in the plan will be amended immediately. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 1.09 - Disconnection from the City. 
    No tract or parcel of land within the boundary of the City shall be disconnected by any owner or owners from the City except upon majority vote of the electors of the City voting at a special election. The question of disconnection from the City shall be submitted to a vote, as provided by Section 2.03(b) of this Charter, upon payment to the Clerk by the owner or owners of the land proposed for disconnection of the expense of said election as determined by the Clerk. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE II - Elections 

Section 2.01 - Colorado Municipal Election Laws Adopted. 
    City elections shall be governed by the Colorado Municipal Election Laws, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, or by ordinance hereafter enacted. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 2.02 - Registration, Judges, Clerks and Election Commission. 
    The Council may by ordinance establish the method for the registration of electors, the qualifications and compensation of election judges and clerks, and the boundaries of election districts and precincts. The Council may by ordinance establish an election commission with such members, powers, duties, terms and qualifications as provided by ordinance. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 2.03 - Municipal Elections. 
(a)  Regular Municipal Election. A regular municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday in November, 1969, and biennially thereafter. 
(b)  Special Municipal Election. Special municipal elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and City ordinances. 
(c)  Polling Places. The polling places for all municipal elections shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. election days. 
(d)  Election Procedures. The City Council shall provide by ordinance the rules and procedures governing all municipal elections. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 2, 2004; amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 2.04 - Districts. 
    The City shall be divided by ordinance into four districts, and such districts shall be numbered consecutively beginning with No. 1. The boundaries of districts shall be changed only by majority vote of the entire Council or in the case of a tie vote, by the affirmative vote of four members of the Council and the affirmative vote of the Mayor. Territory added to the City shall become a part of a district or districts as may be determined by ordinance. Changes in district boundaries shall be made when necessary to conform to constitutional requirements. The new district boundaries shall supersede previous Council district boundaries for the purposes of the next general City election, including nominations, on the effective date of the ordinance establishing said boundaries. The new district boundaries shall supersede previous district boundaries for all other purposes as of the date on which Council members elected at the next general City election take office. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990: amended at election held on Sept. 14, 1976) 
Section 2.05 - Nomination Petitions Required Signatures. 
    The nomination petition for each candidate for Mayor shall be signed by at least fifty (50) registered electors. The nomination petition for each candidate for the Council to be elected from a district shall be signed by at least twenty (20) registered electors from such district. Petitions shall be filed with the City Clerk as provided by ordinance. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 2, 2004; amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 2.06 - Vacancies; Disability as Vacancy. 
(a)  The Mayor's office and a Councilmember's office shall become vacant whenever he or she: resigns; dies; becomes a non-resident of the City; forfeits his or her office as provided in regulations adopted by the City Council pursuant to Section 3.08; becomes disabled as defined in Section 2.06(b); or when the office is declared vacant by any court of competent jurisdiction or by City Council pursuant to Section 2.06(b). In addition, a Councilmember's office becomes vacant when the Councilmember becomes a nonresident of the district from which he or she was elected or appointed. Vacancies shall be filled by a majority vote of the entire Council within thirty (30) days after the vacancy occurs. The appointee or appointees shall serve for the unexpired term of the vacant office or offices. Persons appointed to fill vacancies shall be required to possess the qualifications required for the vacated office. 
(b)  The Mayor or a Councilmember will be determined to be disabled by the Council if he or she is unable to perform his or her duties for a period of six consecutive months. In this event, the Council shall, by resolution, declare a vacancy in the office and appoint a successor pursuant to Section 2.06(a). 
(c)  If a person elected to the office of Mayor or Councilmember is unable to take office after his or her election due to the occurrence of a condition which would constitute a vacancy in the office pursuant to Section 2.06(a), the Council shall, by resolution, declare a vacancy in the office and appoint a successor pursuant to Section 2.06(a). 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE III - Elective Officers 

Section 3.01 - City Council - Powers and Duties. 
    All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 3.02 - City Council - Composition, Eligibility, Election and Terms. 
(a)  Composition. There shall be a Council composed of eight members. Two Councilmembers shall be elected by the voters in each of the four Council districts. The Mayor shall not be considered to be a member of the Council. 
(b)  Eligibility. No person shall be eligible to serve as a member of Council unless at the time of election or appointment he or she is a registered elector. No person shall be eligible to serve as a member of Council unless he or she shall have resided in an area which is within the City at the time of his or her election or appointment for one year immediately preceding such election or appointment. 
(c)  City Council - Election and Terms. Beginning in November, 1997, two (2) Councilmembers shall be elected from each of the City's four (4) districts, each to hold office for a term of two (2) years. The eight (8) Councilmembers shall be elected at the regular City election in November, 1997, and continuing at two (2) year intervals. The terms of office of Councilmembers shall begin at 7:00 p.m. on the first Monday after election and shall continue until a successor has been elected and has taken office. No elected official shall serve more than four (4) full consecutive terms in the same office. For purposes of this section a full term shall mean, for persons appointed to fill vacancies, a period of time equal to or greater than one-half of the entire term of office. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 2, 2004; amended at election held Nov. 4, 1997; amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 3.03 - City Council - Compensation. 
    The Council may determine the compensation of the Mayor and Councilmembers by ordinance passed by three-fourths majority vote of the entire Council. No ordinance increasing such compensation of the Mayor or Councilmembers shall become effective until the commencement of the term of Councilmembers elected at the next regular election. Each Councilmember and the Mayor may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of City business, according to procedures defined by ordinance or resolution. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 3.04 - Mayor - Eligibility, Election, Powers and Duties. 
(a)  Eligibility. No person shall be eligible to serve as Mayor unless at the time of the election or appointment he or she is a registered elector. No person shall be eligible to serve as the Mayor unless he or she shall have resided in the area which is within the City at the time of the election or appointment for one year immediately preceding such election or appointment. 
(b)  Mayor - Election and Term. The Mayor shall be elected from the City at large for a term of four (4) years. The Mayor shall be elected at the regular City election in November 1999, and continuing at four (4) year intervals. The Mayor's term shall begin at 7:00 p.m. on the first Monday after his or her election and shall continue until the first Monday after his or her successor has been elected and has taken office. No person shall serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms as Mayor. For purposes of this section a full term shall mean, for a person appointed to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor, a period of time equal to or greater than one-half of the entire term of office. 
(c)  Powers and Duties. The Mayor shall: 
1)  Be the recognized head of government for all legal and ceremonial purposes except as otherwise provided in this Charter; 
2)  Be the presiding officer of the City Council. The Mayor shall be entitled to participate in discussions and debate with Council; 
3)  Appoint the City Manager with the advice and consent of the majority of the members of the entire Council; 
4)  Represent the City in all intergovernmental matters and relationships, either personally or through his/her authorized representative; 
5)  Prepare and present the budget message, based on the proposed annual budget prepared by the City Manager, to the Council for action; 
6)  Review the performance of the City Manager, at least annually, and report to the Council annually concerning the City Manager's performance; 
7)  Report to the Council, at least annually, concerning the financial condition of the City; 
8)  Recommend, at least annually, to the Council and the citizens of the City, goals and strategies to enhance the City's economic, social, environmental and financial condition; 
9)  Have the power to veto ordinances and resolutions in accordance with Section 6.10 of this Charter; 
10)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned to the Mayor by Charter or ordinance. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 2, 2004; Amended at election held Nov. 4, 1997; amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 3.05 - Mayor Pro Tem. 
    A Mayor Pro Tem shall be elected by the Council from its own membership at the first meeting following installation of each newly elected Council. The Mayor Pro Tem shall serve until the Council meeting following the installation of the next regular City Council. The Mayor Pro Tem shall serve as the presiding officer for the Council during the absence of the Mayor. During the Mayor's absence, the Mayor Pro Tem shall perform only those functions and responsibilities of the Mayor delegated to the Mayor Pro Tem by the Mayor in writing. 
    The Mayor Pro Tem shall become acting Mayor if the Mayor is unable to fulfill his or her functions. The Mayor Pro Tem shall serve as acting Mayor for no longer than six consecutive months. After six months, if the Mayor is unable to fulfill the functions of the office, the Council shall declare the position vacant due to the Mayor's disability and shall appoint a successor pursuant to Section 2.06. The Mayor Pro Tem, as acting Mayor, shall have all of the powers of the Mayor except the veto power. 
    If the Mayor Pro Tem is unable, for whatever reason, to serve as presiding officer of the Council during the Mayor's absence and/or as acting Mayor because the Mayor is unable to fulfill his or her functions, the Council shall designate another of its members to serve as acting Mayor. While serving as presiding officer of the Council during the Mayor's absence or as acting Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall retain all powers granted in this Charter to Councilmembers. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 3.06 - Rules of Behavior. 
    The Council shall, by ordinance, adopt rules of behavior to govern all elected and appointed officials of the City. Every elected or appointed official shall comply with the rules of behavior adopted by the Council. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 3.07 - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Holding Other Office. No elected official shall hold any other elected public office during the period of time such person is serving as an elected City Official. No elected official shall hold any other compensated City office or City employment during the term for which the person was elected to office. No former elected official shall hold any compensated advisory, appointive, or consultative office or employment with the City until one hundred eighty (180) days after the expiration of the term for which the person was elected. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the Mayor from designating any current or former elected official to represent the City on the governing board of any regional or other intergovernmental agency so long as said representation is without compensation. 
(b)  Interference with Administration. Individual members of the Council shall not request or mandate individual City employees to perform tasks for them pertaining to City functions or activities except with the approval of and through the City Manager. Members of the Council may, however, consult directly with the City Clerk and the City Attorney pertaining to the functions of their respective offices. Neither individual members of the Council nor the Mayor shall request or allow City employees to perform for them tasks not related to City functions or activities. 
(c)  Direct Financial Interest Prohibited. No elected or appointed official shall have any direct financial interest in any contract with the City. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 2, 1999; amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 3.08 - Standards of Conduct. 
    The Council shall have the power by ordinance to set additional standards of conduct for elected officials beyond those specified in the Charter and may provide by ordinance for such penalties as it deems proper, including forfeiture of office. An elected official charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of office shall be entitled to a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City at least one week in advance of the hearing. The Council shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence at such public hearing. Decisions on forfeiture of office made by the Council shall be subject to judicial review. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 3.09 - Council Meetings. 
(a)  Regular Meeting. The Council shall meet regularly at least once each month at a day and hour and place to be fixed by the rules and proceedings of each Council. 
(b)  Rules of Procedure. The Council shall prescribe the rules of procedure governing meetings. Written minutes of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept by the Clerk and signed by the Mayor. 
(c)  Open Meetings; Executive Sessions. All regular and special meetings of the Council, and all meetings at which a quorum of Council is present and the purpose of which is to discuss matters concerning the affairs of the City shall be open to the public. Consistent with rules adopted by the Council, members of the public shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The Council may meet in a closed or executive session with other City officers or employees to consider personnel matters, contract negotiations, threatened or pending litigation, quasi-judicial matters, legal advice and other issues where public disclosure may seriously affect the interests of the City. No final policy decision, resolution, rule, ordinance or regulation, and no action approving a contract or calling for the payment of money shall be adopted at any executive session. 
(d)  Quorum. Five (5) members of the Council shall constitute a quorum. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 3.10 - Special Meetings. 
    Special meetings of the Council shall be called by the Clerk on the request of the Mayor, or of any two (2) members of the Council, on at least twenty-four (24) hours notice to each member of the Council. A special meeting may, however, be held on shorter notice if all members of the Council are present or those absent waive their right to twenty-four (24) hours notice. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 3.11 - Audit of Accounts. 
    An independent audit shall be made annually of all financial affairs of the City. More frequent audits may be made if deemed necessary by the Council. The annual audit shall be made by a certified public accountant, experienced in the municipal accounting, selected by the Council. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE IV - City Manager 

Section 4.01 - City Manager - Appointment and Qualifications. 
(a)  Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint the City Manager with the advice and consent of a majority of the entire Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.04(c)(3). 
(b)  Qualifications. The City Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications. 
(c)  Residence. The City Manager need not be a resident of the City or State at the time of appointment. He or she may reside outside the City while in office only with the approval of the Council. 
(Added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 4.02 - City Manager - Definition and Duties. 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City. The City Manager shall: 
(a)  Appoint, promote, suspend, transfer and remove all City employees except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter or personnel regulations adopted by the Council. The City Manager may authorize any departmental supervisor or officer, subject to the Manager's direction and supervision, to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that person's department, office or agency; 
(b)  Appoint the Chief of Police and the City Clerk; 
(c)  Appoint the Court Administrator; 
(d)  Supervise all departments, offices and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law; 
(e)  Assure that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the Council, subject to enforcement by the City Manager or by departmental supervisors and officers subject to the manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(f)  Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the Mayor for the Mayor's submission to the Council; 
(g)  Submit to the Mayor a complete report as the Mayor and/or Council may require concerning the operations of City departments, offices and agencies subject to the City Manager's direction and supervision; 
(h)  Make such other reports as the Mayor and/or Council may require concerning the operations of City departments, offices and agencies; 
(i)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or City ordinances, or as may be required by the Mayor or by Council. 
(j)  Be authorized to accept donations on behalf of the City. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 4, 2003; amended at election held Nov. 2, 1999; added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 4.03 - City Manager - Removal. 
    The City Manager may be removed by the Mayor and a majority of the entire Council, or by a three-fourths majority of the entire Council without the consent of the Mayor. 
(Added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE V - Departments and Offices 

Section 5.01 - General Provisions. 
(a)  Creation of Departments. The functions of the City shall be performed by at least the following departments, offices or agencies: Police, Municipal Court, Finance, Public Works, and Planning and Zoning. The City Manager may establish City departments, offices or agencies in addition to those created by this Charter. The City Manager may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices and agencies of the City. No function assigned by this Charter to a particular department, office or agency, however, may be discontinued or, unless this Charter specifically so provides, assigned to any other department, office or agency. 
(b)  Direction and Supervision. All departments, offices and agencies shall be administered by an employee appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager. With the consent of the Council, the City Manager may serve as the head of one or more such departments, offices or agencies or may appoint one person as the head of two or more of them. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 2, 1999; added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 5.02 - Personnel System. 
(a)  Merit Principles. All appointments and promotions of City employees shall be made solely in the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by a valid and reliable examination or other evidence of competence. 
(b)  Merit System. Consistent with all applicable Federal and State laws, the Council shall provide by ordinance for the establishment, regulation and maintenance of a merit system. The system shall govern personnel policies necessary for effective performance of the employees of the City's departments, offices and agencies. It shall include but not be limited to: classification and pay plans, examinations, force reduction, removals, working conditions, provisional and temporary appointments, in-service training, grievances and relationships with employee organizations. All officers of the City shall be exempt from the merit system. 
(Added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 5.03 - City Clerk. 
(a)  Appointment and Removal. The City Manager shall appoint a City Clerk. The City Clerk may be removed by the City Manager. 
(b)  Duties. The City Clerk shall give notice of Council meetings, keep a journal of Council proceedings, certify by his or her signature all ordinances and resolutions, and perform such other duties as may be required by this Charter, City ordinances or the City Manager or by State law. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 2, 1999; added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 5.04 - City Attorney. 
(a)  Appointment, Removal and Compensation. The Council shall appoint a City Attorney to serve at the pleasure of the Council. The City Attorney shall report to the Council, and may be removed by the Council. The Council shall fix the compensation of the City Attorney. 
(b)  Duties. The City Attorney shall serve as chief legal adviser to the Mayor, the City Council, the City Manager and all City departments, offices and agencies in matters relating to their official powers and duties; shall prosecute ordinance violations and represent the City in all legal proceedings; shall prepare all ordinances and other legal documents; shall perform such other duties as may be required by this Charter, City ordinances or the City Manager. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 2, 1999; added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE VI - Ordinances 

Section 6.01 - Ordinances, Resolutions and Motions. 
    The Council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion. All legislative enactment shall be in the form of ordinances. All actions, except as herein provided, may be in the form of resolutions or motions. Each ordinance shall be confined to one subject, except in case of repealing ordinances. Ordinances providing for appropriations shall be confined to the subject of appropriations. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 6.02 - Voting. 
    Voting shall be by "yes" and "no" and shall be required to approve or disapprove all ordinances and resolutions. Votes shall be entered upon the minutes of the council proceedings. Unless a greater number of votes is prescribed by rules adopted by the Council or by this Charter, ordinances, other than emergency ordinances, shall be approved by a majority affirmative vote of the entire Council or in case of a tie vote, by the affirmative vote of four members of the Council and the affirmative vote of the Mayor pursuant to this section. Resolutions and motions need only be approved by a majority of a quorum of the Council attending the meeting at which the vote is taken. Each member, when present, shall vote upon all ordinances, resolutions and motions. Abstentions from voting shall be permitted only when the member has either a direct financial interest in or a conflict of interest concerning the matter being voted upon by the Council. The reason for the member's abstention from voting on such matters shall be stated to the Council. The member's abstention shall not be counted as a vote. The Mayor shall not have a vote except to break a tie vote. The Mayor shall be required to vote to break a tie vote, unless he or she shall declare to the Council a direct financial interest or a conflict of interest concerning the matter to be voted upon. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 6.03 - Form of Ordinance. 
    The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "The Council of the City of Greenwood Village, Colorado, ordains." (Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 6.04 - Procedure of Passage. 
    An ordinance may be introduced as a bill at any regular meeting by any member of Council, or by petition of the people as provided by this Charter. Upon introduction, the title of the bill shall be read by a member of Council. A full copy of the bill shall be available in Council chambers at the time of the meeting at which the bill is introduced and first voted upon by the Council. If the bill is approved by Council, it shall be published in full by the next publication date of the City's legal newspaper. A bill, before its final passage, shall be presented and voted upon at one additional meeting of the Council. This meeting shall be held no earlier than ten days after initial approval of the bill except in case of emergency as provided in Section 6.05. After final passage, every ordinance shall again be published by reference or in full as determined by the Council. Any amendment to the ordinance shall be published in full. Except as otherwise provided in this Article or specified in the ordinance, all ordinances shall take effect six (6) days after publication following final passage. Any publication by reference shall contain a summary of the subject matter of the ordinance and a notice that copies of the ordinance are available at the office of the City Clerk. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 6.05 - Emergency Ordinances. 
    The Council, if a quorum is present, may adopt, by a majority vote of those present, emergency ordinances necessary for the immediate preservation of the public property, health, peace or safety. The facts showing such urgency shall be stated in the ordinance. After its adoption the ordinance shall be published as prescribed for other adopted ordinances. It shall become effective immediately upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify in the ordinance. Every emergency ordinance, except one made pursuant to Section 11.09(b), shall automatically stand repealed as of the 180th day following the date on which it was adopted. Emergency ordinances, however, may be re-enacted in the manner provided in this article. An emergency ordinance may be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. No ordinance making a grant of any special privilege, levying taxes, incurring indebtedness, fixing rates charged by any City-owned utility or authorizing borrowing money, except as provided in Section 11.09(b), shall be passed as an emergency measure. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 6.06 - Disposition. 
    A true copy of every ordinance, as adopted by Council, shall be numbered and recorded and adoption and publication shall be authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and City Clerk, and by certificate of publication. A true copy of every ordinance as adopted by the vote of the qualified electors of the City shall be separately numbered and recorded annually commencing with "People's Ordinance No. 1. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 6.07 - Codification. 
    Council may cause the permanent ordinances to be codified and may thereafter, recodify them as deemed necessary or desirable. Codification may be accomplished by the Council by re-enactment or authentication, as may be designated by ordinance. The codification shall be amended or supplemented as permanent ordinances are passed by adding or deleting those ordinances adopted or repealed by Council and designated as affecting the Municipal Code. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 6.08 - Code Published by Reference. 
    Standard codes, promulgated by the United States Government, the State of Colorado, or by any agency of either of them, or by recognized trade or professional organization, or amendments or revisions, may be adopted by reference. The publication of the bill or ordinance adopting standard code shall indicate that copies are available for inspection at the office of the City Clerk. Any penalty clause in codes may be adopted only if set forth in full and published in the adopting ordinance. Primary codes adopted may in turn adopt secondary codes. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 6.09 - Severability of Ordinances. 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, a portion of an ordinance or the application of a portion of an ordinance to any person or circumstances found to be invalid by a court, shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable. To this end ordinances are declared severable. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 6.10 - Veto Powers of Mayor. 
    The Mayor shall have the power to veto any ordinance or resolution adopted by the Council. The Mayor's veto shall be exercised within twenty-four hours after adoption of any emergency ordinance and within five days after final passage of all other ordinances and resolutions. The Mayor shall not have the power to veto any ordinance passed by the vote of the registered electors. The City Council shall have the power to override a Mayoral veto upon the affirmative vote of a three-fourths majority of the entire Council. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990; amended at election held on Nov. 6, 1973) 
ARTICLE VII - Initiative and Referendum 

Section 7.01 - Initiative. 
(a)  The registered electors of the City shall have the power to propose ordinances to the Council consistent with the provisions of this Charter and State law. 
(b)  Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the Council for submission to the registered electors by filing with the City Clerk a petition for the proposed ordinance signed by registered electors of the City equal in number to at least five (5) percent of the total number of electors of the City registered on the date the form of the petition was approved by the Clerk pursuant to statute. 
(c)  The petition for a proposed ordinance shall be filed with the Clerk within sixty days after the Clerk's approval of the form of petition for circulation. Each petition shall conform with the requirements of the state statute concerning the form of initiative petitions. 
(d)  Within fifteen calendar days of the filing of a petition, the Clerk shall ascertain whether the petition is signed by the requisite number of registered electors and conforms with the requirements of State law. The Clerk shall certify the sufficiency or insufficiency of the petition and so notify all of the designated petition representatives in writing. In the event a petition is deemed sufficient, whether following the sufficiency determination by the Clerk in the absence of a protest, or following protest proceedings, the Clerk shall so certify and present the certified petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 7.02 - Submissions. 
(a)  The proposed ordinance which is the subject of the initiative shall either be adopted without alteration by the Council within twenty (20) days after such petition is presented by the City Clerk to Council, or the Council shall refer such proposed ordinance, in the form petitioned for, to the registered electors of the City. 
(b)  The vote by the registered electors on any initiated ordinance shall be at a regular or special election held not less than sixty (60) days nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days after the petition for election is filed with the Clerk. If a majority of the electors voting on said ordinance vote in favor of the initiated ordinance, it shall become effective immediately without further publication. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 7.03 - Referendum. 
(a)  The referendum shall apply to all ordinances passed by Council except ordinances adopting the budget, establishing the tax levy, approving appropriations providing for improvements to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessments, or calling for a special election. Additionally, emergency ordinances necessary to the immediate preservation of the public property, peace, health or safety shall not be subject to referendum if they receive the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the entire Council. 
(b)  If within thirty (30) days after final publication of an ordinance to which the referendum is applicable, a petition protesting the ordinance, or any part thereof, is signed by registered electors equal in number to at least five (5) percent of the total number of electors of the City registered on the date the form of the petition was approved by the Clerk pursuant to State statute and is filed with the clerk, the operation of the ordinance, or part so protested against, shall automatically be suspended upon certification by the Clerk as to the sufficiency of the petition. The Council shall reconsider the ordinance within twenty (20) days after the certified petition is submitted by the Clerk to Council. 
(c)  If the ordinance, or the part protested, is not entirely repealed, Council shall submit the ordinance, or the part protested, to a vote of the registered electors at a regular or special election held not less than sixty (60) days and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date the petition was filed with the Clerk. The ordinance, or the part protested, shall not take effect unless a majority of the registered electors voting in the election approve it. 
(d)  The Council shall have the power by ordinance or resolution to submit any proposed ordinance or proposition to a vote of the registered electors at a general or special election as provided in this Charter. No provision of this Charter shall be construed as limiting the right of Council to refer any ordinance subject to referendum. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 7.04 - Alternative Ordinances. 
    The Council may place an ordinance on the ballot that offers registered electors a choice with respect to a citizen initiated ordinance. The Council-referred ordinance shall be clearly identified as an alternative to the citizen initiated ordinance. The ordinance that receives the highest number of votes shall become law. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 7.05 - Amendments. 
    An ordinance, or any part thereof, adopted by the registered electors pursuant to the initiative or referendum shall not be reinforced, revised, repealed or amended by the Council. An ordinance, or any part thereof, rejected by the registered electors pursuant to the initiative or referendum shall not be reintroduced by the Council with provisions identical to those which have been rejected by the registered electors. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE VIII - Recall 

Section 8.01 - Recall. 
    Every elective officer of the City may be recalled from office in accordance with the provisions of Article XXI of the Constitution of the State of Colorado and City ordinances adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990; amended at election held on Nov. 3, 1987) 
ARTICLE IX - Municipal Court 

Section 9.01 - Municipal Court. 
(a)  There shall be a Municipal Court which shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases arising under this Charter or ordinances of the City. The powers of and the procedures in the Municipal Court and the manner of enforcement of its orders and judgments, shall be consistent with the Statutes of the State of Colorado, this Charter and the ordinances of the City. The Council shall have the power to provide for juries for service in the Municipal Court. The City Manager's budget, as submitted to the Mayor shall include a section providing for the funding and operation of the Municipal Court. Personnel of the Municipal Court shall be governed by the City's merit system. 
(b)  The Municipal Court shall be presided over and its functions exercised by a presiding judge and such associate judges as are appointed by the Council for a term to be at the pleasure of the Council. Municipal Judges shall receive fixed salaries or compensation set from time to time by the Council. Salaries or compensation shall not be dependent upon the outcome of the matters to be decided by the Court. If a Municipal Judge is absent or unable to act in any manner or case, the presiding judge shall appoint a temporary judge from a list of qualified persons to act and serve temporarily, and if the presiding judge fails to, or cannot call in a substitute, the Council shall appoint a substitute. Qualifications for Municipal Judge or a temporary judge shall be established by ordinance. 
(c)  The Municipal Court shall be administered by a Court Administrator appointed by the City Manager. The Court Administrator shall report to the City Manager directly, or to his or her designee, concerning all administrative matters of the Municipal Court and shall be responsible to provide staff services to the Municipal Court as the City Manager may deem appropriate. 
(d)  The Council shall provide for the enforcement of its ordinances. The penalty for a violation of the ordinances of the City shall be established by the Council by ordinance. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 2, 1999; amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE X - Boards and Commissions 

Section 10.01 - General Provisions for Boards and Commissions. 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, all boards and commissions shall be appointed by the Council and shall have such powers and perform such duties as are provided by this Charter or by ordinance. The number of members of each board and commission, the terms of office and the rules governing each board and commission shall be as specified by ordinance. Members of all boards and commissions shall possess the same qualifications as to residence in the City as persons eligible to serve as Mayor. Each board and commission shall be broadly representative of the varied interests affecting the quality of life in the City, including, but not limited to, the City's residents, its neighborhoods, and its commercial and retail sectors. Members of boards and commissions shall be appointed to serve without compensation. All members shall be subject to removal by a three-fourths majority vote of the entire Council. The Council shall make appointments to fill vacancies for the unexpired terms. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 10.02 - Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
    There is hereby created and established a Board of Adjustment and Appeals. 
    The Board shall have the power to hear and determine appeals from refusals of building permits, to make exceptions to the terms of the zoning regulations and to authorize variances from the zoning regulations, subject to such limitations as may be set by ordinance. The findings and decisions of the Board shall be final, subject only to judicial review. 
    The Board shall exercise such other powers and duties as are assigned to it by this Charter and the ordinances of the City. Where not otherwise provided by ordinance or Charter, the Board shall have the powers, perform the functions and follow the procedures set forth in State law. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 10.03 - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    There is hereby created and established a Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall prepare and recommend the adoption of a Comprehensive Plan or amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. It shall prepare and recommend to the Council zoning, subdivision and development regulations to implement the Comprehensive Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall exercise such other powers and duties as are assigned to it by this Charter and the ordinances of the City. Where not otherwise provided by Charter or ordinance, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the powers, perform the functions and follow the procedures set forth in State law. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 10.04 - Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission. 
    There is hereby created and established a Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission. 
    The Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission shall formulate and recommend a Parks and Trails Acquisition and Development Plan for the City. It shall formulate recreation policies consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and zoning ordinances of the City, and recommend such policies to the Council. The Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission shall exercise such other powers and duties as are assigned to it by this Charter and the ordinances of the City. 
(Added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE XI - City Finances 

Section 11.01 - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the City, and of all its agencies, shall begin on the first day of January and end on the thirty-first day of December of each year. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 11.02 - Annual Budget and Budget Message. 
    The Mayor shall submit the proposed budget for the next fiscal year, as prepared by the City Manager, and shall submit an accompanying budget message, to the City Council on or before the fifth day after the County Assessor certifies to the City the assessed valuation of property within the City, but no later than the fifteenth day of October. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 11.03 - Budget Message. 
    The Mayor's budget message shall describe and evaluate the proposed budget prepared by the City Manager. It shall relate the City Manager's budget to Council-defined policies and programs. It shall contain a review of the present and projected City economy and its impact on the proposed City budget. It shall: outline and evaluate the City Manager's proposed budget strategies for the next fiscal year; describe the important features of the proposed City budget; indicate any major changes in the proposed budget from the current year's budget in terms of financial policies, expenditures and revenues together with a reason for such changes; summarize the City's present debt position and evaluate debt-related strategies proposed in the budget by the City Manager; include such other information as the Mayor, City Manager and Council deem desirable. 
(Added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 11.04 - Scope of Annual Budget. 
(a)  Contents of Budget. The budget, as prepared by the City Manager and submitted to the Council by the Mayor, shall provide a complete financial plan of all City funds and activities for the next fiscal year. It shall include the best professional judgment of the City Manager concerning the need for expenditures and the availability of revenues to successfully administer City government during the next fiscal year. The budget shall be arranged so as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated revenues and expenditures for the current fiscal year and estimated revenues and expenditures for the next fiscal year. The budget shall relate the proposed City operating and capital expenditures to Council-approved objectives, policies and programs. At a minimum, it shall contain: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  An estimate of anticipated revenue from each and every source for the next year; 
(3)  An estimate of the general fund cash surplus at the end of the current fiscal year, or of the deficit to be made up by appropriation; 
(4)  The estimated expenditures necessary for the efficient administration and operation of City commissions, boards, departments, offices and agencies of the City as well as the estimated expenditures of City services and programs during the next fiscal year; 
(5)  The estimated expenditures and method of financing necessary to initiate the annual portion of the three year capital program; 
(6)  Debt service requirements for the next fiscal year and future years for which the City has or for which the City has or for which it is proposed the City will assume an obligation; 
(7)  A descriptive analysis relating proposed expenditures and revenues to Council-approved objectives, policies and programs; 
(8)  An estimate of the sum required to be raised by the tax levy for the next fiscal year, and the rate of levy necessary to produce the estimated sum. 
(b)  Expenditures Not To Exceed Revenues. The City Manager, through the Mayor, shall present, and the Council shall approve, a balanced budget in which proposed expenditures shall not exceed proposed revenues. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 11.05 - Capital Program. 
(a)  Submission to City Council. The City Manager, through the Mayor, shall prepare and submit to the Council for its approval of a three-year capital program simultaneous with the submission of the annual budget. 
(b)  Contents. The capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of capital improvements and capital expenditures which are proposed to be undertaken during the next three fiscal years, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for each; 
(3)  Cost estimates and recommended time schedules for each improvement or other capital expenditure; 
(4)  Method of financing, for each capital expenditure; 
(5)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired; and 
(6)  Other information and analysis required to assure Council understanding of the needs and conditions of the City's infrastructure. 
    The capital program shall be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. The expenditures and methods of funding necessary to complete the first year of the capital programs shall be known as the capital budget and shall be incorporated in the proposed budget of the City Manager. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 11.06 - Budget Hearing and Amendment Before Adoption. 
(a)  Hearing. The Council shall hold a public hearing on the City Manager's proposed budget on or before the first day of November of each year. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once, five days prior to such hearing. Copies of the proposed budget shall be made available to the public by depositing them in the office of the Clerk. 
(b)  Amendment Before Adoption. The Council may at any time before final adoption of the budget, increase, decrease, add or strike out any item in the proposed budget. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990; amended at election held on Nov. 2, 1971) 
Section 11.07 - Adoption of Budget and Appropriation. 
    Not later than the twelfth day of December of each year, or such earlier date as may be required by state law, the Council shall adopt on final reading an ordinance for the budget and an ordinance for the annual appropriations. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990; amended at election held on Nov. 2, 1971) 
Section 11.08 - Certification of Tax Levy. 
    The Council, not later than the twelfth day of December of each year, or such other date as may be required by the law, shall fix the amount of tax levy which shall be assessed upon each dollar of assessed valuation of all taxable property within the corporate limits of the City. The Council shall cause the same to be certified to the County as required by law. If the Council fails to make such levy, the tax levy fixed in the current year shall be the rate levied for the next fiscal year. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 11.09 - Amendments After Adoption of Budget. 
(a)  Supplemental Appropriations. If during the fiscal year the City Manager certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the Council may appropriate part or all of the excess by ordinance. 
(b)  Emergency Appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting property, health, life or the public peace, the Council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.05. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues or a sufficient fund balance to meet such appropriations, the Council may by emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes. Emergency notes may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes issued and their renewals in any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year in which the emergency appropriation was made by the Council. 
(c)  Reduction of Appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues or fund balances available will be insufficient to finance the expenditures for which appropriations have been authorized, the City Manager, through the Mayor, shall report to the City Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken by the City Manager and recommendations concerning any other steps that must be taken to meet deficits. The Council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or reduce any deficit and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce one or more appropriations. 
(d)  Transfer of Appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the Council may by resolution transfer part or all of the unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or major organizational unit to the appropriations for other departments or major organizational units. The City Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balances among programs within a department or organizational unit and through the Mayor, shall report such transfers to the Council in writing in a timely manner. 
(e)  Limitation; Effective Date. No appropriations for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this action may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 
(Added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 11.10 - Lapses of Appropriations. 
(a)  Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. The funds represented by lapsed appropriations shall revert to the general fund. 
(b)  An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until expended, revised, abandoned or repealed. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. An appropriation for a capital expenditure which has been abandoned shall revert to the general fund. 
(Added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 11.11 - General Fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a fund to be known as the general fund. All revenues not specifically allocated to any other fund shall be placed in the general fund. All general functions of the City shall be financed by expenditures from the general fund. 
(b)  The general fund may contain an item for contingencies. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 11.12 - Special Funds. 
    Additional funds which shall be known as special funds may be created by ordinance to provide for monies to be held or used, for special purposes, such as: depreciation and obsolescence; debt service; equipment and building replacement; special services; local improvements; City-owned utilities; trust funds and endowments; and other purposes as the Council may determine. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 11.13 - Public Records. 
    Copies of the budget, capital program and appropriation and revenue ordinances shall be public records and shall be made available to the public at the offices of the City. 
(Added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 11.14 - Publication of Expenditures. 
    Authorized expenditures need not be published. The City, however, shall maintain a record on file of same, which shall at all times be available for public inspection. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 4, 2003; amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE XII - Bonded Indebtedness 

Section 12.01 - Short Term Notes. 
    The City, by ordinance, is hereby authorized to borrow money without an election in anticipation of the collection of taxes or other revenues, and to issue short term notes to evidence the amounts borrowed. Any short term notes shall mature before the close of the fiscal year in which the money is borrowed. 
(Added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 12.02 - General Obligation Bonds. 
(a)  No bonds or other evidence of indebtedness payable in whole or in part from the proceeds of general property taxes or for which the full faith and credit of the City is pledged shall be issued until the question of the issuance of such bonds shall be submitted to a vote of the registered electors at a general or special election and approved by a majority of those voting on the question. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, the Council shall have the power to issue general obligation bonds for the purpose of acquiring water and water rights or a utility system to include water and water rights, or acquiring, improving, or extending a City water system, without an election upon the affirmative vote of three-fourths of the entire Council. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to short-term notes, revenue bonds, refunding bonds, nor special or local improvement district bonds. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 12.03 - Revenue Bonds. 
    The Council, pursuant to ordinance, and without an election, may borrow money, issue bonds, or otherwise extend the credit of the City to purchase, construct, condemn, acquire, extend or improve a public utility or revenue producing project, or for any other capital improvement project or public purpose; provided, that the bonds or other obligations shall be payable from the net revenue and income from the operation of the utility system or other project to be constructed or installed with the proceeds of said bonds or other obligations, or shall be payable in whole or in part from the available proceeds of a City sales, use, occupational privilege and/or admissions tax. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 12.04 - Refunding Bonds. 
(a)  The City, pursuant to ordinance, may issue its bonds without an election for the purpose of refunding outstanding bonds to accomplish any refunding purpose determined by the Council to be advantageous and favorable to the City. Any refunding bonds which are revenue bonds may be payable in whole or in part from the available proceeds of a City sales, use, occupational privilege and/or admissions tax or any combination of sources of revenue other than ad valorem property taxes, without a vote of the registered electors. 
(b)  Refunding bonds may be issued in such principal amounts and otherwise on such terms as the Council may determine to be necessary or appropriate to accomplish the refunding purpose. The period of payment or refunding bonds shall not exceed the time necessary or appropriate to accomplish the refunding purpose and in no event shall exceed a longer term than thirty (30) years from the date of the refunding bonds. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 12.05 - Bond Sales - Limitations. 
    The terms and maximum interest rate of general obligation or revenue bonds or other like securities shall be fixed by the authorizing ordinance. Such securities shall be sold to the best advantage of the City as determined by Council. All bonds may contain provisions for calling the same at designated periods prior to the final due date, with or without the payment of a prior redemption premium. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 12.06 - Limitation on Indebtedness. 
    The aggregate amount of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness of a City shall not exceed two percent of the actual valuation of the taxable property within the City as certified by the County Assessor; provided, however, in determining the amount of said indebtedness, the following shall not be included within the computation: 
(a)  Bonds or other evidence of indebtedness, outstanding or authorized to be issued for the acquisition, extension or improvement of a municipal water utilities system; 
(b)  Short term notes; 
(c)  Special or local improvement district securities; 
(d)  Securities payable from the revenues of an income producing system, utility, project or other capital improvement project, or from the City sales, use, occupational privilege and/or admission taxes. 
(Added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 12.07 - Long Term Installment Contracts, Rentals, and Leaseholds. 
(a)  In order to provide necessary land, buildings, equipment, and other property for governmental or proprietary purposes, the Council is hereby authorized to enter into long term installment purchase contracts and rental or leasehold agreements. Such agreements may include an option or options to purchase and acquire title to such property within a period not exceeding the useful life of such property. Each such agreement and the terms thereof shall be approved by ordinance. 
(b)  The Council is authorized and empowered to provide for payments of long term installment contracts, rentals and leaseholds by a tax levy imposed on property included within the boundaries of the City, or by rates, tolls, or service charges imposed for the use of such property or any part thereof by others, or by any other available municipal revenue or by any one or more of the above means. 
(c)  The obligations created pursuant to this section shall not constitute an indebtedness of the City within the meaning of the legal limitations of contracting of indebtedness by cities. 
(Added at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE XIII - Improvement Districts 

Section 13.01 - Power to Construct Improvements and Create Improvement Districts. 
    The City, by ordinance, shall have the power to create local improvement districts and to contract for, construct or install needed special or local improvements within designated districts. The City shall have the power to assess the cost needed of special or local improvements wholly or in part upon the property especially benefited. The City shall not, however, order or initiate development of a local improvement in the event that a petition against such improvement, is filed with the Council and signed by owners of property that would be assessed for more than one-half of the assessed costs of the improvements. There shall be no requirement that all parcels benefited in any particular district be contiguous. The Council shall by ordinance prescribe the procedure for notice, the method and manner of making such improvements, letting contracts therefor, assessing the costs thereof, and issuing and paying bonds for costs and expenses of the organization of said districts and of construction or installation of said improvements. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit the power of the Council to otherwise act in accordance with the Constitution and Statutes of Colorado in carrying out such purposes. The general laws of the State of Colorado, as from time to time amended, providing for the organization and operation of general improvement districts shall be in full force and effect within the City, except as the Council may otherwise provide. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 13.02 - Surplus and Deficiency Account. 
    All special or local improvements, except as the City may contribute to the cost thereof, shall be paid for by the proceeds from public improvement bonds. All moneys collected on account of the assessments for any improvements shall be applied to the payment of the bonds and interest, issued therefor, until the payment of all the said bonds. Whenever all outstanding bonds of a special or local improvement district have been paid, any moneys remaining to the credit of the district shall be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency account. Whenever there is a deficiency in any special or local improvement district account to meet the payments of outstanding bonds and interest due thereon, the deficiency shall be paid out of said surplus and deficiency account. Whenever the moneys in the surplus and deficiency account exceed 25% percent of the original principal amount of all outstanding special or local improvement district bonds issued subsequent to November 6, 1990, the Council, by ordinance, may transfer the excess over the 25% to the general fund of the City. No transfer shall occur, however, until all bonds issued prior to November 6, 1990 have been retired and paid. Whenever a special or local improvement district has paid and canceled three-fourths of its bonds issued, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to repay the remaining bonds of the district and the interest due thereon, and there is not sufficient moneys in the surplus and deficiency account, then the city shall pay the bonds when due and the interest due thereon, and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due the district. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 13.03 - Improvement District Bonds - General Benefits. 
    In consideration of general benefits conferred on the City at large from the construction or installation of improvements in improvement districts, the Council may levy annual taxes on all taxable property within the City at a rate not exceeding two mills in any one year. The funds collected shall be disbursed as determined by the Council for the purpose of paying for benefits resulting from such improvement, for the payment of any assessment levied against the City itself in connection with bonds issued for improvement districts or for the purpose of advancing moneys to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of bonds issued for any improvement district created subject to Section 13.01. The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a special account and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified herein, provided that in lieu of such tax levies, the Council may annually transfer to such special account any available moneys from the City. In no event, however, shall the amount transferred in any one year exceed the amount which would result from the tax provisions described in this section. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 13.04 - Review of Improvement District Proceedings. 
    Actions or proceedings, at law or in equity, to review any acts or proceedings, or to question the validity or enjoin the performance of any act, or the issue or collection of any bonds, or the levy or collection of any assessments, authorized by this Article, or for any other relief against any acts or proceedings done or had under this Article, or of the City, with reference thereto, whether based upon irregularities or jurisdictional defects, shall be perpetually barred, unless commenced within thirty (30) days after the performance of the act or the passage of the resolution or ordinance complained of. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE XIV - Franchises 

Section 14.01 - Present Franchises. 
    All franchise ordinances of the City in effect at the time that this Charter is adopted shall remain in full force and effect, according to their provisions and terms, until the expiration date provided in such ordinances. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 14.02 - Extension of Territory Covered by Franchise. 
    With respect to any franchise, after negotiation or mutual agreement, the Council, by ordinance, may, when public convenience and necessity requires, extend the area to include streets, alleys, or public places and property not embraced in such franchise. The ordinance shall be subject to all the terms and conditions of the original franchise, and co-extensive with the terms thereof, without a vote of the qualified taxpaying electors. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 14.03 - Term, Compensation, Restriction. 
    No franchise, lease or right to use the streets, or the public places or property of the City, shall be granted for longer than twenty (20) years. Every grant of a franchise shall fix the amount and manner of payment of the compensation to be paid by the grantee for the use of the same. No other compensation of any kind shall be exacted for such use during the life of the franchise. This provision shall not exempt the grantee from any lawful taxation upon grantee's property, nor from any licenses, charges, or other impositions levied by the Council, not levied on account of the use granted by the franchise. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 14.04 - Revocable Permits. 
    The Council may grant permits for the temporary use or occupancy of any street, alley or public place, and establish conditions and compensation to be paid the City therefor. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 14.05 - Condemnation or Purchase. 
    The right of the City to construct, purchase or condemn any public utility, work or way, as provided by law, is expressly reserved. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 14.06 - Assignment. 
    Assignment or leasing of a franchise shall be considered a forfeiture unless consent is given by the Council by ordinance. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 14.07 - Common Use of Facilities. 
    The Council shall have the power to require any holder of a franchise from the City, or other public utility, to allow the use of its rights-of-way, poles and wires by any franchise holder, or the City itself, upon payment of a reasonable rental therefor. The City may, under the terms prescribed by the Council, allow such franchise holders to use rights-of-way, poles and wires of City-owned facilities. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
ARTICLE XV - Miscellaneous Provisions 

Section 15.01 - Taxes for Municipal Purposes. 
    The Council shall have the power by ordinance to levy all forms of taxation for municipal purposes as are now or may in the future be permitted to home rule cities under the Constitution of the State of Colorado. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 15.02 - Right of Eminent Domain. 
    The City shall have the right of eminent domain for all municipal purposes whatever either within or without the limits of the City as may be permitted to towns or cities by the Constitution and the Statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 15.03 - Contracts with Other Governmental Units. 
    The City may, by resolution or by ordinance, exercise any of its power or perform any of its functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contracts or agreements with other governmental units or special districts, with any one or more states or civil divisions or agencies thereof, or the United States or any agency thereof, for the use of buildings, equipment or facilities and for furnishing or receiving of commodities or services. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 15.04 - Bequests, Gifts and Donations. 
    The Council, on behalf of the City, may receive bequests, gifts and donations of all kinds of property in fee simple, or in trust, for public, charitable or other purposes. Consistent with the Charter and State law, it may do all things and acts necessary to carry out the purposes of such bequests, gifts and donations. It may manage, sell, lease or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the terms of the bequest, gift or trust. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 15.05 - Contracts for Purchases, Leases, and Construction of Public Works. 
    The Council may establish by ordinance procedure for entering into contracts for purchases, contracts for leases and contracts for construction of public works. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 15.06 - Temporary Zoning. 
    The Council, by ordinance, may determine temporary zoning, and establish a temporary zoning district or districts for newly-annexed territory at the time of the annexation of any territory to the City. Immediately upon annexation of any territory, the City shall initiate procedures described in the City's zoning ordinance to establish permanent zoning. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 15.07 - Amendment. 
    This Charter may be amended at any general election or special election called for such purpose upon questions submitted by a majority of the entire Council, or upon questions submitted by the electors by initiative in the manner as provided by this Charter. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 15.08 - Retirement Plans. 
    This Charter shall not affect any contractual relationships existing on the effective date of this Charter between the City and any officer or employee by reason of any retirement and pension plans in effect. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 15.09 - Effect of State Statutes. 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinances adopted by the Council hereunder, the Statutes of the State of Colorado governing municipalities now classified Second Class Cities shall remain in effect. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
Section 15.10 - Severability. 
    If any provision, article, section, sentence, clause or part of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the Charter as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so adjudged to be invalid, and to this end the provisions of this Charter are declared to be severable. 
(Amended at election held Nov. 6, 1990) 
CITY OF GREENWOOD VILLAGE 
CHARTER COMMISSION 
Approved this 21st day of May, 1968. 
  
John Jameson Mary Sherill Mead Robert J. Norton Myron H. Burnett Patricia B. Coughenour Richard N. Graham David W. Rice Moses Taylor Bradford Richardson William I. Mead Elizabeth B. Wangelin Barbara Gilbert Jack Caldwell Russell A. Pomeroy Albert Cole Nelson C. Krum Marian Robertson Alfred M. Stuck W. K. Landon Alice Pate Toothaker William E. Jobe  
Published in The Englewood Herald & Enterprise . 
First Publication June 20, 1968. 
Final Publication July 4, 1968. 
Approved at the election held on July 30, 1968. 
On January 2, 1990, the City Council appointed a committee to review the Home Rule Charter. The Charter Review Committee consisted of the following persons: 
  
Harold Patton Dinah Lewis Candy Figa, Chairman James Ruth Ed Phillipsen Donald C. Morrison Natali Molloy Theresa Byorick Robert Kelly Walter Imhoff  
The amendments recommended by the Committee were approved at the election held on November 6, 1990. 
GREENWOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE 
2011 
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
of the City of Greenwood Village, Colorado 

> 
PREFACE 
The City of Greenwood Village, a Home Rule City, has published its Municipal Code in a format which features the following: 
The Code Table of Contents is the table containing each chapter and article title, with reference to page location. Preceding each chapter is a chapter table of contents, also identifying each article by the subject name provided. 
The three-place section numbering system places the chapter number first, followed by the article number and section number, separated by hyphens. This system allows for new sections to be inserted in the future. Each section may be cited by the chapter, article and section number which are in sequence within each chapter. 
The open chapter and page numbering system creates reserved chapter and page numbers for expansion or revision of the code without undue complication when changes are made to the code by supplementation. 
The Code Comparison Table and Disposition of Ordinances Table identify the sources for the contents of the code. The Code Comparison Table identifies prior code sections and their location in the new code. The ordinance disposition table provides ordinance numbers in chronological order and location by section number for the present code contents. Thus, if there is interest in determining whether a prior code section, an ordinance or a portion thereof is contained within the code, the Code Comparison Table and Disposition of Ordinances Table will provide that information. The Table of Up-to-Date Pages lists all of the current pages through the most recent supplementation. 
The Index provides references by common and legal terminology to the appropriate code sections. Cross-references are provided with the Index when appropriate. 
Supplements to the code provide regular updating of the code to maintain it as a current compilation of all the legislation which has general and continuing effect. Without regular supplementation, the code would soon lose its usefulness as a complete source of the general law of the municipality. Supplementation is accomplished by the periodic publication of additions and amendments to the code. 
  
A BILL FOR AN ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 32     SERIES OF 2011 
INTRODUCED BY: COUNCILMEMBER TODD 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GREENWOOD VILLAGE, COLORADO, ADOPTING BY REFERENCE AND ENACTING A NEW MUNICIPAL CODE FOR THE CITY OF GREENWOOD VILLAGE; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE 
    NOW, THEREFORE, THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GREENWOOD VILLAGE, COLORADO, ORDAINS: 
Section 1 .  The Code entitled the Greenwood Village Municipal Code published by Colorado Code Publishing Company, consisting of Chapters 1 through 18, with Tables and Index, is adopted. 
Section 2 .  All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before the adoption date of this Ordinance, which are inconsistent with the provisions of the Greenwood Village Municipal Code, to the extent of such inconsistency, are hereby repealed. The repeal established in this Section 2 shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that had been previously repealed by any ordinance which is repealed by this Ordinance. 
Section 3 .  The following codes were previously adopted by reference and incorporated in the Greenwood Village Municipal Code. One (1) copy of each is on file in the City Clerk's office: 
(1)  The Model Traffic Code for Colorado , 2010 edition, published by the Colorado Department of Transportation, as adopted and amended in Section 8-1-10, et seq.; 
(2)  The International Building Code , 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-2-10, et seq.; 
(3)  The International Residential Code , 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted in Section 18-3-10, et seq.; 
(4)  The International Plumbing Code , 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-4-10, et seq.; 
(5)  The International Mechanical Code , 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted in Section 18-5-10; 
(6)  The International Fuel Gas Code , 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-6-10, et seq.; 
(7)  The International Fire Code , 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted and amended in Section 18-7-10, et seq.; 
(8)  The International Energy Conservation Code , 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted in Section 18-8-10, et seq. 
Section 4 .  The penalties provided by the Municipal Code of the City of Greenwood Village are hereby adopted as follows: 
(1)  Sec. 1-4-20.  ;hg;General penalty for violation. (Chapter 1, General Provisions; Article 4, General Penalty) 
(a)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Code for which a different penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00) per violation or count or by imprisonment for a period of time not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days per violation of count, or by both such fine and imprisonment, except as hereinafter provided in Section 1-4-30. In addition, such person shall pay all costs and expenses in the case, including attorney fees. 
(b)  The imposition of one (1) penalty shall not excuse any violation or permit it to continue. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, each day or portion thereof during or on which such violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(2)  Sec. 1-4-30.  ;hg;Application of penalties to juveniles. (Chapter 1, General Provisions; Article 4, General Penalty) 
    Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, any person who has not yet reached eighteen (18) years of age at the time of commission of the offense, and who is subsequently convicted or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of any provision of this Code, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00) per violation or count. Such person shall not be subject to imprisonment unless such imprisonment is for failure to comply with the lawful order of the court or for contempt of court. 
(3)  Sec. 1-4-40.  ;hg;Penalty assessment. (Chapter 1, General Provisions; Article 4, General Penalty) 
(a)  When a person is provided the opportunity to pay a penalty assessment in lieu of appearing pursuant to a summons and complaint, the police officer shall issue a penalty assessment notice in the form of a summons and complaint. The penalty assessment notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The identification of the alleged offender; 
(2)  Specification of the offense and the applicable fine associated with such offense, as set forth by resolution of the City Council; 
(3)  A statement indicating that the offender must either pay the fine indicated on the summons and complaint or appear to answer the charge as set forth in the summons and complaint; and 
(4)  A waiver of the right to a hearing on the offense specified on the summons and complaint. 
(b)  If the person issued a penalty assessment notice chooses to acknowledge his or her guilt, he or she may pay the specified fine to the Municipal Court in person or by mail within twenty (20) days from the date of the violation. If the offender chooses not to acknowledge his or her guilt, he or she shall appear as required in the notice. 
(c)  Upon trial, if the alleged offender is found guilty, the fine imposed shall be that set forth in the notice of the offense for which he or she was found guilty, in addition to any court costs and surcharges. 
(4)  Sec. 1-4-50.  ;hg;Penalty for violations of ordinances adopted after adoption of Code. (Chapter 1, General Provisions; Article 4, General Penalty) 
    Any person who violates any provision of any ordinance of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted after adoption of this Code, either before or after it has been inserted in this Code by a supplement, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided by Section 1-4-20 unless another penalty is specifically provided for the violation. 
(5)  Sec. 2-1-230.  ;hg;Penalty. (Chapter 2, Administration; Article 1, Elections) 
(a)  Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this Article or who gives or accepts any contribution or contribution in kind required to be reported under Section 2-1-170 in such a way as to hinder or prevent identification of the true donor, commits a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article 4. Any such person who conspires with another to violate any provision of this Article and who is also a candidate shall, in addition to any other penalty provided in this Section, forfeit his or her right to assume the nomination or to take the oath for the office to which he or she may have been elected, unless he or she has already taken the oath, in which case the office shall be vacated. In the event the office to which the candidate has been elected is vacated, the vacancy to the office shall be filled as provided by the Charter. 
(b)  In addition to any other sanction imposed, any person who violates any provision of this Article relating to contribution limits shall be liable to the City for double the amount contributed or received in violation of the applicable provisions of this Article. Candidates shall be personally liable for fines imposed against the candidate's committee. 
(c)  The City Clerk, after proper notification by certified mail, shall impose a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day that a statement or other information required to be filed by this Article is not filed by the close of business on the day due; except that the City Clerk may excuse such penalty for bona fide personal emergencies. 
(d)  No person who has not fully complied with the provisions of this Article shall be permitted to be a candidate for any municipal office in any subsequent municipal election for four (4) years. 
(6)  Sec. 2-7-100.  ;hg;Violation; penalty. (Chapter 2, Administration; Article 7, Code of Ethics) 
    In addition to any other penalty provided for in the Charter, this Code or any other applicable law, any elected official, board member or employee who violates any provision of this Article is subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A violation by an elected official which is established to the satisfaction of a majority of the remaining Councilmembers shall be grounds for an official reprimand by the City Council. 
(2)  A violation by a board member which is established to the satisfaction of a majority of the remaining members of the board shall be grounds for an official reprimand by the board or by the City Council, or both. The City Council may remove such member from the board and appoint another person to finish the term of the member removed. 
(3)  Any person who knowingly or intentionally violates any provisions of Subsection (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) or (j) of Section 2-7-40 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20. In the event an elected official or board member is charged in Municipal Court with a violation of Section 2-7-40, the Municipal Judge shall recuse himself or herself and an independent judge shall be retained by the City to preside in place of the Municipal Judge. 
(4)  Any elected official who knowingly permits the City to enter into any contract in which the elected official has a pecuniary interest, without disclosing such interest to the City Council prior to the action of the City Council authorizing such contract, shall be guilty of misconduct in office. If such elected official is found, after notice and public hearing, to be guilty of misconduct in office, such elected official shall be punished by forfeiture of the elected official's office as authorized by Section 3.08 of the Charter. The public hearing shall be held upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the elected official, which notice shall fully set forth the charges against such elected official. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 3.08 of the Charter. 
(5)  The penalties provided for in Paragraphs (1) through (4) hereof shall not preclude the application of any other penalty or remedy provided for by law. 
(7)  Sec. 4-3-200.  ;hg;Examination of returns; recomputation, credits, deficiencies. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 3, Sales and Use Tax) 
    The Finance Director shall examine a return as soon as practicable after such return is filed. If it appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted may be greater or less than that shown in the return, the tax shall be recomputed by the Finance Director. If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the excess shall be refunded or credited against any subsequent remittance from the taxpayer. If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the amount of the deficiency with a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the deficiency, plus interest on both the deficiency and the penalty, shall be due and payable in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4-3-270. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added a fraud penalty as set forth in Section 4-3-310. 
(8)  Sec. 4-3-270.  ;hg;Failure to make return; estimate of taxes; notices; appeal. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 3, Sales and Use Tax) 
(a)  If any person fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax or to file a return and pay the tax, as required by this Article, or fails, neglects or refuses to collect, report or pay any portion of the tax, the Finance Director shall make an estimate of the tax due based on available information and shall add thereto a penalty equal to the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or ten percent (10%) of the tax due, whichever is greater, and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed by Section 4-3-320, plus one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month from the date the return and tax was due, which interest shall not exceed eighteen percent (18%) in the aggregate. 
(b)  The Finance Director shall serve upon the delinquent taxpayer personally or by first-class mail, directed to the last address of the taxpayer on file with the City, written notice assessing such estimated taxes, penalty and interest. Such notice shall constitute a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment, and such assessment shall be due and payable from the taxpayer to the Finance Director within twenty (20) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing; provided, however, that, within the twenty-day period, such delinquent taxpayer may appeal the notice of assessment. 
(c)  An appeal of a notice of assessment issued to a retailer or taxpayer for failure to file a return, underpayment of tax owed or as a result of an audit shall be submitted in writing to the Finance Director within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the notice of assessment. Any such appeal shall identify the amount of tax disputed and the basis for the appeal. 
(d)  An appeal of a notice of assessment may include a request for a hearing. 
(e)  If a hearing was requested in response to the petition, the Finance Director shall notify the petitioner in writing of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 4-3-210. After such hearing, or after a consideration of the facts and figures contained in the petition if no hearing is requested, the Finance Director shall make such order in the matter as he or she deems just and proper and shall furnish a copy of such order to the petitioner. 
(9)  Sec. 4-3-300.  ;hg;Assessment and recurring assessment penalty. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 3, Sales and Use Tax) 
    If any taxpayer has failed, neglected or refused to pay the tax imposed by this Article within the time specified for payment, the Finance Director may assess the following penalties, in addition to the taxes, penalties and interest provided for elsewhere in this Article, the additional amount being imposed to compensate the City for administrative and collection costs incurred in collecting such delinquent taxes: 
(1)  Upon the first or second issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per notice. 
(2)  Upon the third, fourth or fifth issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or fifteen percent (15%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(3)  Upon the sixth or more issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifty dollars ($50.00) or thirty percent (30%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(10)  Sec. 4-3-310.  ;hg;Penalties. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 3, Sales and Use Tax) 
(a)  Compliance penalty. A penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed for each section of this Article which the taxpayer violates. This penalty shall be in addition to any other applicable penalties and interest. 
(b)  Fraud penalty. In the event that the taxpayer commits an act of fraud upon the City, the City shall be entitled to assess a fraud penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or one hundred percent (100%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Article. An additional three-percent-per-month penalty on the amount of fraud penalty shall be added from the date the penalty was due until it is paid. 
(c)  Special penalty. In the event that the taxpayer is audited and deficiencies are found in the taxpayer's records which result in unpaid taxes owed to the City, the taxpayer shall have six (6) months from the date of the audit assessment in which to correct its records. If the deficiencies are not corrected and result in unpaid taxes due to the City in the future, then the City shall be entitled to assess a special penalty against the taxpayer. Such special penalty shall be assessed from the first day after the last day through which taxpayer's records were previously audited. The special penalty shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or fifty percent (50%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Article. 
(11)  Sec. 4-4-110.  ;hg;Interest and penalties. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 4, Use Tax on Building Materials) 
(a)  If any amount of use tax is not paid on or before the last date prescribed for payment, interest on such amount at the rate imposed under Subsection (h) hereof shall be paid for the period from such last date to the date paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without regard to any extension of time for payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. In the case of a tax for which the last date for payment is not otherwise prescribed, the last date for payment shall be deemed to be the date liability for the tax arises, and in no event shall it be later than the date that written notice and demand for payment of the tax is made by the Finance Director. 
(b)  If any part of the deficiency in payment of the use tax is due to negligence or intentional disregard of this Article or of authorized rules and regulations of the City with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added to the amount owed a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the deficiency. Penalty interest in such case shall be collected at the rate imposed under Subsection (h), in addition to the interest provided by Subsection (a) hereof, on the amount of the deficiency from the time the return was due, from the person required to file the return, which penalty and interest shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand for payment is given to such person by the Finance Director. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added to the amount owed a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the total amount of the deficiency. In such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the penalty, shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand for payment is given to such person by the Finance Director, and an additional three percent (3%) per month on such amount shall be added from the date the return was due until paid. 
(c)  If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the use tax or to pay any use tax as required, the Finance Director shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent, and shall add thereto a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under Subsection (h) hereof, plus one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month from the date when due. 
(d)  Any use tax due and unpaid shall be a debt to the City, and shall draw penalty interest at the rate imposed under Subsection (h) hereof, in addition to the interest provided by Subsection (a) hereof, from the time when due until paid. 
(e)  Interest prescribed under Subsections (a) through (d) hereof shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as the use tax to which it is applicable. 
(f)  If any portion of a use tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed on the portion of the use tax so satisfied for any period during which, if the period had not been made, interest would have been allowed with respect to such overpayment. 
(g)  Interest prescribed under Subsections (a) through (d) hereof on any use tax may be assessed and collected at any time during the period within which the tax to which such interest relates may be assessed and collected. 
(h)  When interest is required or permitted to be charged under any provisions of Subsections (a) through (d) hereof, the annual rate of interest shall be that established by the State Commissioner of Banking pursuant to Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S. 
(i)  Nothing in Subsections (a) through (d) hereof shall preclude the City from utilizing any other applicable penalties or remedies for the collection or enforcement of the use tax. 
(12)  Sec. 4-6-230.  ;hg;Examination of returns; recomputation, credits, deficiencies. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 6, Business Occupational Privilege Tax) 
    As soon as practicable after a return is filed, the Finance Director shall examine it. If it appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted may be greater or less than that shown in the return, the tax shall be recomputed by the Finance Director. If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the excess shall be refunded or credited against any subsequent remittance from the taxpayer. If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the amount of the deficiency, with a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the deficiency, plus interest on both the deficiency and the penalty, shall be due and payable in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4-6-320. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, there shall be added a fraud penalty as set forth in Section 4-6-360. 
(13)  Sec. 4-6-320.  ;hg;Failure to make return; estimate of taxes; notices; appeal. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 6, Business Occupational Privilege Tax) 
(a)  If any person fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax or to file a return and pay the tax, as required by this Article, or fails, neglects or refuses to collect, report or pay any portion of the tax, the Finance Director shall make an estimate of the tax due based on available information and shall add thereto a penalty equal to the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or ten percent (10%) of the tax due, whichever is greater, and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed by Section 4-6-370, plus one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month from the date the return and tax was due, which interest shall not exceed eighteen percent (18%) in the aggregate. 
(b)  The Finance Director shall serve upon the delinquent taxpayer personally, or by first-class mail directed to the last address of the taxpayer on file with the City, written notice assessing such estimated taxes, penalty and interest. Such notice shall constitute a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment, and such assessment shall be due and payable from the taxpayer to the Finance Director within twenty (20) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing; provided, however, that, within the twenty-day period, such delinquent taxpayer may appeal the notice of determination. 
(c)  An appeal of a notice of assessment issued to a taxpayer for failure to file a return, for underpayment of tax owed or as a result of an audit shall be submitted in writing to the Finance Director within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice of assessment. Any such appeal shall identify the amount of tax disputed and the basis for the appeal. 
(d)  An appeal of a notice of assessment may include a request for a hearing. 
(e)  If a hearing was requested in response to a notice of assessment, the Finance Director shall notify the petitioner in writing of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 4-6-240. After such hearing, or after a consideration of the facts and figures contained in the petition if no hearing is requested, the Finance Director shall make such order in the matter as he or she deems just and proper and shall furnish a copy of such order to the petitioner. 
(14)  Sec. 4-6-350.  ;hg;Assessment and recurring assessment penalty. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 6, Business Occupational Privilege Tax) 
    If any taxpayer has failed, neglected or refused to pay the tax imposed by this Article within the time specified for payment, the Finance Director may assess the following penalties, in addition to the taxes, penalties and interest provided for elsewhere in this Article, the additional amount being imposed to compensate the City for administrative and collection costs incurred in collecting such delinquent taxes: 
(1)  Upon the first or second issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per notice. 
(2)  Upon the third, fourth or fifth issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or fifteen percent (15%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(3)  Upon the sixth or more issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifty dollars ($50.00) or thirty percent (30%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(15)  Sec. 4-6-360.  ;hg;Penalties. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 6, Business Occupational Privilege Tax) 
(a)  Compliance penalty. A penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed for each section of this Article which the taxpayer violates. This penalty shall be in addition to any other applicable penalties and interest. 
(b)  Fraud penalty. In the event that the taxpayer commits an act of fraud upon the City, the City shall be entitled to assess a fraud penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or one hundred percent (100%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Article. An additional penalty of three percent (3%) per month on the amount of fraud penalty shall be added from the date the penalty was due until it is paid. 
(c)  Special penalty. In the event that the taxpayer is audited and deficiencies are found in the taxpayer's records which result in unpaid taxes owed to the City, the taxpayer shall have six (6) months from the date of the audit assessment in which to correct its records. If the deficiencies are not corrected and result in unpaid taxes due to the City in the future, then the City shall be entitled to assess a special penalty against the taxpayer. Such special penalty shall be assessed from the first day after the last day on which the taxpayer's records were previously audited. The special penalty shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or fifty percent (50%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Chapter. 
(16)  Sec. 4-7-140.  ;hg;Examination of returns; recomputation, credits, deficiencies. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 7, Employee Occupational Privilege Tax) 
    As soon as practicable after a return is filed, the Finance Director shall examine it. If it appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted may be greater or less than that shown in the return, the tax shall be recomputed by the Finance Director. If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the excess shall be refunded or credited against any subsequent remittance from the taxpayer. If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the amount of the deficiency with a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the deficiency plus interest on both the deficiency and the penalty shall be due and payable in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4-7-200. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added a fraud penalty as set forth in Section 4-7-240. 
(17)  Sec. 4-7-200.  ;hg;Failure to make return; estimate of taxes; notices; appeal. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 7, Employee Occupational Privilege Tax) 
(a)  If any person fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax, or to file a return and pay the tax as required by this Article, or fails, neglects or refuses to collect, report or pay any portion of the tax, the Finance Director shall make an estimate of the tax due based on available information and shall add thereto a penalty equal to the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or ten percent (10%) of the tax due, whichever is greater, and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed by Section 4-7-250, plus one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month from the date the return and tax was due, which interest shall not exceed eighteen percent (18%) in the aggregate. 
(b)  The Finance Director shall serve upon the delinquent taxpayer personally or by first-class mail, directed to the last address of the taxpayer on file with the City, written notice assessing such estimated taxes, penalty and interest. Such notice shall constitute a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment, and such assessment shall be due and payable from the taxpayer to the Finance Director within twenty (20) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing; provided, however, that within the twenty-day period such delinquent taxpayer may appeal the notice of determination. 
(c)  An appeal of a notice of assessment issued to a taxpayer for failure to file a return, underpayment of tax owed or as a result of an audit shall be submitted in writing to the Finance Director within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice of assessment. Any such appeal shall identify the amount of tax disputed and the basis for the appeal. 
(d)  An appeal of a notice of assessment may include a request for a hearing. 
(e)  If a hearing was requested in response to a notice of assessment, the Finance Director shall notify the petitioner in writing of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 4-7-150. After such hearing, or after a consideration of the facts and figures contained in the petition if no hearing is requested, the Finance Director shall make such order in the matter as he or she deems just and proper and shall furnish a copy of such order to the petitioner. 
(18)  Sec. 4-7-230.  ;hg;Assessment and recurring assessment penalty. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 7, Employee Occupational Privilege Tax) 
    If any taxpayer has failed, neglected or refused to pay the tax imposed by this Article within the time specified, the Finance Director may assess the following penalties, in addition to the taxes, penalties and interest provided for elsewhere in this Article, the additional amount being imposed to compensate the City for administrative and collection costs incurred in collecting such delinquent taxes: 
(1)  Upon the first or second issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per notice. 
(2)  Upon the third, fourth or fifth issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or fifteen percent (15%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(3)  Upon the sixth or more issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifty dollars ($50.00) or thirty percent (30%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(19)  Sec. 4-7-240.  ;hg;Penalties. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 7, Employee Occupational Privilege Tax) 
(a)  Compliance penalty. A penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed for each section of this Article which the taxpayer violates. This penalty shall be in addition to any other applicable penalties and interest. 
(b)  Fraud penalty. In the event that the taxpayer commits an act of fraud upon the City, the City shall be entitled to assess a fraud penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or one hundred percent (100%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Article. An additional three-percent-per-month penalty on the amount of the fraud penalty shall be added from the date the penalty was due until it is paid. 
(c)  Special penalty. If the taxpayer is audited and deficiencies are found in the taxpayer's records which result in unpaid taxes owed to the City, the taxpayer shall have six (6) months from the date of the audit assessment in which to correct its records. If the deficiencies are not corrected and result in unpaid taxes due to the City in the future, then the City shall be entitled to assess a special penalty against the taxpayer. Such special penalty shall be assessed from the first day after the last day on which the taxpayer's records were previously audited. The special penalty shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or fifty percent (50%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Article. 
(20)  Sec. 4-8-80.  ;hg;Violation; summons and complaint; penalty. (Chapter 4, Revenue and Finance; Article 8, Lodging Tax) 
(a)  It is a violation of this Article for any person subject to the tax on lodging levied by the City to refuse to make any return provided to be made in this Article, to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statement in any return or to fail or refuse to make timely payment to the Finance Director or his or her authorized agent of any taxes collected or due to the City, or in any manner to evade the collection and timely payment of the tax, or any part thereof, imposed by this Article, or for any person or purchaser to fail or refuse to pay any such tax or evade the timely payment thereof, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the timely payment of tax imposed by this Article. 
(b)  The Finance Director may direct the issuance of a complaint and summons to appear before the Municipal Court to any person who may be in violation of this Article. 
(c)  Any person who violates this Article shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment, pursuant to the limits established in Section 1-4-20. Each and every twenty-four-hour continuation of any violation shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(21)  Sec. 6-2-50.  ;hg;Minimum penalties. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 2, Alcoholic Beverages) 
(a)  For premises licensed as a retail liquor store, the following shall be the mandatory minimum penalties imposed by the Local Licensing Authority for violations of the Colorado Liquor Code and the Colorado Beer Code: 
(1)  First offense in three (3) years: Six (6) days' suspension, with two (2) days to be served and four (4) stayed. 
(2)  Second offense in three (3) years: Three (3) days' suspension, all of which to be served. 
(3)  Third offense in three (3) years: Revocation. 
(b)  For all other licensed premises, the following shall be the mandatory minimum penalties imposed by the Local Licensing Authority for sales of alcoholic beverages to underage persons in violation of the Colorado Liquor Code and the Colorado Beer Code: 
(1)  First offense in three (3) years: Seven (7) days' suspension, with three (3) days to be served and four (4) stayed. 
(2)  Second offense in three (3) years: Five (5) days' suspension, all of which to be served. 
(3)  Third offense in three (3) years: Revocation. 
(c)  The penalties in this Section shall be mandatory minimum penalties and shall not be reduced or waived by the Local Licensing Authority for any reason, by agreement or otherwise. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the Local Licensing Authority from exceeding these mandatory minimum penalties or from assessing fines in addition to the mandatory minimum penalties. 
(22)  Sec. 6-3-80.  ;hg;Penalty. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 3, Residential Solicitations) 
    Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be subject to a fine of not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00) for each separate offense. 
(23)  Sec. 6-8-210.  ;hg;Penalties. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 8, Sexually Oriented Businesses) 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to violate any provision of this Article, and any such violation shall be subject to punishment in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 1-4-20, provided that no person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall be subject to imprisonment. 
(b)  In the event of violation of any of the terms and regulations set forth herein, the City may obtain equitable relief, including injunctive relief, to require compliance with the provisions hereof. In the event the City is successful in obtaining injunctive or other equitable relief, the costs and attorney fees incurred by the City in such action shall be awarded to the City in addition to any other relief. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall preclude the City from enforcing the suspension and revocation provisions of this Article in addition to simultaneously or subsequently prosecuting alleged violations of this Article under this Section. 
(24)  Sec. 6-11-10.  ;hg;Violation; penalty. (Chapter 6, Business Licenses and Regulations; Article 11, Miscellaneous Provisions) 
    It is unlawful to violate this Chapter. Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-4-20. 
(25)  Sec. 7-6-70.  ;hg;Violation; penalty. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 6, Burning Restrictions) 
(a)  Where the Chief of Police or a City police officer has reasonable grounds to believe that this Article has been violated, he or she shall issue a written warning to the violator. If the Chief of Police or a City police officer subsequently observes, within the following twelve-month period, another violation of this Article on the same premises, he or she may issue a summons and complaint to the violator. 
(b)  Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Article shall be punished by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense, fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second offense, and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) more than the fine for the preceding offense for the third and any subsequent offense up to a maximum fine of four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). 
(26)  Sec. 7-7-120.  ;hg;Enforcement; civil penalties. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 7, Products Containing Ozone-Depleting Compounds) 
(a)  Whenever the City Manager has reason to believe that any person has violated the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to Section 7-7-20, the City Manager may issue a notice of violation or a cease-and-desist order. Such notice or order shall set forth the rule or regulation alleged to have been violated, the facts constituting such violation and any measure which the person is required to take. In addition, if the City Manager finds that a person is in violation of any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to Section 7-7-20, the City Manager may assess a fine of up to nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00) for each violation. 
(b)  Any person who has been issued a notice of violation or a cease-and-desist order or who has been ordered to pay a fine may request a hearing before the City Council to contest the notice, order or fine. Such request shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the notice or order has been issued or the fine has been assessed. Upon such request, a hearing shall be held before the City Council in accordance with Section 2-6-90. 
(c)  After a hearing pursuant to Subsection (b) hereof, any person aggrieved by the determination of the City Council may, pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, seek judicial review of the City Council's order within thirty (30) days after entry thereof in district court. 
(27)  Sec. 7-8-250.  ;hg;Penalty assessment notice. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 8, Animals) 
(a)  A penalty assessment notice may be issued to a person charged with a violation of any of the following sections of this Article: 
(1)  Section 7-8-80, Running at large. 
(2)  Section 7-8-90, Disturbing the peace. 
(3)  Section 7-8-220, Removal of dog and cat feces. 
(b)  The fine prescribed by such penalty assessment notice shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  First offence within a calendar year: twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  Second offence within a calendar year: thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(3)  Third offense within a calendar year: forty-five dollars ($45.00). 
(4)  Fourth offense and each offense thereafter within a calendar year: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) more than the fine for the preceding offense, up to a maximum of four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). 
(c)  A penalty assessment notice shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the person being charged, if known; 
(2)  The nature of the offense; 
(3)  The amount of the penalty prescribed for such offense; 
(4)  The date of the notice; 
(5)  The time and place when and where such person shall appear in court in the event such penalty is not paid within twenty (20) days thereafter; and 
(6)  A place for such person to execute a signed acknowledgement of guilt and an agreement to pay the prescribed penalty within twenty (20) days of the date of the notice. 
(d)  Acceptance and payment of the prescribed fine shall be deemed complete restitution of the violation. 
(e)  If the person being charged refuses to accept the penalty assessment notice, or if the person being charged accepts the notice but fails to pay the prescribed penalty within twenty (20) days thereafter, the notice shall be construed to be a summons and complaint, except that the maximum penalty which may be imposed shall not exceed the penalty set forth in Subsection (b) of this Section. 
(28)  Sec. 7-8-370.  ;hg;Penalty. (Chapter 7, Health, Sanitation and Animals; Article 8, Animals) 
    Violations of this Article shall be punishable in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  First offense within a calendar year: one hundred dollars ($100.00); provided that if a person charged with violation Section 7-8-310, Inoculation required, or Section 7-8-320, Rabies tags for dogs, provides proof to the Court Clerk that the animal involved was inoculated no later than ten (10) days after the offense, or that rabies tags were obtained for the animal involved no later than ten (10) days after the offense, the summons and complaint shall be dismissed. 
(2)  Additional offenses within a calendar year: mandatory court appearance, with the penalty to be imposed by the Municipal Court. 
(29)  Sec. 8-1-30.  ;hg;Amendments. (Chapter 8, Vehicles and Traffic; Article 1, Model Traffic Code) 
    The adopted Model Traffic Code is subject to the following additions, modifications and amendments: 
(1)  The following new Part 3 is added to the Model Traffic Code: 
"PART 3
EMISSIONS CONTROL
. . . 
    "306. Enforcement of State requirements. 
    "(1) It is unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any motor vehicle, which is required by the State to be inspected pursuant to the automobile inspection and readjustment program established pursuant to Sections 42-4-306.5 to 42-4-316, C.R.S., to drive, stop, park, or to cause or knowingly permit such motor vehicle to be driven, stopped or parked, on any street or highway within the City, unless such vehicle has been inspected at an authorized inspection station and, if required, has attached thereto, in proper position, a valid and unexpired certification of emissions control as required by state law. 
    "(2) At the time a person is issued a summons and complaint charging a violation of this Section, the officer so charging may offer to give a penalty assessment notice to the person being charged, if known. Such notice shall contain all of the information required by subsection (4) hereof. If the person accepts the notice, such acceptance shall constitute an acknowledgment of guilt for a violation of this Section and a promise to pay a penalty assessment of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) to the City's Traffic Violations Bureau, either in person or by mail, within twenty (20) days from the date of the violation. Acceptance and payment of the penalty assessment shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the violation. 
    "(3) If an alleged violator refuses to accept the penalty assessment notice or accepts the notice but fails to pay the penalty assessment as required, the penalty assessment notice shall constitute a summons and complaint and shall be processed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
    "(4) A penalty assessment notice shall contain the name and address of the person being charged, if such information is known; the nature of the alleged offense; the amount of the penalty assessment prescribed for such offense; the date of the notice; the time and place when and where such person shall appear in court in the event such penalty assessment is not paid within twenty (20) days thereafter; a place for such person to execute a signed acknowledgment of guilt and an agreement to pay the penalty assessment within twenty (20) days from the date of the violation; and such other information as required by law to constitute such notice as a summons to appear in the Municipal Court, should the penalty assessment not be paid within twenty (20) days from the date of the notice. 
    "(5) Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than thirty-five dollars ($35.00) nor more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). 
    "(6) An officer coming upon an unattended vehicle which is in violation of this Section may place upon the vehicle a penalty assessment notice indicating the offense and directing the owner or operator of the vehicle to remit a penalty assessment of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) to the City's Traffic Violations Bureau within twenty (20) days. If the penalty assessment is not paid within twenty (20) days, the Traffic Violations Bureau shall request the police officer to file a complaint in the Municipal Court, which shall be served upon the registered owner of the vehicle with a summons to appear in Municipal Court. 
    "(7) In any prosecution under this Section, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint or penalty assessment notice was driven, parked, or stopped in violation of this Section, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint or penalty assessment notice was at the time of such driving, stopping or parking, a registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who drove, stopped, parked, or knowingly permitted to be driven, stopped or parked, such vehicle at the place where, and at the time when such violation occurred." 
    . . . 
(30)  Sec. 8-1-70.  ;hg;Violation; penalty. (Chapter 8, Vehicles and Traffic; Article 1, Model Traffic Code) 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Article or the Model Traffic Code as adopted herein. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein, every person convicted of a violation of this Article or the Model Traffic Code shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20. 
(c)  The penalty for conviction of the following offenses shall be a fine not to exceed four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00), with no possibility of imprisonment: 
(1)  Any traffic offense for which the points assessed by the State against the person's driver's license is three (3) points or less. 
(2)  Careless driving. 
(3)  Speeding up to nineteen (19) miles per hour in excess of the posted speed limit. 
(4)  Disobedience of traffic control devices. 
(5)  Failure to yield to an emergency vehicle. 
(6)  Following too closely. 
(7)  Failure to yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian. 
(8)  Improper passing. 
(d)  A conviction for a traffic offense for which the penalty may not exceed a fine of four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00) with no possibility of imprisonment does not constitute a crime, and the punishment imposed shall not be deemed for any purpose to be penal or criminal punishment. Any person charged with such an offense shall not have a right to trial by jury. 
(31)  Sec. 8-1-80.  ;hg;Overload penalties. (Chapter 8, Vehicles and Traffic; Article 1, Model Traffic Code) 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any weight limitation imposed by Part 5 of the Model Traffic Code shall be subject to the following penalties: 
Excess Weight in Pounds Fine 1-3,000 $ 100.00 3,001-4,250  177.00 4,251-4,500  184.00 4,501-4,750  192.00 4,751-5,000  199.00 5,001-5,250  372.00 5,251-5,500  384.00 5,501-5,750  397.00 5,751-6,000  409.00 6,001-6,250  422.00 6,251-6,500  434.00 6,501-6,750  447.00 6,751-7,000  459.00 7,001-7,250  893.00 7,251-7,500  910.00 7,501-7,750  928.00 7,751-8,000  945.00 8,001-8,250  963.00 8,251-8,500  980.00 8,501 and over  998.00  
(32)  Sec. 8-1-120.  ;hg;Red light cameras. (Chapter 8, Vehicles and Traffic; Article 1, Model Traffic Code) 
    . . . 
(h)  Penalties and costs. 
(1)  The maximum penalty for a violation of Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code detected by a red-light camera system, including surcharges, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). No portion of any fine collected for a violation discovered by a red-light camera system may be paid to the manufacturer or vendor of the red-light camera. The compensation paid by the City for such equipment shall be based on the value of such red-light camera system and may not be based upon the number of traffic citations issued or the revenue generated by such red-light camera system. 
(2)  In any proceeding under this Section, the Municipal Court may impose as an additional cost the cost of service of the notice of violation upon the defendant, if such service is effected through either certified mail or personal service. The Municipal Court may impose the actual cost of such service if the cost is reasonable and does not exceed the amount actually charged for service. 
(3)  The City shall not report to the Department of Revenue any conviction, entry of judgment, outstanding judgment, or warrant based on a violation of Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code that was detected exclusively by means of a red-light camera system. 
(33)  Sec. 9-12-122.  ;hg;Violations; penalties. (Chapter 9, General Offenses; Article 12, Public Peace and Decency) 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate: any provision of Article 46, Colorado Beer Code, Article 47, Colorado Liquor Code, or Article 48, Liquors; Special Events Permits of Title 12, C.R.S.; any rule or regulation of the Colorado Department of Revenue promulgated pursuant to such statutes; or any regulation contained in the City beer and liquor regulations, as amended. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in Subsections (c) and (d) hereof, violations of this Section shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not more than nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.99), or by imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In no case shall the fine imposed for any such violation be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and the fine shall not be reduced below this minimum by plea bargain or otherwise. 
(c)  A person convicted of serving alcohol to an underage person shall be punished by a mandatory fine of nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00). Imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days may be imposed in addition to, but not in lieu of, the mandatory fine. In no case shall the fine imposed for any such violation be more or less than nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00), and the fine shall not be reduced below this amount by plea bargain or otherwise. 
(d)  An underage person convicted of obtaining or attempting to obtain, by misrepresentation of age or any other method, any alcoholic beverage in any place where alcoholic beverages are sold shall be punished, upon conviction, as follows: 
(1)  First offense. The defendant shall attend an alcohol treatment or awareness class or program at the defendant's own expense, complete twenty-four (24) hours of useful public service and pay a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  Second offense. The fine shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), and, in addition, the defendant shall complete forty-eight (48) hours of useful public service. 
(3)  Third offense. The fine shall be four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00), and, in addition, the defendant shall complete ninety-six (96) hours of useful public service. 
(4)  Subsequent offenses. The fine shall be four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00), and, in addition, the Municipal Court may order the defendant to complete any number of hours of useful public service. 
(e)  The fines and hours of useful public service set forth in Subsection (d) hereof shall be mandatory and shall not be increased, reduced or waived by the Municipal Court. 
(f)  This Section shall not apply to any underage person who is expressly authorized by the Police Department to attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain alcoholic beverages as part of a police investigation or other police operation. 
(g)  The penalties contained in this Section are distinct from, and may be imposed in addition to, any proceedings or penalties relating to the suspension or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license. 
(34)  Sec. 9-14-80.  ;hg;Unlawful acts; penalty. (Chapter 9, General Offenses; Article 14, Smoking in Public Places) 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this Article. 
(b)  Other than as provided in Section 9-14-70, violations of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). In determining the sentence to be imposed, the Municipal Judge shall consider the frequency and duration of the violation, the size of the establishment, whether the violation was knowingly made and any other relevant factor. Each day of continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(35)  Sec. 9-17-40.  ;hg;Violation; penalty. (Chapter 9, General Offenses; Article 17, Targeted Residential Picketing) 
(a)  Before a person may be charged with a first offense of a violation of this Article, the person shall have been ordered by a law enforcement official, on at least one (1) occasion prior thereto, to move or disperse or to take other appropriate action to comply with this Article and shall have failed to promptly comply with the warning. 
(b)  To ensure that proper warning has been given, the Police Department shall maintain a written record indicating the name of each warned individual, the address of each targeted residence and the date and time of each warning. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of this Article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-4-20. 
(36)  Sec. 9-18-60.  ;hg;Violation; penalty. (Chapter 9, General Offenses; Article 18, Fireworks) 
    It is unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this Article. Any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00), or by imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(37)  Sec. 11-1-10.  ;hg;Responsibility for abutting sidewalks. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; Article 1, Snow Removal) 
(a)  Except as provided for in Section 11-1-20, the owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession or in control of any premises or property located in a B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, L-I, M-C or T-C zone district shall maintain those sidewalks adjoining such premises or property in a condition free from snow or ice and shall remove any accumulation of snow or ice from such sidewalks within twenty-four (24) hours after its accumulation. 
(b)  Except as provided for in Section 11-1-20, the owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession or control of any single-family residential property having a sidewalk abutting the front or, in the case of a corner lot, the front and side of a residence shall maintain the sidewalk in a condition free from snow or ice and shall remove any accumulation of snow or ice from such sidewalks within forty-eight (48) hours after its accumulation. This responsibility does not extend to driveways or walkways leading from the sidewalk to the residence nor to sidewalks or trails abutting the rear property of a residence. 
(c)  The penalty for conviction may not exceed a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with no possibility of imprisonment. The punishment imposed shall not be deemed for any purpose to be penal or criminal punishment, and no person charged with such an offense shall have a right to trial by jury. Violation of this Section by residential property owners does not create any civil liability upon an residential property owner not otherwise imposed by Colorado law. 
(38)  Sec. 11-1-40.  ;hg;Penalty. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; Article 1, Snow Removal) 
(a)  Any person who violates this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(39)  Sec. 11-3-280.  ;hg;Penalties. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; Article 3, Public Rights-of-Way) 
(a)  If any contractor or permittee is found guilty of or pleads guilty to a violation of this Division, he or she shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article 4. Each and every day or portion thereof during which a violation is committed, continues or is permitted shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to or in lieu of the penalties set forth in Subsection (a) hereof, the City may impose the following monetary penalties: 
(1)  For any occupancy of a travel lane or any portion thereof beyond the time periods or days set forth in the traffic control plan approved by the City: 
a.  In arterial and collector streets (as defined in the City of Greenwood Village Transportation Plan) during the hours of 6:30 a.m. through 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. through 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday: one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each fifteen (15) minutes, or portion thereof, for a maximum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per day. 
b.  In arterial and collector streets during any time other than the times specified in Subparagraph (b)(1)a. hereof, or in local streets at any time: fifty dollars ($50.00) for each fifteen (15) minutes, or portion thereof, for a maximum of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per day. 
(2)  For commencing work without a valid permit: five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus twice the applicable permit fee. 
(3)  For facilities installed outside of the approved alignment: ten dollars ($10.00) per linear foot. This penalty shall not be imposed if the facilities are removed or relocated to comply with the approved alignment or the facilities are abandoned pursuant to Subsection 11-3-240(c). 
(4)  For any other violation of a permit: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation, with no maximum amount. 
(c)  The penalties set forth in this Section shall not be the City's exclusive remedy for violations of this Division and shall not preclude the City from bringing a civil action to enforce any provision of a public right-of-way permit or to collect damages or recover costs associated with any use of the public rights-of-way. Furthermore, the enforcement of one (1) penalty shall not preclude the City from enforcing any other penalty. 
(40)  Sec. 11-3-430.  ;hg;Penalty. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; Article 3, Public Rights-of-Way) 
    Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.00). Each day such violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense. As an additional means of enforcement, and not as an alternative to or substitute for prosecution for violation of this Division, the City may remove or eradicate any utility markings which are not removed pursuant to this Division and bill the party responsible for such removal the full cost incurred by the City to effect such removal. Any such costs incurred shall be immediately due and payable, and failure to pay such costs in full within thirty (30) days of billing therefor by the City shall subject the responsible party to interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum, compounded monthly. Any requests for future permits by such permittee shall be denied until all unpaid balances are paid in full. 
(41)  Sec. 11-4-80.  ;hg;Violation; penalty. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; Article 4, Underground Relocation of Overhead Facilities) 
    Any owner or operator of a facility who violates this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 1-4-20. Each day of violation shall be a separate offense. 
(42)  Sec. 11-5-90.  ;hg;Violation; penalty. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; Article 5, Park Regulations) 
    Violations of this Article shall be governed by Section 1-4-20. 
(43)  Sec. 11-6-60.  ;hg;Violation; penalty. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; Article 6, Vendors and Solicitors on Public Land) 
    Violations of this Article shall be governed by Section 1-4-20. 
(44)  Sec. 11-7-60.  ;hg;Maintenance. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; Article 7, Noise-Attenuating Structures) 
    . . . 
    (c) The following conditions concerning maintenance shall apply: 
    . . . 
(4)  In the event the charge specified in Paragraph (3) hereof is not paid when due, the City may impose a lien on the property in the amount of the unpaid charge, plus a penalty in an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the unpaid charge. 
(45)  Sec. 11-9-20.  ;hg;Violation and penalty. (Chapter 11, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places; Article 9, Storm Drainage) 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the Greenwood Village Drainage Criteria Manual. 
(b)  It is declared to be a nuisance for any owner, developer or occupant of any real property within the City to fail to comply with any of the provisions of the Manual. 
(c)  Upon violation of any provision of the Manual, any person may be subject to the following penalties and enforcement provisions: 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of the Manual, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code; or 
(2)  Any person violating any provision of the Manual shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 7, Article 1 of this Code. 
(d)  Each day during which the illegal construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance, use or noncompliance with conditions continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(46)  Sec. 16-1-80.  ;hg;Violations and penalties. (Chapter 16, Land Development Code; Article 1, General Provisions) 
(a)  The following are unlawful and shall be considered violations of this Chapter: 
(1)  A violation of any provision of this Chapter; 
(2)  Failure to comply with an order to discontinue or remove any violation of the Chapter within the time period stated in the order; or 
(3)  Failure to comply with any condition, requirement or limitation imposed upon any zoning or rezoning plat, MDP, SDP, PUD plan, FDP, SUP or PSP. 
(b)  Violations of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). 
(c)  A conviction of an offense under this Chapter for which the penalty may not exceed a fine of four hundred ninety-nine ($499.00) with no possibility of imprisonment does not constitute a crime and the punishment imposed shall not be deemed for any purpose to be penal or criminal punishment. Any person charged with such an offense shall not have a right to trial by jury 
(d)  In addition to the above penalty, the Director may choose to schedule a hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission to determine whether the violation warrants a revocation of a license or permit held under this Chapter. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to the license or permit holder by U.S. mail not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. The license or permit holder may appeal the Planning and Zoning Commission finding to the City Council by filing an application for appeal within seven (7) days of the date such findings were made. In the event the Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council upon appeal makes a finding that the violation of the license or permit poses an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general public, it may immediately revoke the license or permit. Upon revocation, no person shall operate a license or permit without obtaining reinstatement. 
(e)  If the City Council finds that any person holding a license or permit under this Chapter has violated any provision of this Code and based on that violation, the City Council suspends or revokes such license or permit, the City Council may require that the licensee or permittee pay to the City the reasonable costs incurred by the City, not to exceed fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00), in investigating and prosecuting the alleged violation. Such costs shall include the reasonable attorney fees of any special counsel appointed to conduct the investigation and present evidence at the hearing, but shall not include any fees of the City Attorney acting as legal advisor to the City. The costs imposed pursuant to this Section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by the City Council or the Greenwood Village Municipal Court, and shall have no bearing on or relationship to any penalty imposed by the Greenwood Village Municipal Court. 
(f)  Once a permit or license has been revoked, an applicant may obtain reinstatement of the license or permit by filing a petition for reinstatement with the Director. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and decide on the petition in accordance with the administrative procedural requirements of Section 2-6-50 The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the petition. No petition for reinstatement shall be approved or conditionally approved unless the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that the violations which resulted in revocation of the permit or license have been corrected, and that the applicant has provided the City with reasonable assurances that said violations will not occur in the future. In the event the Planning and Zoning Commission denies a petition for reinstatement, the applicant may appeal such denial to the City Council by filing an application for appeal within seven (7) days of the date of the denial. City Council shall conduct a de novo hearing on appeal in accordance with the procedural requirements of Section 2-6-50. 
(g)  Violations of this Chapter may also be abated as nuisances pursuant to Chapter 7 of this Code. 
(h)  Each day during which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(47)  Sec. 18-1-30.  ;hg;Violation; penalty. (Chapter 18, Building Regulations; Article 1, General Provisions) 
    It is unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter. Any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or of any of the provisions of the codes adopted pursuant to this Chapter shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20. 
(48)  Sec. 18-7-30.  ;hg;Amendments. (Chapter 18, Building Regulations; Article 7, Fire Code) 
    The code adopted herein is hereby modified by the following amendments: 
(1)  Additions. none. 
(2)  Amendments. The following sections of the IFC are amended as follows: 
    " Section 101.1, Title . These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of Greenwood Village, hereinafter referred to as 'this code.' " 
    " Section 109.3, Violation penalties . Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment up to the maximum specified in Section 13.04.030 of the Greenwood Village Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense." 
    . . . 
Section 5 .  Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6 .  Ordinances adopted after this Ordinance that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to those provisions of the Code. 
Section 7 .  This Ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days after final publication thereof. 
    INTRODUCED AND APPROVED ON FIRST READING ON THE 17th DAY OF OCTOBER 2011, AND ORDERED PUBLISHED IN THE VILLAGER. 
/s/ (signature) 
      Ronald J. Rakowsky, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ (signature) 
      Susan M. Phillips, MMC 
      City Clerk       INTRODUCED AND APPROVED ON SECOND READING ON THE 7th DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2011, AND ORDERED PUBLISHED IN THE VILLAGER BY REFERENCE TO TITLE ONLY. 
/s/ (signature) 
      Ronald J. Rakowsky, Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ (signature) 
      Susan M. Phillips, MMC 
      City Clerk   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/ (signature) 
      Tonya Haas Davidson 
      City Attorney   Effective Date: December 10, 2011 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance No. Year Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 01 2017  2- 6-2017 Omitted 02 2017  2- 6-2017 Omitted 03 2017  3- 6-2017 Included 04 2017  5- 1-2017 Omitted 05 2017  5- 1-2017 Omitted 06 2017  5- 1-2017 Included 07 2017  5- 1-2017 Included 08 2017  6-19-2017 Included 09 2017  6-19-2017 Included 10 2017  6- 5-2017 Omitted 11 2017  6-19-2017 Included 13 2017  8- 7-2017 Omitted 15 2017  9-11-2017 Omitted 17 2017 10-16-2017 Omitted 18 2017 10-16-2017 Omitted 19 2017 10-16-2017 Omitted 20 2017 10-16-2017 Included 21 2017 10-16-2017 Included Supp. No. 2 22 2017 11- 6-2017 Included 01 2018  5- 7-2018 Omitted 02 2018  4- 2-2018 Included 03 2018  6- 4-2018 Included 04 2018  6- 4-2018 Included 05 2018  6- 4-2018 Included 6 2018  6- 4-2018 Included 07 2018 10- 1-2018 Included 08 2018  9-10-2018 Failed 09 2018 10- 1-2018 Included 10 2018 11- 5-2018 Omitted 11 2018 10-15-2018 Omitted 12 2018  1- 7-2019 Included 13 2018  1- 7-2019 Omitted Supp. No. 3 01 2019  3- 4-2019 Included 02 2019  4- 1-2019 Included 03 2019  4-15-2019 Included 04 2019  4- 1-2019 Included 05 2019  4- 1-2019 Postponed indefinitely 07 2019  4-15-2019 Included  
CHAPTER 1 - General Provisions 
ARTICLE 1 - Code 

Sec. 1-1-10. - Adoption of Code. 
    The published code known as the Greenwood Village Municipal Code , of which one (1) copy is now on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected during regular business hours, is enacted and adopted by reference as a primary code and incorporated herein as if set out at length. This primary code has been promulgated by the City of Greenwood Village, Colorado, as a codification of all the ordinances of the City of Greenwood Village of a general and permanent nature through Ordinance No. 32, 2011, for the purpose of providing an up-to-date code of ordinances, properly organized and indexed, in published form for the use of the citizens and officers of the City. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 12  1, 2018) 
Sec. 1-1-20. - Title. 
    This Code shall be known as the Greenwood Village Municipal Code . 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-1-30. - Code supersedes prior ordinances. 
    This Code shall supersede all other municipal codes consisting of compilations of general and permanent ordinances and parts of ordinances passed by the City Council. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-1-40. - Matters not affected by repeal. 
    The repeal of ordinances and parts of ordinances of a permanent and general nature by Section 1-1-50 shall not affect any offense committed or act done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract, right or obligation established prior to the time said ordinances and parts of ordinances are repealed. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-1-50. - Ordinances not contained in Code. 
(a)  Upon the effective date of this Code, all existing ordinances and portions of ordinances of a general and permanent nature which are inconsistent with any ordinance included in the adoption of this Code are, to the extent of the inconsistency, repealed. 
(b)  Temporary or special ordinances and portions of such ordinances, although omitted from this Code, shall not be affected by such omission. The adoption of this Code shall not repeal or amend any temporary or special ordinances. Among the ordinances not repealed or amended by the adoption of this Code are those ordinances: 
(1)  Creating, opening, dedicating, naming, renaming, vacationing or closing specific streets, alleys and other public ways; 
(2)  Establishing the grades or lines of specific streets, sidewalks and other public ways; 
(3)  Creating local improvement districts; 
(4)  Authorizing the issuance of general obligation or specific local improvement district bonds; 
(5)  Making special assessments for local improvement districts and authorizing refunds from specific local improvement district bond proceeds; 
(6)  Annexing territory to or excluding territory from the City; 
(7)  Dedicating or accepting any specific plat or subdivision; 
(8)  Calling an election; 
(9)  Authorizing specific contracts for purchase of beneficial use of water by the City; 
(10)  Approving or authorizing specific contracts with the State, with other governmental bodies or with others; 
(11)  Authorizing a specific lease, sale or purchase of property; 
(12)  Granting rights-of-way or other rights and privileges to specific railroad companies or other public carriers; 
(13)  Granting a specific gas company or other public utility the right or privilege of constructing lines in the streets and alleys or of otherwise using the streets and alleys; 
(14)  Granting a franchise to a specific public utility company or establishing rights for or otherwise regulating a specific public utility company; 
(15)  Appropriating money; 
(16)  Levying a temporary tax or fixing a temporary tax rate; 
(17)  Relating to salaries; and 
(18)  Amending the Official Zoning Map. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 12  2, 2018) 
ARTICLE 2 - Definitions and Usage 

Sec. 1-2-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Code, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Charter means the Home Rule Charter of the City of Greenwood Village, Colorado, adopted July 30, 1968, as amended, copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk. 
    City means the City of Greenwood Village, Colorado, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Greenwood Village, Colorado, and such territory outside of the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. City shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
    City Council means the City Council of the City of Greenwood Village. 
    City Manager means the City Manager of the City, or the City Manager's authorized representative. 
    Code means the Greenwood Village Municipal Code as published and subsequently amended, unless the context requires otherwise. 
    County means the County of Arapahoe, Colorado. 
    C.R.S. means the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended. 
    Day means the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. 
    Finance Director means the Finance Director of the City or such other person designated by the City. Finance Director shall also include such person's designee. 
    Land , real estate and real property mean and include lands, tenements, hereditaments, water rights, possessory rights and claims. 
    Law means applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of Colorado, the ordinances of the City and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
    Legal holiday means New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day, the Friday after Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve Day and Christmas Day. 
    May is discretionary. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
    Oath, affirmation, swear and affirm all mean a statement attesting to the truth of that which is stated or written. 
    Owner, applied to a building, land, motorized vehicle, animal or other real or personal property, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety or any other person with a possessory interest in the whole or a part of said building, land, motor vehicle, animal or other real or personal property. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by the court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit, and includes the plural as well as the singular number. 
    Personal property means and includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments in which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished, and every right or interest therein. 
    Police officer means a peace officer whose authority shall include the enforcement of all laws of the State of Colorado and who shall be certified by the peace officers' standards and training board pursuant to state statute. Police officers shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Code and the City Charter and shall have the authority granted to them pursuant to the Colorado Revised Statutes. Police officers shall be sworn members of the Police Department. 
    Property means and includes both real and personal property unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall and must are both mandatory. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended primarily for the use of pedestrians. 
    State means the State of Colorado. 
    Street or public thoroughfare , unless otherwise defined elsewhere in this Code, means and includes all streets, alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, parkways, public ways, public squares and public sidewalks. 
    Tenant and occupant , applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies all or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Trail or trails means routes or paths which have been specifically prepared or designed for public recreational functions and may be either paved or unpaved. 
    Week means seven (7) days; however, publication in a newspaper of any notice or matter indicating to be for a stated number of weeks means one (1) insertion in each week, unless specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one (1) day in each week; and all publications heretofore made in accordance with the terms of this Subsection are validated. 
    Weekday means any day Monday through Friday which is not a legal holiday. 
    Written or in writing means a tangible or electronic record of a communication or representation, including handwriting, typewriting, printing, photostating, photography, and electronic communications. 
    Year means a calendar year. 
(Prior code 1.04.010, 3.08.030, 5.12.010, 8.24.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 12  3, 2018) 
Sec. 1-2-20. - Computation of time; reasonable time. 
(a)  The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day; unless the time for an act to be done falls on a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next regular business day following such Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When any such time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
(b)  In all cases where this Code requires any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice. 
(Prior code 1.04.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-2-30. - Title of office. 
    Use of the title of City Manager or any other officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City, or his or her designated representative. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-2-40. - Usage of terms. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; however, technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Prior code 1.04.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-2-50. - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply to this Code and to City ordinances: 
(1)  Any gender includes the other genders. 
(2)  The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense shall include the past and future tenses and vice versa. 
(4)  Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. 
(Prior code 1.04.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-2-60. - Relevance of rules of construction. 
    The rules of construction set forth in Section 1-2-50 shall not be applied to any ordinance or Code section which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction or when the subject matter or context of such ordinance or Code section may be repugnant thereto. 
(Prior code 1.04.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-2-70. - Errors and omissions. 
    If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and provision shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any questions exists regarding the nature or extent of such error. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 3 - General 

Sec. 1-3-10. - Titles and headings not part of Code. 
    Chapter and Article titles, headings, numbers and titles of sections and other divisions of this Code or in supplements made to this Code are for the convenience of persons using this Code and are not part of this Code. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-3-20. - Prohibited acts. 
    Whenever in this Code or any City ordinance any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-3-30. - Publication of ordinances. 
(a)  The City Council shall designate the legal newspaper of the City by resolution. 
(b)  Any ordinance, resolution, notice or advertisement of the City which is required to be published shall be published in the newspaper designated by resolution of the City Council as the City's legal newspaper. 
(c)  If publication in the City's legal newspaper is not feasible, the City may publish any ordinance, resolution, notice or advertisement in any newspaper which meets the requirements of a legal newspaper in the County. 
(d)  The provisions of this Section shall supersede the publication requirements contained in Section 31-16-105, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 1.24.010, 1.24.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-3-40. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this Code are declared to be severable, and if any section, provision or part thereof shall be held unconstitutional, the remainder of this Code shall continue in full force and effect, it being the legislative intent that this Code would have been adopted even if such unconstitutional matter had not been included therein. It is further declared that, if any provision or part of this Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application thereof to other persons shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 4 - General Penalty 

Sec. 1-4-10. - Violations. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse, or fail to comply with or resist the enforcement of any provision of this Code or any secondary code adopted by this Code. 
(Prior code 1.28.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-4-20. - General penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Code for which a different penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) per violation or count or by imprisonment for a period of time not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days per violation or count, or by both such fine and imprisonment, except as provided in Section 1-4-30 below. In addition, such person shall pay all costs and expenses in the case, including attorney fees. 
(b)  The imposition of one (1) penalty shall not excuse any violation or permit it to continue. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, each day or portion thereof during or on which such violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Prior code 1.28.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11 1, 2013) 
Sec. 1-4-30. - Application of penalties to juveniles. 
    Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, any person who has not yet reached eighteen (18) years of age at the time of commission of the offense, and who is subsequently convicted or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of any provision of this Code, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the maximum fine allowed under this Chapter per violation or count. Such person shall not be subject to imprisonment unless such imprisonment is for failure to comply with the lawful order of the court or for contempt of court. 
(Prior code 1.28.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11 2, 2013) 
Sec. 1-4-40. - Penalty assessment. 
(a)  When a person is provided the opportunity to pay a penalty assessment in lieu of appearing pursuant to a summons and complaint, the police officer shall issue a penalty assessment notice in the form of a summons and complaint. The penalty assessment notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The identification of the alleged offender; 
(2)  Specification of the offense and the applicable fine associated with such offense; 
(3)  A statement indicating that the offender must either pay the fine indicated on the summons and complaint or appear to answer the charge as set forth in the summons and complaint; and 
(4)  A waiver of the right to a hearing on the offense specified on the summons and complaint. 
(b)  If the person issued a penalty assessment notice chooses to acknowledge his or her guilt, he or she may pay the specified fine to the Municipal Court. If the offender chooses not to acknowledge his or her guilt, he or she shall appear as required in the notice. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 12  4, 2018) 
Sec. 1-4-50. - Penalty for violations of ordinances adopted after adoption of Code. 
    Any person who violates any provision of any ordinance of a permanent and general nature passed or adopted after adoption of this Code, either before or after it has been inserted in this Code by a supplement, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided by Section 1-4-20 unless another penalty is specifically provided for the violation. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-4-60. - Cumulative remedies. 
(a)  All remedies set forth in this Code are cumulative, and the exercise of one (1) shall not be deemed to prevent the exercise of another, nor to bar or abate any prosecution or petition for injunction under this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any act or condition is declared in this Code to be or constitutes a nuisance, or provides a cause of action for injunction or other civil remedy, in addition to the penalties provided in Section 1-4-20, an action for abatement, injunction or other civil remedy may be brought against such violator. 
(c)  When work or activity for which a permit or license is required by this Code or any code adopted by this Code is commenced without first having acquired such permit or license, the specified fee shall be doubled; however, the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with all the requirements of this Code or any codes adopted by this Code, nor from any other prescribed penalties. Payment of such double fee or any unpaid portion thereof may be compelled by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The acceptance of any portion less than the entire amount of such double fee by any officer or employee of the City shall not constitute a waiver or release of the balance thereof. 
(Prior code 1.28.020, 1.28.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 12  5, 2018) 
Sec. 1-4-70. - Presumption of responsibility. 
    The occupant of any premises upon which a violation of any provision of this Code or of any code adopted by this Code is apparent, the owner of any object or material placed or remaining anywhere in violation of any provision of this Code or of any code adopted by this Code, and the occupant of any premises served by any excavation or structure illegally made or erected, shall be deemed prima facie responsible for the violation so evidenced, and subject to the penalty provided therefor. 
(Prior code 1.28.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-4-80. - Power to pardon. 
    The Mayor shall have the power to grant pardons and to remit fines and penalties imposed for the violation of this Code; however, in every case where he or she may exercise this power, he or she shall report such action with his or her reasons to the City Council at its next meeting. 
(Prior code 1.28.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 1-4-90. - Restitution. 
    The Municipal Court is specifically authorized and permitted to grant suspended jail sentences conditioned on restitution by the defendant of any and all damages sustained by the victim of an offense and/or the City. 
(Prior code 1.28.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 5 - Seal 

Sec. 1-5-10. - Corporate seal. 
    The corporate seal of the City shall be an impression described as follows: In circular form around the outside, there shall be inscribed the words "City of Greenwood Village, Colorado" and in the center, within the circular inscription, shall be the word "Seal." Each of the words inscribed on the seal shall be entirely in capital letters. 
(Prior code 1.20.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
CHAPTER 2 - Administration 
ARTICLE 1 - Elections 

Sec. 2-1-10. - Write-in candidate affidavit. 
    No write-in vote for any municipal office shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the City Clerk by the person whose name is written in prior to twenty (20) days before the day of the election, indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of that office if elected. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-20. - Cancellation of election. 
(a)  If the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office and if, at the close of business on the nineteenth day before the election, there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, including candidates filing affidavits of intent as set forth in Section 2-1-10, the City Clerk shall certify such fact to the City Council; and it shall hold a meeting, shall by resolution instruct the City Clerk to cancel the election and shall declare the candidates elected. 
(b)  Notice of such cancellation shall be published, if possible, and notice of such cancellation shall be posted at each polling place and in not less than one (1) other public place. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-30. - Districts established. 
(a)  The City is divided into four (4) districts, numbered in consecutive order pursuant to Section 2.04 of the Greenwood Village Home Rule Charter. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall maintain in the City Clerk's office a map showing the boundaries of the districts as adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Prior code 1.16.010; Ord. 21 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-40. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-1-50. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-1-60. - Municipal and Uniform Election Code adopted; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by the Charter or by ordinance, the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965, as the same presently exists or as may be in the future amended, is adopted by the City and shall govern the conduct of all elections held within the City. 
(b)  Section 1-1-101, et seq., C.R.S., also known as the "Uniform Election Code of 1992," as the same presently exists or as may in the future be amended, is adopted by the City as the provisions of that code apply to elections held within the City; provided, however, that the City Council may, where authorized by law, adopt ordinances which specifically supersede the provisions of the Uniform Election Code. 
(c)  The provisions of the Fair Campaign Practices Act, Section 1-45-101, et seq., C.R.S., are superseded by the provisions of this Article. 
(Prior code 2.72.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-70. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Campaign treasurer means the treasurer of any candidate for nomination, retention or election or the treasurer of any political committee. A candidate may appoint himself or herself as campaign treasurer. 
    Candidate means any person who: 
a.  Seeks election to any public office which is to be voted for in this City at any election. A person is a candidate for election if the person has filed nominating petitions for public office in a nonpartisan election; has been chosen to fill any vacancy; or has publicly announced an intention to seek election for public office and has received a contribution in support of the candidacy. 
b.  For purposes of filing and reporting requirements, a person is a candidate if the person is an incumbent and still has an unexpended balance of contributions or a debt or deficit and receives contributions or contributions in kind. 
    Candidate committee means a person, including the candidate, or persons with the common purpose of receiving contributions or making expenditures under the authority of a candidate. A contribution to a candidate shall be deemed a contribution to the candidate's candidate committee. A candidate shall have only one (1) candidate committee. A candidate committee shall be considered open and active until affirmatively closed by the candidate or by action of the appropriate authority. 
    City Clerk means the City Clerk of the City, who is the custodian of the official records of the City, or any person delegated by the City Clerk to exercise any part of his or her powers, duties or functions. Reference herein to the office of the City Clerk shall mean the physical location in a public building of the City Clerk's office. 
    Contribution means: 
a.  The payment, loan, pledge or advance of money, or guarantee of a loan, made to any candidate, candidate committee or issue committee; 
b.  Any payment made to a third party for the benefit of any candidate, candidate committee, political committee or issue committee; 
c.  The fair market value of any gift or loan of property made to any candidate, candidate committee, political committee or issue committee; 
d.  Anything of value given, directly or indirectly, to a candidate, political committee or issue committee. 
    Contribution does not include services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering their time on behalf of a candidate or political committee. Any transfer of money between political committees is an expenditure by the political committee which dispenses the money and is a contribution to the political committee which receives the money. 
    Contribution in kind means a gift or loan of any item of real or personal property, other than money, made to or for any candidate or political committee for the purpose of influencing the passage or defeat of any issue or the nomination, retention, election or defeat of any candidate. Personal services are a contribution in kind by the person paying compensation therefor; volunteer services are not included. Contribution in kind does not include an endorsement of candidacy or issue by any person. In determining the value to be placed on contributions in kind, a reasonable estimate of fair market value shall be used. 
    Day means a calendar day. When the deadline for any act required by this Article falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period shall be deemed extended to the close of business on the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
    Election means any general election, general municipal election or election at which an issue is submitted to the electorate as required or permitted by law. Election includes a recall election held pursuant to law, and also includes elections for initiative and referendum. 
    Electioneering means engaging in activities or making statements which are intended to induce a person to cast a ballot in favor of or opposed to a candidate or issue at an election. 
    Electioneering communication means any communication broadcasted by television or radio, printed in a newspaper or on a billboard, directly mailed or delivered by hand to a personal residence or otherwise distributed, that: 
a.  Unambiguously refers to any candidate; and 
b.  Is broadcasted, printed, mailed, delivered or distributed within thirty (30) days before a primary election or sixty (60) days before a general election; and 
c.  Is broadcasted to, printed in a newspaper distributed to, mailed to, delivered by hand to or otherwise distributed to an audience that includes members of the electorate for such public office. 
Electioneering communication does not include any news articles, editorial endorsements, opinion or commentary writings or letters to the editor printed in a newspaper, magazine or other periodical not owned or controlled by a candidate or political party; any editorial endorsements or opinions aired by a broadcast facility not owned or controlled by a candidate or political party; and communication by persons made in the regular course and scope of their business or any communication made by a membership organization solely to members of such organization and their families; or any communication that refers to any candidate only as part of the popular name of a bill or statute. 
    Expenditure means the payment, purchase, distribution, deposit, loan or advance or gift of any money or contribution in kind by any person, candidate, political committee or agent of either for the purpose of influencing the passage or defeat of any candidate or issue. Expenditure does not include services provided without compensation by any candidate or political committee or expenditures from the candidate's own funds for his or her personal or family activities. An expenditure occurs when any of the following first occurs: the actual payment is made, goods are first delivered or services commence or a contractual agreement is reached and the amount is determined. 
    Independent expenditure means an expenditure that is not controlled by or coordinated with any candidate or agency of such candidate. Expenditures that are controlled by or coordinated with a candidate or candidate's agent are deemed to be both contributions by the maker of the expenditures and expenditures by the candidate committee. 
    Issue means any proposition or initiated or referred measure which is to be submitted to the electors for their approval or rejection, and includes recall of an elected official. 
    Issue committee means any person, other than a natural person, or any group of two (2) or more persons, including natural persons, having as a major purpose supporting or opposing any ballot issue or ballot question or that has accepted or made contributions or expenditures in excess of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to support or oppose any ballot issue or ballot question. 
a.  Issue committee does not include political parties, political committees, small donor committees or candidate committees as otherwise defined in this Section. 
b.  An issue committee shall be considered open and active until affirmatively closed by such committee or by action of the appropriate authority. 
    Person means any natural person, partnership, committee, association, corporation, labor organization, political party or other organization or group of persons. 
    Political committee means any person, other than a natural person, or any group of two (2) or more persons including natural persons that have accepted or made contributions or expenditures in excess of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to support or oppose the nomination or election of one (1) or more candidates and includes committees established, financed, maintained or controlled by a single corporation or its subsidiaries. 
a.  Political committee does not include political parties, issue committees or candidate committees as otherwise defined in this Section. 
b.  For the purposes of this Article, the following are treated as a single political committee: 
1.  All political committees established, financed, maintained or controlled by a single corporation or its subsidiaries. 
2.  All political committees established, financed, maintained or controlled by the same political party. 
    Political party means any group of registered electors who, by petition or assembly, nominate candidates for the official general election ballot. Political party includes affiliated party organizations at the state, county and election district levels, and all such affiliates are considered to be a single entity for the purposes of this Article unless otherwise provided. 
    Small donor committee means any political committee that has accepted contributions only from natural persons who each contributed no more than fifty dollars ($50.00) in the aggregate per year. For purposes of this Section, dues transferred by a membership organization to a small donor committee sponsored by such organization shall be treated as pro rata contributions from individual members. 
a.  Small donor committee does not include political parties, political committees, issue committees or candidate committees as otherwise defined in this Section. 
b.  For purposes of this Article, the following are treated as a single small donor committee: 
1.  All small donor committees established, financed, maintained or controlled by a single corporation or its subsidiaries; 
2.  All small donor committees established, financed, maintained or controlled by the same political party; and 
3.  All small donor committees established, financed, maintained or controlled by substantially the same group of persons. 
    Information, statement, affidavit, challenge, protest, objection, opinion, question and any other synonyms shall be acceptable to the City Clerk as equivalent and permissible words. 
(Prior code 2.72.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 03 1, 2013) 
Sec. 2-1-80. - Candidate nomination petitions. 
    Nomination petitions for candidates for Mayor and City Council may be circulated no earlier than one hundred twenty (120) days before the election and shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than sixty-seven (67) days before the election. 
(Prior code 2.72.030; Ord. 18 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-90. - Initiated and referred ordinances. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of this Code or state statutes to the contrary, the vote by the registered electors on any ordinance initiated or referred by petition shall be at a general or special election held not less than sixty (60) days nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days after the petition for such election is filed. 
(Prior code 2.72.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-100. - Changes in elections precincts. 
    Notwithstanding any provisions of this Code or state statutes to the contrary, all changes in the boundaries of election precincts and the creation of new election precincts shall be completed by an ordinance adopted by the City Council on or before July 31 of the year of any municipal election, except in cases of precinct changes resulting from annexations. 
(Prior code 2.72.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-110. - Ballots. 
(a)  The names of all candidates for each elective municipal office within the City shall be placed upon the ballot by drawing lots. 
(b)  The City Council may, by resolution, direct that a regular or special election shall be coordinated with the County. 
(c)  Election by mail ballot shall be allowed in any election for which the City Council determines, by motion or resolution at least ninety (90) days prior to such election, that such ballot is authorized. When an election by mail ballot is held and coordinated with the County, the City shall comply with all provisions of the "Mail Ballot Election Act," Section 1-7.5-101, et seq., C.R.S. When an election by mail ballot is held and not coordinated with the County, drop-off locations shall be determined by the City Clerk, who shall also be responsible for receiving and preparing mail ballots for tabulation in accordance with procedures promulgated by the City Clerk. 
(Prior code 2.72.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 03 2, 2013) 
Sec. 2-1-120. - Applicability of Article. 
(a)  The provisions of this Article shall apply to any elected office or any election upon any issue within the City, but the City, as a home rule municipality, may adopt ordinances or Charter provisions with respect to its local elections. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this Article in any respect shall have no effect on the validity of any election, issue or bonds issued pursuant to law; except that the penalty provided for a candidate shall still apply. 
(Prior code 2.72.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-130. - Filing; where to file; timeliness. 
(a)  For the purpose of meeting the filing requirements of this Article, candidates for elected municipal office or political committee shall file all required filings in the office of the City Clerk. Facsimile and electronic copies shall be accepted; provided that original documents are received by the City Clerk within five (5) days from the date of the facsimile or electronic filing. 
(b)  Reports required by this Article to be filed shall be deemed timely filed if received by the City Clerk no later than 5:00 p.m., local time, on the designated day for filing. 
(Prior code 2.72.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 03 3, 2013) 
Sec. 2-1-140. - Candidate affidavit; disclosure statement. 
(a)  When any individual becomes a candidate, such individual shall certify, by affidavit filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of his becoming a candidate, as defined at Section 2-1-70, that he or she is familiar with and understands the provisions of this Article. Any contributions or expenditures received or made in behalf of the candidacy of such individual prior to the filing of such affidavit shall be reported in the first reporting period, and such report shall include the information required under Section 2-1-150. 
(b)  Failure of any person to file an affidavit as required by this Section shall result in the disqualification of such person as a candidate. 
(Prior code 2.72.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-150. - Organization of political committees. 
(a)  Every political committee supporting or opposing a candidate or issue shall file a statement of organization with the City Clerk no later than fifteen (15) days after opening a bank account as required by Section 2-1-160 or twenty (20) days prior to the election, whichever is earlier. 
(b)  The statement of organization shall include: 
(1)  The name, the address and phone number, the candidate or issue it supports or opposes, and any other purpose or interest of the committee, 
(2)  The name, phone number and address of the campaign treasurer of the political committee, 
(3)  Proof of the existence of a bank account as required in Section 2-1-160 and proof of the date of the initial deposit made therein, 
(c)  Any political committee whose purpose is the recall of any elected official shall file a statement of organization with the City Clerk no later than fifteen (15) days after the filing of the statement of organization and every thirty (30) days thereafter until the date of the recall election has been established, at which time the political committee shall follow the provisions of Section 2-1-170. 
(d)  When any political committee is organized, the treasurer or other officer of such committee shall certify, by affidavit at the office of the City Clerk, within ten (10) days of filing the required statement of organization, a statement that the person signing the affidavit is familiar with and understands the provisions of this Article. Previously organized political committees are likewise required to file an affidavit. 
(Prior code 2.72.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-160. - Deposit of contributions. 
    All contributions received by a candidate or political committee shall be deposited no later than ten (10) business days after receipt in a financial institution in a separate account whose title shall include the name of the candidate or political committee. All records pertaining to such accounts shall be maintained by the candidate or political committee for sixty (60) days after submission of the final report unless a complaint is filed, in which case they shall be maintained until final disposition of the complaint and any consequent litigation. Such records shall be subject to inspection at any hearing held pursuant to this Article. 
(Prior code 2.72.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-170. - Reports; certification and filing. 
(a)  All candidates, candidate committees, political committees, issue committees, small donor committees and political parties shall file reports of all contributions received, including proceeds of loans, and all expenditures made by or on behalf of such committee or party. In the event that no contributions have been received or expenditures made, a report shall be filed stating such status. Reports shall be filed fourteen (14) days before and thirty (30) days after any election. These reports shall be complete as of five (5) days prior to the filing date. All reports shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the day due. Facsimile or electronic copies shall be accepted; provided that the original documents are received by the City Clerk within five (5) days. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of this Article, every incumbent elected official in office and every candidate elected to public office is subject to the reporting requirements of this Section. 
(c)  All reports required by this Section shall be filed with the City Clerk. These reports are public records and shall be open to inspection by the public during regular business hours. 
(d)  Each report required by this Section shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The amount of funds on hand at the beginning of the reporting period. 
(2)  The name and address of each person who has made an aggregate contribution to or for such candidate, candidate committee, issue committee, small donor committee or political committee within the reporting period in excess of twenty dollars ($20.00) or a contribution in kind in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00), together with the amount and date of such contribution, or a chronological listing of all contributions and contributions in kind, including the name and address of each contributor. 
(3)  The total sum of all contributions and contributions in kind to or for such candidate, candidate committee, issue committee, small donor committee or political committee during the reporting period. 
(4)  The name and address of each person to whom expenditures have been made by or on behalf of the candidate, candidate committee, issue committee, small donor committee or political committee within the reporting period in excess of twenty dollars ($20.00), together with the amount, date and purpose of each such expenditure and the name of and the office sought by each candidate on whose behalf such expenditure was made. 
(5)  The total sum of all expenditures made by such candidate, candidate committee, issue committee, small donor committee or political committee during the reporting period. 
(6)  The name and address of any bank or other depository for funds used by the candidate, candidate committee, issue committee, small donor committee or political committee. 
(e)  The reporting provisions of Subsection (d) above and Section 2-1-140 shall apply to any candidate, candidate committee, issue committee, small donor committee or political committee which receives contributions or contributions in kind from any person through donations or through events such as dinners, luncheons, rallies or other fundraising events if such contributions or contributions in kind are intended to be given to another organization or group of persons which in turn distributes or contributes such contributions or contributions in kind to one (1) or more candidates, candidate committees, issue committees, small donor committees or political committees. The reporting provisions of this Section shall also apply to the candidate, candidate committee, issue committee, small donor committee or political committee receiving such contributions or contributions in kind. 
(f)  Any person who expends one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more per calendar year on electioneering communications shall report the amount expended or in kind contribution toward the communications and the name and address of any person that contributes more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year to the person expending one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more on the communications. If the person making a contribution or contribution in kind of more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is a natural person, the disclosure required by this Section shall also include the person's occupation and employer. 
(Prior code 2.72.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 03 4, 2013) 
Sec. 2-1-180. - Unexpended contributions and expenditure deficits. 
(a)  Any post-election report filed under Section 2-1-170 shall be final unless it shows an unexpended balance of contributions or loan proceeds or an expenditure deficit, in which event a supplemental report shall be filed no later than sixty (60) days after the election to which it applied. Subject to the provisions of Subsections (b) and (c), no unexpended balance of contributions, loan proceeds balance or expenditure deficit may exist later than ninety (90) days after the date of the election. 
(b)  No officeholder, candidate or campaign treasurer shall use any contribution or contribution in kind received from any person for private purposes not reasonably related to influencing the passage or defeat of any issue, or the nomination, retention, election or defeat of any candidate or to voter registration or political education. The term political education shall include obtaining information from or providing information to the electorate, and shall include the establishment of educational scholarships related to political education. Contributions not expended on behalf of a political committee's campaign or for any other purpose permitted under this Subsection, upon approval by the nonpartisan candidate or political committee, or contributions not expended on behalf of a political committee's campaign seeking to influence the passage or defeat of any issue or for any other purpose permitted by this Article, upon approval by such committee, may be contributed to any nonprofit or charitable organization or to the State or any political subdivision thereof, but not to any political party; or may be returned to the contributors to such political committee or candidate. 
(c)  Unexpended campaign contributions may be retained by the candidate committee for use by the candidate in a subsequent campaign subject to the provisions of this Subsection. In no event shall contributions to a candidate committee be used for personal purposes not related to supporting the election of the candidate. Any unexpended campaign contributions retained by a candidate committee for use in a subsequent City election shall be counted and reported as contributions from political committees in any subsequent election. At such time as the candidate is no longer serving in or running for City office, any unexpended campaign contributions and/or expenditure deficits shall be handled as provided in Subsection (a) hereof. 
(Prior code 2.72.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-190. - Campaign contribution limits. 
    Candidate campaign contributions, including in-kind contributions, are limited to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per person per candidate per election. 
(Prior code 2.72.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 03 5, 2013) 
Sec. 2-1-200. - Limitations on cash contributions. 
    No person shall make any contribution in currency or coin exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) in support of or in opposition to any candidate, political committee or issue. 
(Prior code 2.72.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-210. - Limitations on expenditures in cash. 
    No candidate or political committee shall make any expenditure in currency or coin exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any purpose related to such candidate's campaign or to the passage or defeat of an issue. 
(Prior code 2.72.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-220. - Duties of City Clerk. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall: 
(1)  Prescribe forms for statements and other information required to be filed by this Article and furnish such forms and information free of charge for use by candidates and other persons required to file such statements and information under this Article. 
(2)  Keep a copy of any report or statement required to be filed by this Article for a period of one (1) year from the date of filing. In the case of candidates who are elected, those candidate's reports and filings shall be kept for one (1) year after the candidate leaves office. 
(3)  Develop a filing and indexing system for his or her office consistent with the purpose of this Article. 
(4)  Make the reports and statement filed with him or her available for public inspection and copying under his or her supervision, commencing as soon as practicable but not later than the end of the second day following the day during which it was received. He or she shall permit copying of any such report or statement by hand or duplicating machine, as requested by any person, at the expense of such person. No information copied from such reports and statements shall be sold or utilized by any person for the purpose of soliciting contributions or for any commercial purpose. 
(5)  Review all required filings for timeliness and completeness. In the event the City Clerk determines a filing contains an error or is otherwise incomplete, the candidate and/or treasurer of any political committee which has made the erroneous or incomplete filing shall be afforded three (3) days from the date of notification of the error by the City Clerk to file a corrected report or statement. If such corrected report or statement is not timely filed or is otherwise erroneous, the Clerk shall notify the City Manager as provided in Subsection (b), and an independent hearing officer may be, but is not required to be, appointed as therein provided. 
(b)  Any person who believes a violation of this Article has occurred may file a written complaint with the City Clerk no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the final report of a candidate or political committee. The City Clerk shall notify the City Manager of such complaint, and the City Manager, in consultation with the City Clerk and the City Attorney, shall appoint an independent hearing officer to hear and determine such complaint. Any such hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Section 24-4-105, C.R.S., or such other rules as the City Clerk shall have promulgated. If the hearing officer determines after a hearing that a violation has occurred, the City Attorney or, if applicable, a special prosecutor may: 
(1)  Institute a civil action for relief, including a permanent or temporary injunction, a restraining order or any other appropriate order in a court of competent jurisdiction, which shall include the Municipal Court; or 
(2)  Institute an action in the Municipal Court. 
(Prior code 2.72.170; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-230. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this Article or who gives or accepts any contribution or contribution in kind required to be reported under Section 2-1-170 in such a way as to hinder or prevent identification of the true donor, commits a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article 4. Any such person who conspires with another to violate any provision of this Article and who is also a candidate shall, in addition to any other penalty provided in this Section, forfeit his or her right to assume the nomination or to take the oath for the office to which he or she may have been elected, unless he or she has already taken the oath, in which case the office shall be vacated. In the event the office to which the candidate has been elected is vacated, the vacancy to the office shall be filled as provided by the Charter. 
(b)  In addition to any other sanction imposed, any person who violates any provision of this Article relating to contribution limits shall be liable to the City for double the amount contributed or received in violation of the applicable provisions of this Article. Candidates shall be personally liable for fines imposed against the candidate's committee. 
(c)  The City Clerk, after proper notification by certified mail, shall impose a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day that a statement or other information required to be filed by this Article is not filed by the close of business on the day due; except that the City Clerk may excuse such penalty for bona fide personal emergencies. 
(d)  No person who has not fully complied with the provisions of this Article shall be permitted to be a candidate for any municipal office in any subsequent municipal election for four (4) years. 
(Prior code 2.72.180; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-240. - Automatic recount. 
    In any municipal election wherein persons are elected to an elected municipal office, there shall be an automatic recount of the votes, which shall be accomplished by the City Clerk no later than five (5) days after the date of election, in the event any candidate for office fails to be elected by one percent (1%) or less of the vote cast for any candidate elected to that same office. 
(Prior code 2.72.190; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-250. - Other recounts or contests. 
    Except as provided in Section 2-1-240, all election contests or recounts shall be accomplished in accordance with Section 31-10-1301, et seq., C.R.S. 
(Prior code 2.72.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-260. - Encouraging withdrawal from campaign prohibited. 
    No person shall offer or give any candidate or candidate committee any money or any other thing of value for the purpose of encouraging the withdrawal of the candidate's candidacy, nor shall any candidate offer to withdraw a candidacy in return for money or any other thing of value. 
(Prior code 2.72.210; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-1-270. - Limitations on City contributions. 
(a)  The City, acting through its City Council, its elected or appointed officials and its employees in their official capacity, shall make no contribution in or to any campaign involving the nomination, retention or election of any person to any public office, nor shall the City or any elected or appointed official thereof expend any public moneys from any source or make any contributions to urge electors to vote in favor of or against any statewide or local ballot issue that has been submitted for the purpose of having a title designated and fixed pursuant to Section 1-40-106(1), C.R.S., or that has had a title designated and fixed pursuant to that section, or to vote in favor of or against any initiated or referred measure or recall. 
(b)  A member of the City Council, elected City official or City employee may respond to questions about any issue described in Subsection (a) hereof if he or she has not solicited the question. 
(c)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed as prohibiting the City from expending public monies or making contributions in kind to dispense a factual summary, which shall include arguments both for and against the proposal, on any issue of official concern before the electorate of the City appearing on an election ballot in the City. Such summary shall not contain a conclusion or opinion in favor of or against any particular issue. As used herein, an issue of official concern shall be limited to any issue which appears on an election ballot in the City. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed as prohibiting the City Council: 
(1)  From passing a resolution or taking a position of advocacy on any issue described in Subsection (a); or 
(2)  From reporting the passage of or distributing such resolution through established, customary means other than paid advertising by which information about other proceedings of the City Council is regularly provided to the public. 
(e)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent a member of the City Council, elected City official or City employee from expressing a personal opinion on any issue. 
(f)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed as prohibiting a member of the City Council, elected City official or City employee from expending personal funds, making contributions in kind or using personal time to urge electors to vote in favor of or against any issue described in Subsection (a) hereof. 
(g)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed as prohibiting the City from expending public funds to produce and distribute the election notices and summaries required by Article X, Section 20(5) of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Prior code 2.72.220; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 2 - Mayor and City Council 

Sec. 2-2-10. - Compensation. 
(a)  Mayor. The Mayor shall be paid the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each month or portion thereof served in office. The Mayor shall also be eligible for the following employment benefits offered to other City employees, at his or her option, in accordance with the City's current Personnel Handbook, provided that the Mayor shall not be eligible for any reimbursement for not choosing to take advantage of such benefits: 
(1)  Health insurance; 
(2)  Dental insurance; 
(3)  Life insurance; 
(4)  Death, accidental death and dismemberment insurance; and 
(5)  Long-term disability insurance. 
(b)  City Council. Each member of the City Council shall be paid the sum of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each month or portion thereof served in office. 
(c)  Expenditures. In addition to any other compensation described herein, the Mayor and each member of the City Council shall be reimbursed for authorized expenditures incurred in the performance of City business. 
(Prior code 2.10.010; Ord. 33 1, 2007; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-20. - Regular meetings. 
(a)  Time. The City Council shall hold a regular meeting on the first Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. The City Council may schedule a second regular meeting on the third Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. A regular meeting to be held on the third Monday of the month shall be called by the City Clerk on the oral request of the Mayor, or of any two (2) members of the City Council, on at least seventy-two (72) hours' notice to each member of the City Council. When the day fixed for any regular meeting of the City Council falls upon a day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, such meeting may be held at the same hour on the next succeeding Monday not a holiday. All meetings shall be adjourned by 10:30 p.m. unless the City Council votes to extend the meeting. 
(b)  Place. All regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the City Council Chambers of the City or such other place designated in writing to each member of the City Council at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting. 
(Prior code 2.04.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-30. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the City Council shall be called by the City Clerk on the oral request of the Mayor, or of any two (2) members of the City Council, on at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice to each member of the City Council; but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the City Council are present or those absent waive notice thereof. 
(Prior code 2.04.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-40. - Duties of presiding officer. 
    The presiding officer of the City Council shall be the Mayor. The presiding officer shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the City Council. He or she shall state every question coming before the City Council, announce the decision of the City Council on all subjects and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the City Council, in which event a majority vote of the City Council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. He or she shall vote on all questions on which a tie vote has been cast, his or her name being called last. He or she shall sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council during his or her presence. In the event of the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall sign ordinances or resolutions as then adopted. 
(Prior code 2.04.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-50. - Call to order. 
    The Mayor or, in his absence, the Mayor Pro Tem, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall immediately call the City Council to order. In the absence of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, the City Clerk, or his or her assistant, shall call the City Council to order, whereupon a temporary chairman shall be elected by the members of the City Council present. Upon the arrival of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, the temporary chairman shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the City Council. 
(Prior code 2.04.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-60. - Roll call. 
    Before proceeding with the business of the City Council, the City Clerk shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(Prior code 2.04.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-70. - Quorum. 
    Five (5) members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the City Council. 
(Prior code 2.04.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-80. - Order of business. 
    All meetings of the City Council except executive sessions shall be open to the public. At the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the City Council, City Clerk, City Attorney and Mayor shall take their regular stations in the Council Chambers, and the business of the City Council shall be taken upon for consideration and disposition in the order established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code 2.04.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-90. - Reading of minutes. 
    Unless a reading of the minutes of a City Council meeting is requested by a member of the City Council, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the City Clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. 
(Prior code 2.04.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-100. - Rules of debate. 
(a)  Presiding officer may debate and vote. The Mayor or such other member of the City Council acting as temporary chairman may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members. A Councilmember acting as chairman shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Councilmember by reason of his or her acting as the presiding officer. The Mayor may not move or second, but may debate from the chair. 
(b)  Getting the floor. Every Councilmember desiring to speak shall address the chair and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself or herself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. 
(c)  Interruptions. A Councilmember, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to call him or her to order, or as otherwise provided in this Article. If a Councilmember, while speaking, is called to order, he or she shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed. 
(d)  Motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the City Council may be made at any time, subject only to the following limitations: Passage of an ordinance may be reconsidered at any time prior to the time such ordinance becomes effective. Any action of the City Council having as its ultimate purpose the vesting of any contractual or quasi-contractual right may be reconsidered at any time before the actual vesting of such right. 
(e)  Remarks of Councilmember; when entered in minutes. A Councilmember may request, through the presiding officer, the privilege of having an abstract of his or her statement on any subject under consideration by the City Council entered in the minutes. If the City Council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes. 
(f)  Synopsis of debate; when entered in minutes. The City Clerk may be directed by the presiding officer, with consent of the City Council, to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question coming regularly before the City Council. 
(Prior code 2.04.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-110. - Addressing City Council. 
(a)  Any person desiring to address the City Council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer to do so. 
(b)  Written communications. Residents or taxpayers of the City, or their authorized representatives, may address the City Council by written communications in regard to matters then under discussion. 
(c)  Oral communications. Residents or taxpayers of the City, or their authorized legal representatives, may address the City Council by oral communications on any matter concerning the City's business, or any matter over which the City Council has control; provided, however, that preference shall be given to those persons who may have notified the City Clerk in advance of their desire to speak in order that the same may appear on the agenda of the City Council. 
(d)  Reading of protests. Interested persons or their authorized representatives may address the City Council by reading of protests, petitions or communications in regard to matters then under consideration by the City Council. 
(Prior code 2.04.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-120. - Addressing City Council after motion made. 
    After a motion is made by the City Council, no person shall address the City Council without first securing the permission of the City Council to do so. 
(Prior code 2.04.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-130. - Decorum. 
(a)  By Councilmembers. While the City Council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the City Council, disturb any member while speaking nor refuse to obey the orders of the City Council or its presiding officer, except as otherwise provided in this Article. 
(b)  By persons. Any person who makes personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who becomes boisterous while addressing the City Council shall be forthwith, by the presiding officer, barred from further audience before the City Council, unless permission to continue is granted by a majority vote of the City Council. 
(Prior code 2.04.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-140. - Recording of protests. 
    Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for his or her dissent from, or protest against, any action of the City Council entered on the minutes. 
(Prior code 2.04.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-150. - Ordinances, resolutions, motions and contracts. 
(a)  Preparation of ordinances. All ordinances shall be prepared by or under the direction of the City Attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the City Council unless ordered by a member of the City Council or requested by the Mayor, except that in no case shall the right of the people to initiative or referendum be abridged. 
(b)  Prior approval of administrative staff. All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents, before presentation to the City Council, shall have been approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney, and shall have been examined for administration by the Mayor. 
(c)  Introducing for passage or approval. 
(1)  Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the City Council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the City Council. Any Councilmember may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted, except that any proposed ordinance may be submitted by petition of the people as provided by the Charter. 
(2)  No ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it was introduced. 
(3)  Except for repealing ordinances, no ordinance shall relate to more than one (1) subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title, and, when practical, ordinances shall be adopted as amendments to this Code. 
(4)  Upon first reading of the ordinance, the City Council may refer it to a committee for further study. An ordinance, after reference and report thereon, may be re-referred at any time previous to its final passage. 
(Prior code 2.04.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-160. - Reports of committees. 
    Any committee to which an ordinance or resolution is referred may make its reports in writing, and shall return the petition, resolution, account or other paper submitted for consideration by the City Council. 
(Prior code 2.04.170; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-170. - Reports and resolutions; filing with City Clerk. 
    All reports and resolutions shall be filed with the City Clerk and entered in the minutes. 
(Prior code 2.04.180; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-180. - Suspension of rules. 
    Any provision of these rules not governed by the Charter or law may be temporarily suspended at any meeting of the City Council by a majority vote of all members of the City Council. The vote on any such suspension shall be taken by "ayes" and "nays" and entered upon the records. 
(Prior code 2.04.190; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-190. - Adjournment. 
    A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. 
(Prior code 2.04.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-200. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  The City Council may meet in executive session for the purpose of considering any one (1) or more of the following matters: 
(1)  The purchase, acquisition, lease, transfer or sale of any real, personal or other property interest; except that no executive session shall be held for the purpose of concealing the fact that a member of the local public body has a personal interest in such purchase, acquisition, lease, transfer or sale. 
(2)  Conferences with an attorney for the City for the purposes of receiving legal advice on specific legal questions. Mere presence or participation of an attorney at an executive session is not sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this Subsection. 
(3)  Matters required to be kept confidential by federal or state law or rules and regulations. 
(4)  Specialized details of security arrangements or investigations. 
(5)  Determining positions relative to matters that may be subject to negotiations; developing strategy for negotiations; and instructing negotiators. 
(6)  Personnel matters; except, if the employee who is the subject of the session has requested an open meeting or if the personnel matter involves more than one (1) employee, all of the employees have requested an open meeting. 
(7)  Consideration of any documents protected by the mandatory nondisclosure provisions of Part 2, Article 2, Title 24, C.R.S., commonly known as the "Open Records Act." 
(b)  An executive session of the City Council may be held only at a regular or special meeting of the City Council upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the quorum present at the meeting. Prior to the time the members of the City Council convene in executive session, the chairman of the meeting shall announce the general topic of the executive session. An executive session may be called without prior notice during a regular or special meeting of the City Council. The minutes of the regular or special meeting during which an executive session is held shall reflect the general topic of the discussion at the executive session. 
(c)  No person attending a properly convened executive session which is authorized pursuant to Subsection (a) hereof shall disclose to any person not in attendance at the executive session, and not entitled to be in attendance at the executive session, any confidential or privileged communication which was made or received by any person present in the executive session and which is related to the topic for which any such properly convened and properly authorized executive session was called. For purposes of this Section, confidential or privileged information shall mean any information which is related to real estate appraisals obtained on property which the City is considering buying or selling (the decision to buy or sell such real estate being required to be made in the course of a public meeting); information or legal advice delivered by the City Attorney or any special counsel which is privileged under state law or the Colorado Rules of Professional Conduct; matters related to security arrangements; negotiation positions which are either considered or adopted involving pending or threatened litigation, property acquisitions or sales or contract negotiations which are on-going; personnel matters unless the employee who is the subject of the personnel matter consents to the release of such information; and any matter required by any state or federal law or regulation to be maintained in confidence. During the course of any executive session, any member may ask the members of the City Council who are present for the executive session to allow disclosure of any confidential or privileged information from the executive session, however, such disclosure shall be authorized only upon an affirmative vote by a majority of those members of the City Council attending the executive session and entitled to vote. The provisions of this Section shall not prohibit the disclosure of any communication made or received after the matters discussed at the executive session and to which the communication pertains have been lawfully released to the public. The provisions of this Section shall apply to any person entitled to be in attendance at an executive session and who is later informed of the discussion at the executive session. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any person whose claim, employment or contract is the subject of the executive session. 
(d)  If a question is raised as to the propriety or appropriateness of holding an executive session or as to the propriety or appropriateness of classifying any information as confidential or privileged for purposes of nondisclosure, the question shall be in the first instance determined by the majority of those members of the City Council present at the executive session. Any member dissatisfied with such determination may appeal the City Council's determination to the District Court for adjudication as to whether the executive session has been called and conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and the provisions of this Section, or whether any matter identified and classified as either confidential or privileged is subject to disclosure. It is the expectation of the City Council that members of the City Council and other persons authorized to be present at properly convened and authorized executive sessions will refrain from disclosure of confidential or privileged information received at such executive sessions, subject to the right of any person attending such executive sessions to avail himself or herself of the appeal provisions set forth in this Subsection. 
(e)  The City Attorney, or such other person as may be designated by the Mayor, shall keep a record of every executive session of the City Council. This record shall specify the date, who was present, the times when the session began and ended, and the general subject matter of the discussion. 
(f)  If the City Council determines that written minutes should be made of all or part of the discussion at any executive session, the minutes shall be prepared by the City Attorney, or such other person who may be designated by the Mayor. The record of the executive session shall note that such written minutes exist. 
(g)  The record of an executive session shall be placed with the regular City Council minutes and shall be reviewed and approved at the next regular Council meeting. 
(h)  Any minutes of City Council discussions in executive session shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council at its next executive session. At all other times, the minutes shall be kept by the City Clerk in a locked cabinet. Only the Mayor, members of City Council, the City Manager and the City Attorney shall have access to the minutes. The City Clerk shall note the date and time during which minutes are reviewed by any of such persons. 
(i)  Minutes of executive sessions shall be reviewed by the City Council at least annually so that the City Council can determine which minutes, if any, no longer need to be kept confidential. The City Manager shall schedule at least annually a review of the minutes of executive sessions. Minutes which no longer need to be kept confidential shall be placed with the minutes of regular City Council meetings. 
(Prior code 2.04.210; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-210. - Open meetings. 
(a)  All meetings at which three (3) members of the City Council are present and the purpose of which is to discuss matters concerning the affairs of the City or at which any formal action may be taken shall be open to the public at all times unless the meeting is an executive session of the City Council called pursuant to Section 2-2-200. 
(b)  No meeting of the City Council which is open to the public pursuant to this Section shall be held unless twenty-four (24) hours' prior notice shall have been given to all members of the City Council. 
(c)  At least twenty-four (24) hours prior to any City Council meeting which is open to the public pursuant to this Section, notice of the date, time, place and subject matter of such meeting shall be posted at the entrance to the City administrative building in a manner so as to be legible from the outside of the building. Such notice shall remain posted for forty-eight (48) hours after the meeting. 
(d)  No final policy or other formal action shall be made or taken at any meeting of the City Council which is open to the public pursuant to this Section unless the meeting is also a regular or special meeting of the City Council called and held in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and this Code. No final policy or other formal action shall be taken at any meeting of the City Council which is designated in the notice of the meeting as a study session. 
(Prior code 2.04.220; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-220. - Boards and commissions established. 
    The following boards and commissions for the City are created and established: 
(1)  Board of Adjustments and Appeals. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have such organization, function, powers and duties as are prescribed in Article 12 of this Chapter. 
(2)  Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have such organization, function, powers and duties as are prescribed in Article 14 of this Chapter. 
(3)  Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission. The Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission shall have such organization, functions, powers and duties as are prescribed in Article 13 of this Chapter. 
(4)  Employees' Retirement Board. The Employees' Retirement Board shall have such organization, function, powers and duties as are prescribed in Article 11 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 2.40.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-2-230. - Appointment, composition, procedure and absences of boards and commissions. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by the Charter, all boards and commissions shall be appointed by the City Council and shall have such powers and perform such duties as are provided by the Charter or by ordinance. Members of such boards and commissions shall be appointed to serve without compensation, but shall be paid their authorized expenses actually incurred in the discharge of their official duties. Initial appointments by the City Council shall specify the term of office of each individual in order to achieve overlapping tenure, and thereafter, all appointments shall be for the full term specified. No member of any board or commission shall serve more than four (4) consecutive terms of office. Any member serving on a board or commission at the time this limitation on the length of service becomes effective may complete his or her current term of office. If a past board or commission member who has served the maximum amount of tenure permitted by this Section desires to recommence service on that board or commission, the past member may be reappointed only after an absence of at least two (2) years from the board or commission. 
(b)  All members shall be subject to removal by a three-fourths majority vote of the entire City Council. The City Council shall make appointments to fill vacancies for the unexpired terms. In the event a person is appointed to fill a vacancy on a board or commission for an unexpired term and the time remaining to serve under the unexpired term is less than one-half (1/2) of the entire term of office, the period of time the new member serves to fill out the unexpired term shall not constitute a term of the new member, and the new member shall be eligible to serve four (4) consecutive full terms thereafter. In the event the time remaining to serve under the unexpired term is equal to or greater than one-half (1/2) of the entire term of office, the period of time the new member serves to fill out the unexpired term shall constitute a term of the new member and the new member shall be eligible to serve three (3) consecutive full terms thereafter. 
(c)  Each board and commission shall choose its own Chair and Vice Chair and shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the conduct of its business. If a member fails to attend seven (7) out of every ten (10) consecutive meetings, City Council shall consider whether such member should be removed from the board or commission. The roll call shown on the minutes of the board or commission shall be conclusive evidence of a member's presence or absence at a particular meeting. 
(Prior code 2.40.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 15 1, 2012) 
ARTICLE 3 - Officers and Employees 

Sec. 2-3-10. - Appointed officers. 
(a)  The following officers of the City shall be appointed by a majority vote of all the members of the City Council: 
(1)  City Manager; 
(2)  City Attorney; 
(3)  City Clerk; and 
(4)  Municipal Judge. 
(b)  Said officers shall hold their respective offices until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the City Council. 
(Prior code 2.10.010; Ord. 33 1, 2007; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-3-20. - Duties of City Manager. 
(a)  Whenever the term "City Manager" is used in this Code or any ordinance of the City, it means the City Manager or the City Manager's authorized representative. 
(b)  In addition to the duties set forth in the City Charter, the City Manager shall perform the following duties and functions: 
(1)  The City Manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which the City may be a party. The City Manager shall see to it that all terms of any contract to which the City is a party are fully performed by all parties; 
(2)  The City Manager shall be the general purchasing agent of the City. No purchase shall be made or obligation incurred except upon authorization by the City Council, and no expense shall be incurred, except for a purpose for which no prior appropriation is required by law, if the amount thereof is not covered by an unexpected appropriation for that purpose; 
(3)  The City Manager shall keep current accounts showing at all times the fiscal condition of the City, including the current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand and anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and accounts; 
(4)  The City Manager shall collect all moneys due to the City; 
(5)  The City Manager shall keep a current inventory showing all real and personal property of the City and its location, and shall be responsible for the care and custody of all such property including equipment, buildings, parks, vehicles and all other City property which is not by law assigned to some other office or entity for care and control; 
(6)  The City Manager shall cause the ordinances of the City and all other documents of the City to be published, as required by law. The City Manager shall cause to be prepared all reports which the City or any of the officials thereof are required by law to prepare; 
(7)  The City Manager shall cause to be kept a complete set of maps and plats showing the location of City utilities and other municipal properties and all streets and public places and all lots or parcels of land subdivided according to law; 
(8)  The City Manager shall receive and file all papers to be filed among the City records. 
(9)  The City Manager shall approve the appointment by the City Attorney of all assistant city attorneys authorized to perform legal services on behalf of the City. 
(10)  The City Manager shall, consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, establish, regulate and maintain a merit system governing personnel policies necessary for the effective performance of the employees of the City's departments, offices and agencies which shall contain a statement that the City does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, physical or mental disability, veteran status or sexual orientation and which merit system shall include but not be limited to: classification and pay plans, examinations, force reductions, removals, working conditions, provisional and temporary appointments, in-service training, grievances and relationships with employee organizations. 
(Prior code 2.08.010; Ord. 27 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-3-30. - City Manager; bond required. 
    The City Manager shall furnish a fidelity bond, the premium for which shall be borne by the City, in an amount to be determined by the City Council, upon the faithful performance of his or her duties, with a corporation licensed to do business in the State. Such bond shall be filed among the City records after being approved by the City Attorney. 
(Prior code 2.08.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-3-40. - Authority of City Manager. 
(a)  The City Manager is delegated the specific authority to do the following acts, make and implement the following decisions and, where appropriate, execute the following documents and agreements without prior City Council approval: 
(1)  Grant or accept temporary construction easements. 
(2)  Accept any easement. 
(3)  Approve any expenditure authorized within the City's approved budget. 
(4)  Approve transfers of funds from one (1) approved capital project to another and from one (1) fund to another. 
(5)  Execute construction contracts and agreements for professional services which have previously been approved within the City's budget; provided that the concept and design of capital construction projects are approved by City Council. 
(6)  Approve any administrative policy and procedure, including modifications to or deletion of any existing internal administrative policy. 
(7)  Review and approve all equal employment opportunity reports. 
(8)  Execute revocable license agreements. 
(9)  Execute service contracts in amounts which have previously been approved within the City's budget. 
(b)  Nothing in this Section shall in any respect modify or diminish the duties and authorities assigned or delegated to the City Manager by any provision of the Charter or other ordinances. 
(Prior code 2.08.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-3-50. - Code Enforcement Officer. 
(a)  The purpose of this Section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by formally establishing the position of a code enforcement officer for the City, and delineating the enforcement duties and authority of code enforcement officers. 
(b)  There is hereby created the position of code enforcement officer for the City. 
(c)  A code enforcement officer shall be empowered as a designee, representative and agent of the Police Chief and/or any other official of the City as provided by this Code to issue citations or summonses and complaints to enforce this Code. 
(d)  It shall not be a requirement that code enforcement officers be certified peace officers pursuant to Section 24-31-301, et seq., C.R.S. 
(e)  Code enforcement officers are hereby authorized and required to enforce the following provisions of this Code: 
(1)  Chapter 7, regarding health, safety and animals; 
(2)  Chapter 8, Article 1, regarding stopping, standing and parking; 
(3)  Chapter 8, Article 3, regarding permit parking districts; 
(4)  Chapter 11, regarding streets, sidewalks and public places; and 
(5)  Chapter 16, regarding zoning. 
(Prior code 2.88.010, 2.88.020, 2.88.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 4 - Municipal Court 

Sec. 2-4-10. - Creation of Municipal Court. 
    The Municipal Court in and for the City is hereby created and established, pursuant to Article XX, 6(b) and (c) of the Colorado Constitution and Article IX, 9.01 of the Charter. 
(Prior code 2.56.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-20. - Court of record. 
    The Municipal Court shall be a court of record, and the presiding Municipal Judge shall provide for the making of a verbatim record of all court proceedings by either an electronic device or stenographic means. 
(Prior code 2.56.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-30. - Original jurisdiction. 
    The Municipal Court shall have original jurisdiction over any action brought in the Municipal Court for any criminal fine or punishment or for any civil penalty or other civil order, arising under the provisions of this Code and ordinances of the City, including issuance of stop work orders, orders to show cause or any other civil order authorized by this Code. The Municipal Court shall have full power to punish violators by the imposition of such fines and penalties as are prescribed in this Code or by ordinance. 
(Prior code 2.56.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-40. - Rules of procedure. 
    In addition to other powers, the Municipal Judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and regulations for conducting the business of the Municipal Court, consistent with the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-50. - Powers. 
(a)  The Municipal Court and the Judges thereof shall have all the express and implied judicial powers relating to the operation of the court, including the power to impose fines and penalties of incarceration, the power to suspend such fines and penalties, the power to impose and enforce deferred sentences and deferred judgments, the power to impose sentences subject to conditions, the power to enter default judgments where appropriate, and the power of contempt to enforce court orders, as provided by the Charter, the Colorado Constitution, state statutes and City ordinances. 
(b)  In addition to the powers listed in Subsection (a) hereof, the Municipal Court has the following powers: 
(1)  The power to sentence any defendant to supervised or unsupervised probation for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months; 
(2)  The power to require any defendant, as part of a sentence or as a condition of probation or deferred judgment or sentence, to pay restitution to the victim for damage or injury caused by such defendant; 
(3)  The power to order any defendant, as part of a sentence or as a condition of probation or deferred judgment or sentence, to perform a specified number of hours of useful community service, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) hours; and 
(4)  The power to order any defendant, as part of a sentence or as a condition of probation or deferred judgment, to attend educational classes, such as drug, alcohol, theft, domestic violence, anger management and similar classes, at the expense of such defendant. 
(c)  For purposes of this Section, useful community service means any work which is beneficial to the public, any public entity or any bona fide nonprofit organization, which work would not, with the exercise of reasonable care, endanger the health or safety of the person performing the work. 
(Prior code 2.56.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-60. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from the Municipal Court shall be in accordance with Sections 13-10-116 through 13-10-125, C.R.S., and the Colorado Municipal Court Rules. 
(Prior code 2.56.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-70. - Qualifications and oath of office. 
(a)  Any person appointed to the office of Municipal Judge shall, at the time of appointment and throughout the tenure of office, be licensed to practice law in the State. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, a Municipal Judge shall make an oath or affirmation that he or she will support the Constitution of the United States and the Colorado Constitution and the laws and ordinances of the City, and will faithfully perform the duties of the office. 
(Prior code 2.56.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-80. - Presiding Judge. 
(a)  There shall be a Presiding Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall have the power to make and adopt written rules and regulations for conducting the business of the Municipal Court, subject to applicable state statute and the Colorado Municipal Court Rules. 
(b)  The Presiding Judge, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may appoint referees as necessary to conduct the business of the Municipal Court. 
(Prior code 2.56.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-90. - Court Administrator. 
    There shall be a Municipal Court Administrator, who shall give a performance bond in the amount of at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which shall be approved by the City Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties and for the faithful accounting of all funds received by the Municipal Court. 
(Prior code 2.56.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-100. - Court sessions. 
(a)  There shall be regular sessions of the Municipal Court for arraignments, trials and other required hearings. 
(b)  The Presiding Judge may authorize special sessions of the court at any time, including Sundays, holidays and evenings if, in the discretion of the Presiding Judge, such special sessions are necessary to conduct court business. 
(c)  All sessions shall be open to the public. However, where the nature of the case is such that it would be in the best interest of justice to exclude persons not directly connected with the proceedings, the Presiding Judge may order that the courtroom be cleared. 
(d)  The Municipal Court shall be open during such hours as may be set by the City Manager, and the Court Administrator shall post the hours in a conspicuous place in City Hall. 
(Prior code 2.56.100, 2.56.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-110. - Warrant fees. 
    When the Municipal Court issues a warrant for the arrest of a defendant, the Municipal Court shall impose on the defendant, in addition to all other penalties or costs authorized by this Code, a warrant fee in the amount set by resolution of the City Council to reimburse the City for costs incurred in processing the warrant. 
(Prior code 2.56.120; Ord. 03 1, 2008; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-120. - Court costs. 
(a)  The Municipal Court may assess court costs in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) against any defendant who appears in court and either pleads or is found guilty. 
(b)  If any defendant is convicted after a jury trial, the Municipal Court may increase the court costs assessed against the defendant to one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Prior code 2.56.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-4-130. - Witness fees and mileage reimbursement. 
    The Presiding Judge shall establish a witness fee and mileage reimbursement amount to be paid to witnesses who appear in the Municipal Court pursuant to subpoena. Such witness fees and mileage reimbursement may be assessed against any defendant who pleads or is found guilty. 
(Prior code 2.56.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 5 - Police Department 

Sec. 2-5-10. - Creation; composition. 
    There is hereby created a Police Department for the City, which shall consist of one (1) Chief of Police and as many police officers as may from time to time be deemed necessary for the safety and good order of the City. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-5-20. - Departmental rules, regulations. 
    The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-5-30. - Chief of Police; appointment and duties. 
(a)  In accordance with the Charter, the City Manager shall appoint a Chief of Police who shall be the head of the Police Department. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to: 
(1)  See that the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State are duly enforced and the rules and regulations of the Police Department obeyed. 
(2)  Direct the operations of the Police Department, subject to the rules and regulations thereof. 
(3)  Render such accounts of the Police Department, his or her duties and receipts as may be required by the City Council, and keep the records of his or her office open to inspection by the City Council at any time. 
(4)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the City Council. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of such office, the Chief of Police shall take and subscribe to an oath that he or she will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution and laws of the State and ordinances of the City, and that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he or she is about to enter. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-5-40. - Duties of police officers. 
    All members of the Police Department shall have power and duties as follows: 
(1)  They shall perform all duties required by the Chief of Police. 
(2)  They shall be the enforcement officers of the City and shall see that the provisions of the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State are complied with. 
(3)  They shall execute and return all writs and processes to them directed by the Municipal Judge in any case arising under a City ordinance, and they may serve the same in any part of the County. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-5-50. - Oath of officers. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, each police officer shall take and subscribe an oath that he or she will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution and laws of the State and the ordinances of the City, and that he or she will faithfully perform the duties of the office upon which he or she is about to enter. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 6 - Rules of Administrative Procedure 

Sec. 2-6-10. - Purpose and applicability. 
    The purpose of the rules of procedure contained in this Article is to provide a uniform, consistent and expeditious method of procedure for the conduct of all hearings held before the City Council or any board, commission or official of the City. The provisions of this Article shall be applied uniformly in all such hearings; provided, however, that any board, commission or official may supplement the provisions of this Article by the adoption of further rules of procedure not inconsistent herewith. All rules adopted to supplement the provisions of this Article by any board, commission or official shall be reduced to writing, and copies thereof shall be made available to the public. Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person a right to appeal to the City Council or to any board, commission or official of the City, or to have a hearing before the same, unless the provisions of the Charter, any applicable state statute or other ordinance grants such a right, the sole purpose of this Article being to establish procedural rules for hearings otherwise required by the provisions of other laws. 
(Prior code 2.64.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Administrative body means the City Council or any board, commission or official of the City. 
    Aggrieved person means any person having a direct and substantial interest in the outcome of any quasi-judicial hearing or any person having a right of appeal therefrom by virtue of any Charter provision, state statute or ordinance. 
    Applicant means the petitioner, appealing party or complainant. 
    Clerk means the City Clerk, the secretary of any board or commission, or other appropriate official. 
    Opponent means any person in interest opposing the applicant. 
(Prior code 2.64.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-30. - Department heads; authorized officials. 
    Department heads, authorized officials of the City or the City itself may be the applicant, a respondent or an aggrieved person as the case may be. 
(Prior code 2.64.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-40. - Quasi-judicial hearings. 
    The provisions of Section 2-6-90 shall be applicable only to those hearings where the administrative body is called upon to exercise a power of a judicial or quasi-judicial nature, which shall include: 
(1)  Hearings before the City Council upon applications for the issuance of a liquor or fermented malt beverage license and hearings for the suspension or revocation of liquor or fermented malt beverage licenses; 
(2)  Hearings before the City Council involving zoning or rezoning of property except for comprehensive map amendments; 
(3)  Hearings before the Board of Adjustments and Appeals upon appeals from the denial of a building permit or from any other decision or action of the Building Official, Director of Public Works or the Director of Community Development relative to the building regulations, subdivision regulations and zoning ordinance, and upon requests for variances from the provisions of the zoning ordinance and the building regulations; 
(4)  Hearings before the City Council upon appeals from disciplinary actions against City employees; 
(5)  Hearings before the City Council or any board, commission or official respecting the issuance, suspension or revocation of any license issued by the City; and 
(6)  Hearings before the City Council upon appeals from the issuance of a notice of violation, cease and desist order or assessment of a fine by the City Manager for violation of the rules and regulations concerning ozone-depleting compounds promulgated pursuant to Section 7-7-20. 
(Prior code 2.64.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-50. - Administrative hearings. 
    All hearings before an administrative body other than those specified in Section 2-6-40 shall be deemed to be administrative hearings, the purpose of which is to obtain information to enable the City Council to determine legislative policy or to enable any board or commission to make recommendations to the City Council upon proposed or pending legislation. Such hearings shall be conducted in compliance with the provisions of Sections 2-6-60 through 2-6-80, and in such a manner so as to enable any person desiring to be heard a reasonable opportunity for the presentation of his or her views; however, there shall be no requirement for compliance with the provisions of Section 2-6-90. 
(Prior code 2.64.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-60. - Commencement of proceedings. 
    All proceedings conducted pursuant to this Article shall be commenced in the manner provided by the Charter, statute or ordinance governing the matter. In any proceeding involving the appeal of a decision of a City official, board or commission, the appeal procedure shall be commenced by the filing of a written notice of appeal by any party entitled to take such appeal, within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of the decision being appealed, unless a different time for appeal is set by the Charter, statute or other ordinance involved. 
(Prior code 2.64.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-70. - Referral to administrative body. 
    Upon receipt by the Clerk of any application, petition, notice of appeal, complaint or other instrument initiating a hearing, the same shall be referred to the administrative body having jurisdiction over the matter. A date, time and place for hearing thereon shall be set by the administrative body, which shall direct public notice thereof to be given, if otherwise required; provided, however, that the administrative body may authorize its Clerk to set a date, time and place for hearing upon receipt of such instrument without the necessity for action by the administrative body itself. 
(Prior code 2.64.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-80. - Public notice. 
    Public notice, if required, of the date, time and place of the public hearing shall be given in the manner provided by the Charter, statute or ordinance pursuant to which the hearing is to be held. In the absence of provisions specifically delineating the manner in which public notice is to be given, notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing to be held shall be published once in that newspaper designated by the City Council as the City's official newspaper, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. In the event the public hearing is postponed, notice shall be given of the date, time and place to which the hearing has been postponed, either by causing further notice to be published as provided in this Section or by publicly announcing at the date, time and place set in the original notice of the hearing's postponement of the new date, time and place when and where the postponed hearing shall be held. 
(Prior code 2.64.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-90. - Procedures for quasi-judicial hearings. 
(a)  Rights of participants. All quasi-judicial hearings, as designated in Section 2-6-40, shall be conducted under procedures designed to ensure all interested parties due process of law, and shall, in all cases, provide for the following: 
(1)  The administration of oaths to all parties or witnesses who appear for the purpose of testifying upon factual matters. 
(2)  The cross-examination, upon request of the interested parties, of all witnesses. 
(3)  The stenographic or other verbatim reproduction of all testimony presented in the hearing. 
(b)  Order of procedure. On all quasi-judicial hearings, as designated in this Article, the following order of procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  First, there shall be presented those documents showing the regularity of the commencement of the proceedings and the due form of the notice given. 
(2)  Next, the applicant shall present such material evidence, if any, as he or she desires. 
(3)  The administrative body shall, upon completion of the presentation of the applicant's evidence, call upon any person present in support of the applicant's position to present such evidence and information as he or she may desire. 
(4)  Thereafter, the hearing body shall call for the presentation of information and evidence from any person present at the hearing who desires to oppose the application, petition, appeal or complaint. 
(5)  The applicant shall then be given an opportunity to present any further matter in opposition or rebuttal to the matters presented by the opponents. 
(6)  All documents or other items of physical evidence shall be marked as exhibits with such identifying symbols as may be necessary to determine the exhibit referred to by any witness or other person. 
(c)  Rules of evidence. The hearing body shall not be required to observe any formal rules of evidence, but may consider any matter which a majority thereof concludes is reasonably reliable and calculated to aid the hearing body in reaching an accurate determination of the issues involved. 
(d)  Deliberations and notice of decision. Each hearing body is authorized to deliberate upon the issues presented at the hearing in private, nonpublic sessions; provided that no decision shall be effective, except upon a vote of the members of the hearing body, conducted in an open session thereof, which shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the hearing body. 
(e)  Judicial enforcement and review of decision. 
(1)  Any party aggrieved by a hearing body in any quasi-judicial hearing, or the City itself, may apply to have such decision reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction, in accordance with the provisions therefor contained within the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure; provided that the action is commenced not more than thirty (30) days subsequent to the date of the decision or within such shorter time as may be required by the Charter, statute or ordinance under which such hearing was held. The cost of preparation of the record of the hearing shall be assessed against the appealing party in the event the decision appealed from is affirmed by the court. 
(2)  In the event that such judicial review results in a judicial declaration setting aside or reversing the decision, the members of the hearing body which rendered such decision may take such steps as may be necessary to obtain an appellate review of the same, either through the institution of original proceedings or through appeal, in their own names, in their representative capacities, as members of the administrative body rendering the decision. Should any party not comply with any decision of any hearing body, the members of the administrative body involved, or the City itself, may, in addition to any other legal remedies which may exist for compelling compliance therewith, petition any court of competent jurisdiction for the entering of a judicial decree compelling compliance with the decision. 
(Prior code 2.64.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-100. - Preserving order. 
    Each administrative body shall have the right to preserve order during the hearing and to take such steps, including the ejection of any disorderly or obstreperous person interfering with its proceedings, as may be necessary. The administrative body may, prior to any presentations and as a condition to the taking of testimony or information from any person, require the registration of all persons desiring to be heard during the hearing. It may restrict the testimony of any person to the material issues pending before it and, to prevent duplicative or cumulative presentation, it may impose reasonable time restrictions on any person. 
(Prior code 2.64.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-110. - Adjournments. 
    After commencement of any hearing, the administrative body may, if it is deemed necessary to obtain a full presentation, adjourn the hearing from time to time by publicly announcing the fact of such adjournment and the date, time and place when and where the adjourned hearing shall recommence without the necessity of any further published notice thereof. 
(Prior code 2.64.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-120. - Hearing fees. 
    Each administrative body is authorized to require from each applicant requesting a hearing before the same to pay to the City a reasonable, uniform fee therefor, to defray the expenses of the same; provided, however, that provision shall be made for the waiver of the payment of same in all instances of proven indigency. 
(Prior code 2.64.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-6-130. - Requests for stenographic recording. 
    Any applicant may, by written notice to the City Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing, request that the proceedings and testimony presented at the hearing be recorded stenographically, in which event the applicant shall deposit with the City Clerk a sum sufficient to cover the cost of employing a stenographer. Absent such a request, the hearing shall be recorded stenographically or electronically at the option of the administrative body, and such recording shall constitute the record of such proceedings for appellate purposes. 
(Prior code 2.64.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 7 - Code of Ethics 

Sec. 2-7-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is: 
(1)  To promote public confidence in City government; 
(2)  To ensure that officers of the City do not accrue advantages by virtue of their office which are not available to others; 
(3)  To provide guidance to the Mayor, members of the City Council, members of City boards and commissions and City employees; and 
(4)  To comply with Section 3.06 of the Charter, by establishing rules of behavior for City elected officials and board members. 
(Prior code 2.66.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-7-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Board means any appointive board or commission or other appointive body or authority of the City established by the Charter or by ordinance or resolution. 
    Board member means a regular or alternate member of a board appointed by the City Council. 
    Confidential information means information which is not available to the general public under applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, and which is obtained by reason of the elected official's, board member's or employee's position with the City. In the event the information is in written form, the document containing said information shall be marked "confidential." If the document is not so marked, the information contained therein shall not be deemed to be confidential information. Any person creating a document containing information of a confidential nature shall be responsible for marking the document as "confidential." 
    Conflict of interest means a personal interest of an elected official, board member, employee or any relative of the foregoing which interferes with or influences, may interfere with or influence or may reasonably be perceived by the public as interfering with or influencing the conduct of the duties or the exercise of the powers of the elected official, board member or employee on behalf of the City. 
    Contract means any arrangement or agreement pursuant to which any material, service or other thing of value is to be furnished to the City for valuable consideration to be paid by the City or is to be sold or transferred by the City, provided that the amount involved is more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
    Councilmember means any member of the City Council. 
    Direct financial interest means any interest by which a person, his or her relative or his or her designee and/or business association could gain or lose money or anything of value other than as may naturally accrue generally to all residents of the City by reason of such residence in the City. 
    Elected official means the Mayor or any Councilmember. 
    Employee means any person employed by the City on a full-time or part-time basis, with the exception of independent contractors. 
    Interest means a pecuniary, property or commercial interest, or any other interest the primary significance of which is economic gain or the avoidance of economic loss to an elected official, board member, his or her relative or his or her designee; provided, however, that interest shall not include any matter involving the common public good or necessity, or any matter in which a similar benefit is conferred to all persons or property similarly situated; and further provided that ownership individually or in a fiduciary capacity of any securities, or of any beneficial interest in securities, of a corporation shall not be deemed to create an interest in the corporation unless the aggregate amount of such securities, or interest in such securities, amounts to five percent (5%) or more of any class of the securities of the corporation then outstanding or constitutes controlling interest in the corporation. 
    Relative means the spouse or minor child of an elected official, board member or employee. 
(Prior code 2.66.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-7-30. - Compliance with other laws. 
    The requirements of this Article shall be in addition to the applicable requirements of the Charter and laws of the State. To the extent any conflict exists between this Article and the laws of the State, this Article shall apply. To the extent any conflict exists between this Article and the Charter, the Charter shall apply. To the extent any conflict exists between the Charter and the laws of the State, the Charter shall apply. 
(Prior code 2.66.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-7-40. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No elected official, board member or employee shall have or acquire any direct financial interest in any contract with the City. 
(b)  No elected official, board member or employee shall knowingly use any confidential information to further the interest of the elected official, board member or employee, or any relative thereof. 
(c)  No elected official, board member or employee shall disclose any confidential information to persons not entitled to such information, except as required by law; provided, however, that any person may disclose confidential information if the City Council authorizes such disclosure pursuant to Subsection 2-2-200(c) of this Chapter, or the District Court has determined, pursuant to the provisions of Subsection 2-2-200(d), that an executive session was either unauthorized, improperly convened or conducted, or that information conveyed or received at any executive session was improperly classified as confidential or privileged. 
(d)  No elected official, board member or employee shall, in his or her official capacity, participate in any discussion of, take any final action on, or vote to render any final decision or determination on, any matter in relation to which the elected official, board member or employee has a conflict of interest. 
(e)  No elected official, board member or employee shall receive any compensation, gift, payment of expense, reward, gratuity or any item of value tendered by a person who has an interest in any matter pending before the City which, in the judgment of a reasonably prudent person, would tend to impair the elected official's, board member's or employee's independence or impartiality of judgment in the performance of the elected official's, board member's or employee's official duties with regard to any such pending matter. The following shall not be prohibited under this Subsection: 
(1)  Campaign contributions reported as required by law; 
(2)  An occasional nonpecuniary gift, having a fair market value less than fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(3)  A nonpecuniary award publicly presented by a nonprofit organization in recognition of public service; 
(4)  Payment of or reimbursement for actual necessary expenditures for travel and subsistence for attendance at a convention or other meeting at which such elected official, board member or employee is scheduled to participate; 
(5)  Reimbursement for or acceptance of an opportunity to participate in a social function or meeting which is offered to an elected official, board member or employee which is not extraordinary when viewed in light of the position held by such elected official, board member or employee; 
(6)  Items of perishable or nonpermanent value, including but not limited to meals, lodging, travel expenses or tickets to sporting, recreational, educational or cultural events; 
(7)  Payment for speeches, debates or other public events, reported as honorariums; 
(8)  Payment of salary from employment, including other government employment, in addition to that earned from being an elected official, board member or employee; or 
(9)  Any scholarship, including those funded by the City, to a relative of any elected official, board member or employee. 
(f)  No elected official, board member or employee shall appear on behalf of a private interest before the City Council or any board, unless otherwise permitted by the Charter or ordinances, except that any elected official, board member or employee may appear before the City Council or any board on his or her own behalf. Nothing herein shall preclude an elected official, board member or employee in the same manner and under the same circumstances as any other person, from appearing before the City Council or a board on an application of the elected official, board member or employee for a permit, license or other approval of the City Council or board required by law, or on a matter of general interest. 
(g)  No elected official, board member or employee shall represent any private interest, other than the elected official's, board member's or employee's own interest, against the interest of the City in any civil litigation to which the City is a party, unless the consent of the City Council is first obtained, except that any elected official, board member or employee may testify under oath if subpoenaed. 
(h)  In addition to the restrictions on employment imposed on elected officials for one hundred eighty (180) days following their terms of office as set forth at Section 3.07 of the Charter, no elected official or board member shall at any time within six (6) months following termination of the office or employment, obtain employment in which the elected official or board member will take direct advantage, unavailable to others, of matters with which the elected official or board member was directly involved during his or her term of office with the City, nor shall any former elected official represent another person having a matter before the council, any board or commission or department within two (2) years following their term of office, regardless of whether such representation is compensated. 
(i)  No elected official, board member or employee shall use any City property or employee services for personal gain or advantage except in the same manner and under the same circumstances as any other person who is not an elected official, board member or employee of the City, nor shall any elected official use his or her position to influence or interfere with the actions of staff for personal financial gain or advantage. 
(j)  No elected official or board member shall vote on any question concerning the elected official's or board member's own conduct. 
(Prior code 2.66.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 04 ,  1, 2018) 
Sec. 2-7-50. - Advisory opinions. 
(a)  Any Councilmember the Mayor or the City Manager may request in writing an advisory opinion with respect to this Article from the City Attorney. The advisory opinion shall be in writing and the person requesting the opinion or the City Manager may require that all or portions of the opinion remain confidential. Confidentiality shall only be applied to the extent that a person acts in accordance with the opinion. 
(b)  The Municipal Judge shall maintain the consent of one (1) or more attorneys licensed to practice law in the State with demonstrated expertise in ethics or municipal matters to provide advisory opinions with respect to this Article. The reasonable expense and fees for such opinions shall be paid by the City, the names of such persons shall be provided to the City Council, the City Manager and the City Attorney. 
(c)  At least three (3) Councilmembers, the City Manager or the City Attorney may request in writing an advisory opinion with respect to this Article from any person described in Subsection (b). The advisory opinion shall be in writing and the City Manager or the City Council may require that all or portions of the opinion remain confidential. Confidentiality shall only be applied to the extent that a person acts in accordance with the opinion. 
(d)  Any person who acts in accordance with an advisory opinion issued under this Section shall not be guilty of violating this Article. 
(Prior code 2.66.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-7-60. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  An elected official who knowingly has a conflict of interest in relation to a matter pending before the City Council shall make full and complete disclosure of the conflict of interest to the City Council. 
(b)  When it appears to the City Council that an elected official may have a conflict of interest which has not been disclosed, an advisory opinion may be requested pursuant to Section 2-7-50 as to whether the elected official has a conflict of interest. If the advisory opinion is that a conflict of interest exists, no vote shall be recorded for the elected official, consistent with Section 6.02 of the Charter. 
(c)  The elected official with a conflict of interest shall not vote on or be present on the dais during or participate in consideration of the matter in relation to which a conflict of interest is disclosed or established prior to any vote. 
(d)  Subsections (a) through (c) hereof shall apply to board members and boards. When it appears that a board member may have a conflict of interest which has not been disclosed, the board may request that the City Manager seek an advisory opinion pursuant to Section 2-7-50 as to whether a board member has a conflict of interest. If the advisory opinion is that a conflict of interest exists, no vote shall be recorded for the board member. No vote shall be recorded for a board member who refused to vote because of a conflict of interest. 
(Prior code 2.66.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-7-70. - Appearance of impropriety. 
    To maintain confidence in government, each elected official, board member and employee shall, in the performance of services for the City, seek to avoid the appearance that a conflict of interest exists or that a City office or position is being used for personal interest. 
(Prior code 2.66.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-7-80. - Quasi-judicial decisions. 
    Each elected official and board member shall be and remain impartial when making any quasi-judicial decision. Any elected official or board member who cannot be impartial in making a quasi-judicial decision shall not vote on, be present during or participate in consideration of the matter upon which a quasi-judicial decision is to be made. The City Attorney shall provide affected elected officials and board members with advice on what constitutes a quasi-judicial decision. 
(Prior code 2.66.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-7-90. - Procedure for reporting and investigation. 
(a)  Any elected official, board member or employee who becomes aware of alleged or suspected facts which would lead the person to believe that an elected official, board member or employee has violated any of the provisions of this Article, the Charter or the laws of the State shall report such facts to the City Manager, who shall in turn report the matter to the City Attorney. If the alleged or suspected facts involve the City Manager, the matter shall be reported to the Mayor. If the alleged or suspected facts involve an elected official, the manner shall be reported to a Councilmember who is not involved in the alleged or suspected facts. 
(b)  All information reported to the City Manager, Mayor, Councilmember or City Attorney pursuant to this Section shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed to any person other than as necessary for the investigation of the allegations or suspicions and, in the event the allegations or suspicions are believed by the City Attorney to be based on fact and to constitute a violation of this Article, the Charter or state law, to the City Council pursuant to this Section. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a report from the City Manager, Mayor or Councilmember, the City Attorney shall contact the complainant and request that the allegations be placed in writing. The City Attorney shall investigate such allegations only where the allegations have been placed in writing and signed by the complainant, and affirmed under oath if the City Attorney determines that such verification is appropriate; where the City Attorney is personally aware of the factual basis of an allegation or suspicion that the provisions of this Article, the Charter or state law have been violated; or where the City Attorney agrees that disclosure of the complainant's identity (only in cases where the complainant is an employee) might result in reprisal against the employee, in which case the City Attorney's memorandum to such effect shall be sufficient. 
(d)  In conducting the investigation, the City Attorney shall: 
(1)  Discuss the substance of the allegations or suspicions with the elected official, board member or employee unless there is good cause to believe, and the City Attorney so certifies by memorandum, that disclosure of the allegation may result in destruction of records or evidence of criminal acts or misconduct by the elected official, board member or employee. 
(2)  Conduct such other investigation, including the interviewing of witnesses, as the City Attorney deems appropriate to determine if there is a factual basis to believe the allegations are well-founded. Witness statements shall be accepted and utilized by the City Attorney in the investigation and analysis only where the witness statements are in writing and signed by the witness, or affirmed under oath if the City Attorney determines that such verification is appropriate. 
(e)  The City Attorney shall proceed with the investigation until one (1) of the following resolutions of the matter is achieved: 
(1)  A finding that the suspicion or allegation is unfounded, meaning that the City Attorney finds that no credible evidence exists upon which a reasonable person could find a violation of law or regulation; in which case, the City Attorney shall inform any person referred to above who has knowledge of the suspected or alleged matter of the finding; 
(2)  A finding that the suspicion or allegation may constitute criminal misconduct subject to prosecution by the District Attorney or other law enforcement agency, in which case the City Attorney shall immediately provide the investigative files and papers concerning the matter to the appropriate law enforcement agency, and shall also report such findings and the action taken thereon to the City Council at a regular or special meeting; or 
(3)  A finding that the City Attorney believes a conflict of interest or ethical violation does exist, but which does not appear to constitute criminal misconduct, which finding shall be reported first to the elected official, board member or employee and as soon as possible thereafter to the City Council at a regular or special meeting. 
(Prior code 2.66.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-7-100. - Violation; penalty. 
    In addition to any other penalty provided for in the Charter, this Code or any other applicable law, any elected official, board member or employee who violates any provision of this Article is subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A violation by an elected official which is established to the satisfaction of a majority of the remaining Councilmembers shall be grounds for an official reprimand by the City Council. 
(2)  A violation by a board member which is established to the satisfaction of a majority of the remaining members of the board shall be grounds for an official reprimand by the board or by the City Council, or both. The City Council may remove such member from the board and appoint another person to finish the term of the member removed. 
(3)  Any person who knowingly or intentionally violates any provisions of Subsection (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) or (j) of Section 2-7-40 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20. In the event an elected official or board member is charged in Municipal Court with a violation of Section 2-7-40, the Municipal Judge shall recuse himself or herself and an independent judge shall be retained by the City to preside in place of the Municipal Judge. 
(4)  Any elected official who knowingly permits the City to enter into any contract in which the elected official has a pecuniary interest, without disclosing such interest to the City Council prior to the action of the City Council authorizing such contract, shall be guilty of misconduct in office. If such elected official is found, after notice and public hearing, to be guilty of misconduct in office, such elected official shall be punished by forfeiture of the elected official's office as authorized by Section 3.08 of the Charter. The public hearing shall be held upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the elected official, which notice shall fully set forth the charges against such elected official. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 3.08 of the Charter. 
(5)  The penalties provided for in Paragraphs (1) through (4) hereof shall not preclude the application of any other penalty or remedy provided for by law. 
(Prior code 2.66.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 8 - Recall Procedures 

Sec. 2-8-10. - Officials subject to recall. 
    Every elected official of the City may be recalled from office at any time by the qualified electors of the City in the manner provided in Section 4 of Article XXI of the Colorado State Constitution. 
(Prior code 2.76.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-8-20. - Procedure; petition. 
    The procedure to effect the recall of an elected official of the City shall be as follows: 
(1)  A petition signed by qualified electors entitled to vote for a successor of the incumbent sought to be recalled equal in number to twenty-five percent (25%) of all ballots cast for that particular office in the last preceding regular municipal election, demanding an election of the successor to the office named in the petition shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. 
(2)  Such petition shall contain a general statement, in not more than two hundred (200) words, of the grounds on which such recall is sought, which statement is intended for the information of the qualified electors. 
(3)  The qualified electors shall be the sole and exclusive judges of the legality, reasonableness and sufficiency of such grounds assigned for such recall, and the grounds shall not be open to review. 
(Prior code 2.76.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-8-30. - Sectioned petitions. 
    Any recall petition may be circulated and signed in sections if each section contains a full and accurate copy of the title and text of the petition. 
(Prior code 2.76.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-8-40. - Signatures; oath; protests. 
    The signatures to such recall petition need not all be on one (1) sheet of paper, but each signer shall add to his or her signature the date of his or her signing the petition and his or her place of residence, giving his or her street number, if any. The person circulating such sheet shall make and subscribe an oath on such sheet that the signatures thereon are genuine. False oath, willfully so made and subscribed by such person, is perjury in the second degree and shall be punishable as such. All petitions are sufficient if they appear to be signed by the requisite number of signers who are qualified electors unless a protest in writing under oath is filed in the office of the City Clerk by a qualified elector within fifteen (15) days after such petition is filed, setting forth specifically the grounds of such protest. The City Clerk shall thereupon mail forthwith a copy of such protest to the persons named in such petition as representing the signers thereof, together with a notice fixing a time for hearing such protest not less than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days after such notice is mailed. 
(Prior code 2.76.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-8-50. - Hearings. 
    All hearings shall be before the City Clerk and all testimony shall be under oath. Such hearings shall be summary and shall be concluded within thirty (30) days after such petition is filed, and the result thereof shall be forthwith certified to the person representing the signers of such petition. In the case where a petition is not sufficient, it may be withdrawn by the person or a majority of the persons representing the signers of such petition and, within fifteen (15) days thereafter, may be amended and refiled as an original petition. The finding as to the sufficiency of any petition may be reviewed by the District Court in and for the County upon application of the person or a majority of the persons representing the signers of such petition, but such review shall be had and determined forthwith. 
(Prior code 2.76.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-8-60. - Submission of petition; date for recall election. 
    When such petition is sufficient, the City Clerk shall forthwith submit the petition, together with an affidavit of its sufficiency, to the City Council, which shall thereupon order and fix a date for the holding of the recall election, which date shall be not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of the receipt of the petition by the City Council. If a regular election is to be held within ninety (90) days after the date of receipt of the petition by the City Council, the recall election shall be held as part of the regular election. 
(Prior code 2.76.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-8-70. - Resignation. 
    If an elected official subject to a recall petition offers his or her resignation, it shall be accepted, and the vacancy caused by such resignation or from any other cause shall be filled as provided by law; however, the person appointed to fill such vacancy shall hold office only until the person elected at the recall election qualifies. If such officer does not resign within five (5) days after the sufficiency of the recall petition has been sustained, the City Council shall cause notice to be published for the holding of such election, and the same shall be conducted and returned and the result thereof declared in all respects as in the case of regular elections. 
(Prior code 2.76.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-8-80. - Balloting; results. 
(a)  On the official ballot at such elections, there shall be printed, in not more than two hundred (200) words, the reasons set forth in the petition for demanding such elected official's recall; and, in not more than three hundred (300) words, there shall also be printed, if desired by him or her, such elected official's justification of his or her course in office. If such elected official resigns at any time subsequent to the filing of such petition, the recall election shall be called, notwithstanding such resignation. 
(b)  There shall be printed on the official ballot, as to every elected official whose recall is to be voted on, the words, "shall (name of person against whom recall petition is filed) be recalled from the office of (title of office)?" Following such question shall be the words "yes" and "no" on separate lines with a blank space at the right of each in which the voter shall indicate, by marking a cross mark "X," his or her vote for or against such recall. 
(c)  On such ballots, under each question, there shall also be printed the names of those persons who have been nominated as candidates to succeed the person sought to be recalled, however, no vote cast shall be counted for any candidate for such office unless the voter also voted for or against the recall of such person sought to be recalled from such office. The name of the person against whom the petition is filed shall not appear on the ballot as a candidate for the office. 
(d)  If a majority of those voting on the question of the recall of any incumbent from office vote "no," the incumbent shall continue in such office. If a majority vote "yes," such incumbent shall be removed from such office upon the qualification of his or her successor. 
(e)  If the vote in such recall election recalls the elected official, the candidate who has received the highest number of votes for the office thereby vacated shall be declared elected for the remainder of the term, and a certificate of election shall be forthwith issued to him or her. In case the person who received the highest number of votes fails to qualify within fifteen (15) days after the issuance of a certificate of election, the office shall be deemed vacant and shall be filled according to law. 
(f)  Candidates for the office may be nominated by petition as provided by law, which petition shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk not less than thirty (30) days before such recall election. 
(Prior code 2.76.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-8-90. - Recall after six months. 
(a)  No recall petition shall be circulated or signed against any elected official until he or she has actually held office for at least six (6) months, unless he or she holds his or her office by virtue of appointment to fill a vacancy. 
(b)  After one (1) recall petition and election, no further petitions shall be filed against the same elected official during the term for which he or she was elected unless the petitioners signing the petition equal fifty percent (50%) of all ballots cast for that office in the last preceding regular municipal election. 
(Prior code 2.76.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 9 - Indemnification of Officers and Employees 

Sec. 2-9-10. - Purpose. 
    The City recognizes the need to encourage elected officials, municipal employees and appointed officers to effectively and efficiently perform their duties and to protect such individuals in the performance of such duties. To this end, the City Council desires to provide to such individuals assurances by way of indemnification against claims and causes of action which might arise in the performance of their duties for the City. 
(Prior code 2.80.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-9-20. - Legal counsel and indemnification provided. 
    The City Council shall, in all cases, provide competent legal counsel of its choosing to defend any elected official, municipal employee, appointed officer or member of any City board or commission who is a party defendant, or is threatened with being made a party defendant, to any threatened, pending or contemplated action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that such person is or was a municipal employee, elected official, appointed officer or member of any City board or commission, and shall pay or indemnify such person as against all expenses, court costs (including expert fees), fees, judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement or satisfaction of judgment actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in connection with such action, suit or proceeding, provided that such person acted in good faith within the scope of his or her employment and duties, and provided that the claim is not the result of any willful or wanton act on the part of such person. 
(Prior code 2.80.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-9-30. - When provisions do not apply. 
    The provisions of Section 2-9-20 shall not be applicable in the event the City carries an insurance policy covering such acts or omissions, unless the claim asserted is in excess of the policy limits. In no event shall Section 2-9-20 be applicable to an award of exemplary or punitive damages. 
(Prior code 2.80.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-9-40. - Discretion of City Council. 
    The City Council may, in its discretion, direct the City Attorney to defend any legal action. The designation of defense counsel by the City Council shall not preclude such defense being conducted under a reservation of rights of indemnity by the City. In the event the cause of action is covered under a policy of insurance of the City, which insurance provides for defense, it shall be discretionary in the City Council as to whether legal counsel is designated to assist in the defense. 
(Prior code 2.80.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-9-50. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to require the City to provide legal counsel or indemnification in the following situations: 
(1)  In civil matters, where such person described in Section 2-9-20 is the plaintiff or moving party, or where it shall be finally adjudicated in any action, suit or proceeding that such person shall not have acted in good faith and in the reasonable belief that his or her action was in the best interest of the City; and 
(2)  In criminal matters, where such person described in Section 2-9-20 is the complaining party, or had reasonable grounds to believe that his or her conduct was unlawful. 
(Prior code 2.80.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-9-60. - Presumptions. 
    Termination of any action, suit or proceeding by judgment, order or conviction adverse to such person described in Section 2-9-20, by settlement or by plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent, shall not of itself create a presumption that such person did not act in good faith and in the reasonable belief that his or her action was in the best interests of the City; and with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, that such person had reasonable cause to believe that his or her conduct was unlawful. 
(Prior code 2.80.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-9-70. - Additional legal counsel. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit any such person described in Section 2-9-20 from seeking additional legal counsel other than the legal counsel provided by the City. However, nothing in this Article shall be construed to require the City to pay any fees or other expenses incurred as the result of employment of such additional counsel. 
(Prior code 2.80.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-9-80. - Rights not exclusive. 
    The provisions of this Article shall not be deemed exclusive of any rights to which those indemnified may be entitled under any other statute, ordinance, agreement, insurance or policy of the City. 
(Prior code 2.80.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-9-90. - Acts covered. 
    The provisions of this Article shall apply to all acts of any elected official, municipal employee, appointed officer or member of any City board or commission committed during any term of office or employment of any such person. 
(Prior code 2.80.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 10 - State of Emergency 

Sec. 2-10-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City and its residents by expressly authorizing the City Council: to declare a state of emergency; to recognize a state of emergency declared by the Governor of the State; and to take certain precautionary measures during any such state of emergency and the recovery period after such emergency. 
(Prior code 1.32.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-10-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Curfew means a regulation prohibiting any person from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
    Overcharging means charging prices for good, materials, services or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or the supplier's or provider's costs. 
    Recovery period means a period of time not to exceed six (6) months following a state of emergency during which the impact of the emergency continues. 
    State of emergency means a condition declared by the Governor of the State pursuant to the Colorado Disaster Emergency Act of 1992, Section 24-32-2101, et seq., C.R.S., or by the Mayor or the City Council pursuant to Section 2-10-30. 
(Prior code 1.32.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-10-30. - Declaration of state of emergency. 
(a)  The City Council is expressly authorized to declare a state of emergency upon the occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural cause or cause of human origin, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous substance incident, oil spill or other water contamination requiring action to avert danger or damage, volcanic activity, epidemic, air pollution, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, civil disturbance or hostile military or paramilitary action. 
(b)  The Mayor is expressly authorized to declare a state of emergency under the circumstances described in Subsection (a) if the City Council is unavailable or unable to make such a declaration. 
(Prior code 1.32.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-10-40. - Alternate meeting location. 
(a)  During a state of emergency and recovery period, the affairs and business of the City, including meetings of the City Council, may be conducted at places other than City Hall if the City Council determines that it would be prudent to conduct such affairs and business at an alternate location. Such alternate location may be located outside the City limits, if necessary. 
(b)  When meetings of the City Council occur outside the City limits, all actions taken by the City Council shall be valid as if taken within the City. 
(Prior code 1.32.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-10-50. - Curfew. 
(a)  During a state of emergency and recovery period, the City Council may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew. 
(b)  The curfew shall apply throughout the City, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be effective. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the curfew imposed by the City Council. 
(e)  Individuals engaged in the provision of designated essential services, such as fire protection, law enforcement, utility repair, emergency medical services and hospital services, shall be exempt from any curfew imposed pursuant to this Section. The resolution may, in the discretion of the City Council, exempt other individuals. 
(Prior code 1.32.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-10-60. - Emergency contracts. 
    During a state of emergency, the City Council or its designee may contract for public works without following the usual public works contract bidding procedures. 
(Prior code 1.32.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-10-70. - Code enforcement. 
(a)  During a state of emergency, the City Council may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, if the emergency is such that immediate action outside the Code is required, and the suspension is not contrary to any controlling federal or state law. 
(b)  During a state of emergency and recovery period, the City Council may temporarily suspend or reduce any permit fees, application fees or other fees imposed by this Code, as necessary to promote the reconstruction or repair of the area impacted by the emergency. 
(Prior code 1.32.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-10-80. - Temporary dwellings. 
    During a state of emergency and recovery period, the City Council or its designee may authorize the use of temporary dwellings in any zone district while the primary dwelling is being repaired or reconstructed, provided that such temporary dwellings comply with all applicable health regulations. 
(Prior code 1.32.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-10-90. - Overcharging prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful during a state of emergency or recovery period for any person doing business in the City to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing. 
(b)  Overcharging shall be presumed when there is a substantial increase in the price of the goods, materials, services or housing, as compared to the price immediately prior to the emergency, unless the increase is directly attributable to cost increases resulting from the emergency. 
(Prior code 1.32.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 11 - Retirement Board 

Sec. 2-11-10. - Established policy. 
    The City Council declares that it is the policy of the City to encourage and promote the welfare of all its employees and that retirement plans rewarding employees for services performed further that policy. To this end, there is established and created a Police Pension Plan for commissioned police officers and a General Retirement Plan for all other employees of the City other than firefighters, elected officials or employees who are members of a bargaining unit represented by a labor union. The plans shall be known as the City Employees' Retirement Plan and the City Police Pension Fund Plan. 
(Prior code 2.84.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-20. - Retirement Board created. 
    There is created the City Employee and Commissioned Officers Retirement Board ("Retirement Board") in which the control and management of the City retirement system and of the plans adopted shall be vested. The Retirement Board may make all necessary rules and regulations for managing and discharging its duties for its own government and procedure in so doing, and for the preservation and protection of any fund and/or any annuity contract. 
(Prior code 2.84.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-30. - Composition; terms of office. 
(a)  The Retirement Board shall consist of three (3) standing members, the City Manager, the Finance Director and the City Clerk; and four (4) elected representatives, two (2) commissioned police officers, with an alternate, elected by their peers, and two (2) civilian employees, with an alternate, elected by their peers. The City Manager shall serve as the Chair and the City Clerk shall serve as the Secretary of the Retirement Board. The Finance Director shall be ex officio treasurer of the Retirement Board and administer the funds. Administration of the Police Pension Fund shall be as provided for in the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(b)  An election to select the four (4) elected members of the Retirement Board was conducted in 1996. At the election, the commissioned police officer and the civilian employee receiving the highest number of votes were elected to serve an initial term of four (4) years, and the commissioned police officer and the civilian employee receiving the second highest number of votes were elected to serve an initial term of two (2) years. Thereafter, the four (4) elected members of the Retirement Board shall serve for a term of four (4) years following the date of their election. The three (3) standing members of the Retirement Board are ex officio members of the Retirement Board and shall serve for that period of time during which they hold their office or position with the City. 
(Prior code 2.84.030, 2.84.035; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-40. - Voting. 
    The elected board members will be allowed to vote only on agenda items addressing their plan. The two at-large City representatives will vote only on agenda items regarding their plan. 
(Prior code 2.84.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-50. - Duties. 
(a)  The Retirement Board shall determine what type of retirement plan in which to participate and shall select, on the basis of the most sound proposal, a qualified insurance company plan or a noninsured trust retirement plan with a bank or trust company authorized to exercise trust powers in the State as a trustee, and the Retirement Board shall immediately transmit to the City Council a plan recommended by it. The City Council shall have final authority to determine the plan to be adopted. 
(b)  In addition to the powers and duties of the Retirement Board provided for this Article, and the duties set forth by its own rules and regulations, the Retirement Board's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The authority to contract with any person, firm or corporation authorized to do business in the State for the purposes set forth in this Code. 
(2)  The supervision of the investment of funds held in any trust fund created under this Article, subject to any limitations contained in this Code. 
(3)  The maintenance of such records and accounts as shall be necessary to render financial statements and reports as may be required from time to time by the City Council. 
(4)  The power to hear and decide all applications for relief, pensions, annuities, retirement or other benefits under the plan or system adopted, and determine eligibility for membership and benefits under such plan. 
(Prior code 2.84.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-60. - Hardship withdrawal request subcommittee. 
    Hardship withdrawal rules shall be determined by the Retirement Board as a whole pursuant to Section 2-11-50 of this Article. 
(Prior code 2.84.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-70. - Membership. 
    If any employee member of the Retirement Board terminates his or her employment with the City, such member shall automatically be removed from the Retirement Board. 
(Prior code 2.84.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-80. - Meetings and financial reports. 
(a)  The Retirement Board shall hold such meetings as it determines necessary, provided that the Chair shall call a meeting of the Retirement Board whenever requested to do so in writing by two (2) members of the Retirement Board, or at the request of the City Council. 
(b)  A financial report will be made available to employees and City Council as necessary to reflect the financial condition of the City's retirement plans. 
(Prior code 2.84.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-90. - Audit. 
    The Retirement Board shall provide for an independent audit of all funds of the Plan, to be made annually by a certified public accountant. 
(Prior code 2.84.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-100. - Removal of members. 
    Any member of the Retirement Board may be removed therefrom by the City Council for cause. 
(Prior code 2.84.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-110. - Expenses. 
    Subject to the provisions contained in Section 2-11-130, all expenses incurred by the Retirement Board shall be chargeable to the City Employees' Retirement Funds, which are hereby established. 
(Prior code 2.84.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-120. - Legal counsel. 
    The City Attorney shall be the legal consultant for the Retirement Board, and shall bring and defend any action at law or equity in the name of the Retirement Board. 
(Prior code 2.84.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-130. - City contributions to Retirement Plans. 
    Commencing with the effective date of any Plan adopted pursuant to this Article, the Plan Administrator is authorized and directed to deposit annually to the account of the Retirement Funds such funds as are budgeted and appropriated by the City Council. Any funds remaining in the accounts at the end of any budget year in excess of an amount determined to be necessary to maintain the actuarial soundness of the Plans shall be used to reduce the cost of the Plans to the City for the ensuing budget year. 
(Prior code 2.84.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-140. - Member-employee contributions. 
    No member-employee of the Plans shall be permitted to make contributions to his or her respective Plan. 
(Prior code 2.84.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-150. - Assignment, anticipation and alienation prohibited. 
    No member or his or her designated beneficiary shall have the right to assign, anticipate or alienate any benefit or interest under this Article, and all assets of any fund attributable to any member or his or her designated beneficiary are declared to be exempt from attachment, levy and execution or satisfaction of any judgment obtained against any member or his or her designated beneficiary by operation of law or otherwise; and this provision is found, declared and determined to be a matter of local and municipal concern to the City. 
(Prior code 2.84.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-11-160. - Liability. 
    Neither the establishment of any plan, any modification thereof, any action taken thereunder nor any omission to act, if in good faith and not constituting willful misconduct by the Retirement Board or any member, officer or employee thereof, shall be construed as giving to any member of the Plans or other person any legal or equitable right against the City or any of its officers, officials or employees, or against the Retirement Board or any officer or member thereof. No member of the Retirement Board shall be liable for the act or omission of any other member of the Retirement Board or of any agent or employee of the Retirement Board. 
(Prior code 2.84.170; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 12 - Board of Adjustments and Appeals 

Sec. 2-12-10. - Board of Adjustments and Appeals created. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Charter, there is created and established a Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(Prior code 2.44.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-12-20. - Appointment and composition; quorum. 
    The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall consist of eight (8) members. Two (2) members shall be appointed from each of the four (4) Council districts. Such members shall be appointed by resolution of the City Council for overlapping terms of two (2) years, and the City Council shall make appointments to fill unexpired terms due to vacancies. Members appointed prior to June 13, 2012 shall be allowed to complete their original appointment term. Five (5) members of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall constitute a quorum. 
(Prior code 2.44.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 18 1, 2012) 
Sec. 2-12-30. - Qualifications for membership. 
    Each member of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall be a registered elector of the City and shall have resided within the City at the time of the appointment for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of the appointment. No member of the City staff shall be a member of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
(Prior code 2.44.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 18 2, 2012) 
Sec. 2-12-40. - Organization; conduct of business. 
    The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair for one-year terms. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall keep minutes and records of its proceedings, show the votes taken and maintain records of all of its official actions. Every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals may adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its proceedings, except where otherwise prescribed by ordinance. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals may also recommend a fee schedule to the City Council for applications for appeals and variances. 
(Prior code 2.44.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-12-50. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have power to hear and determine appeals from denials of building permits, to authorize variances from the strict application of the Land Development Code and building regulations to residential construction, and to decide appeals from and review any order, decision or determination made by an administrative official charged with the enforcement of the Land Development Code and building regulations. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals may also hear and decide all matters referred to it by the City Council, or upon which it is required to pass under any ordinance. 
(b)  In addition to any other duties the Council may prescribe, the Board's procedures to hear variances and appeals by any person are provided in Chapter 16 of the Land Development Code and are to be conducted in accordance with this Chapter for quasi-judicial hearings. 
(c)  The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have the power to subpoena any witnesses it deems necessary or appropriate in order to make an informed decision on any case coming before it. 
(d)  The Chair shall rule on the admissibility of all testimony or other evidence and is authorized to administer oaths to all witnesses. 
(Prior code 2.44.060; prior code 2.44.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 05 2 , 2016) 
ARTICLE 13 - Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission 

Sec. 2-13-10. - Created. 
    There is created the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission of the City, which shall be charged with the duties, powers and responsibilities as are set forth in this Article. The word "Commission," when used in this Article, means the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission of the City. 
(Prior code 2.52.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-13-20. - Appointment and composition; members. 
    The Commission shall consist of nine (9) members: two (2) adult members from each Council district ("district members"); and one (1) at-large youth member. District members shall be appointed by resolution of the City Council for overlapping terms of two (2) years, the at-large youth member for no more than two (2) years, and the City Council shall make appointments to fill unexpired terms due to vacancies. Members appointed prior to June 13, 2012 shall be allowed to complete their original appointment term. Four (4) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. 
(Prior code 2.52.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 17 1, 2012) 
Sec. 2-13-30. - Qualifications for membership. 
    On the date of appointment, each district member shall be a registered elector of the City and shall have resided within the City for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of appointment. The at-large youth member shall be a young adult between the ages of sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) years or a junior or senior in high school who has resided within the City for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of appointment. No member of the City staff shall be a member of the Commission. 
(Prior code 2.52.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 17 2, 2012) 
Sec. 2-13-40. - Organization; conduct of business; rules. 
(a)  At the first meeting of each calendar year, the Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair from its voting members to serve for a term of one (1) year. The Vice Chair shall have the authority to act as Chair during the absence or disability of the Chair. The Chair shall be entitled to enter into all discussions of the Commission and to vote on all questions before the Commission, but cannot make or second any motion. The adoption of any resolution or motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of those members of the Commission present at the meeting at which the vote is taken. In the case of a tie vote, the motion fails. 
(b)  The Commission may appoint such committees as it deems necessary to discharge its duties and responsibilities. 
(c)  The conduct of the proceedings of the Commission shall be subject to the following rules: 
(1)  All meetings and hearings of the Commission, or of any committee thereof, shall be open to the public. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and those minutes shall be filed in the office of the Parks and Recreation Department. All such minutes shall be available for public inspection. 
(2)  The Commission shall hold at least one (1) meeting each month. 
(3)  At any meeting or hearing, any interested person may appear in person, or by agent or attorney, and offer evidence or testimony. 
(4)  The City Attorney and other City officials shall advise and assist the Commission in the performance of its duties as requested by the Commission. 
(d)  Hearings before the Commission shall be administrative hearings as defined in Section 2-6-50 of this Chapter. 
(e)  The Commission shall have the power to adopt by resolution additional rules, not inconsistent with this Article or the other provisions of this Code, for the conduct of its proceedings. 
(Prior code 2.52.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 17 3, 2012) 
Sec. 2-13-50. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Using the City's Comprehensive Plan as a guide, the Commission shall formulate parks, trails and open space acquisition and development plans for approval by the City Council. 
(b)  The Commission shall formulate recreation policies and recommend such policies to the City Council. 
(c)  The Commission shall perform other such duties and functions as may be from time to time designated by the City Council. 
(Prior code 2.52.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 17 4, 2012) 
ARTICLE 14 - Planning and Zoning Commission 

Sec. 2-14-10. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Charter, there is created a Planning and Zoning Commission for the City. 
(Prior code 2.48.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-14-20. - Appointment; composition; quorum. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of eight (8) members, two (2) appointed from each Council district. The members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be appointed by the City Council to serve overlapping terms of two (2) years and the City Council shall make appointments to fill unexpired terms due to vacancies. Members appointed prior to June 13, 2012 shall be allowed to complete their original appointment term. Four (4) members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall constitute a quorum. 
(Prior code 2.48.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 1, 2012) 
Sec. 2-14-30. - Qualifications for membership. 
    Each member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be a registered elector and shall have resided within the City at the time of his or her appointment for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of his or her appointment. 
(Prior code 2.48.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 2, 2012) 
Sec. 2-14-40. - Organization and rules. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair for terms of one (1) year, with eligibility for re-election. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one (1) meeting each month and keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to adopt rules for the conduct of its business, a copy of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(Prior code 2.48.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-14-50. - Powers and duties. 
    The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have all of the powers and shall perform all of the duties specified in the Charter and this Code, including the following: 
(1)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall maintain a Comprehensive Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the Comprehensive Plan as often as it deems appropriate but no less frequently than once every five (5) years. In addition to reviews initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission, City Council may direct the Planning and Zoning Commission to review one (1) or more provisions of the Comprehensive Plan. Following any review of the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall submit to City Council its findings and recommendations, if any, for consideration. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power to hear and determine whether a violation of the Land Development Code warrants a revocation of a license or permit held under Chapter 16 of this Code, as well as petitions for reinstatement. 
(3)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and make recommendations regarding appropriate zoning for annexed areas, proposed rezonings, master development plans, site development plans, planned unit developments, major subdivisions, special use permits and exactions and dedications. 
(4)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and make final decisions regarding planned sign programs and abatement of signs relating to inoperative functions. 
(5)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider and make recommendations regarding any matter that is referred by the City Council. 
(Prior code 2.48.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 3, 2012; Ord. 02  1, 2018) 
ARTICLE 15 - Arts and Humanities Council 

Sec. 2-15-10. - Arts and Humanities Council; created. 
    The Greenwood Village Arts and Humanities Council shall be charged with the duties, powers and responsibilities as are set forth in this Article. The word Council , when used in this Article, means the Greenwood Village Arts and Humanities Council. 
(Prior code 2.53.010; Ord. 26 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 2-15-20. - Appointment; composition; quorum. 
    The Council shall consist of nine (9) members, all appointed by City Council; four (4) adult members from each council district ("district members"); four (4) at-large adult members; and one (1) at-large youth member. The members of the Arts and Humanities Council shall be appointed by the City Council to serve for overlapping terms of two (2) years and the at-large youth member for two (2) years. The City Council shall make appointments to fill unexpired terms due to vacancies. Four (4) members of the Council shall constitute a quorum. 
(Prior code 2.53.020; Ord. 26 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 19 1, 2012; Ord. 02 ,  1, 2019) 
Sec. 2-15-30. - Qualifications for membership. 
    On the date of appointment, each district member shall be a registered elector of the City and shall have resided within the City for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of appointment. The at-large youth member shall be a young adult between the ages of sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) years or a junior or senior in high school at the time of appointment and must have resided with the City for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of the appointment. No member of the City staff shall be a member of the Council. 
(Prior code 2.53.030; Ord. 26 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 19 2, 2012; Ord. 02 ,  2, 2019) 
Sec. 2-15-30. - Qualifications for membership. 
    On the date of appointment, each district member shall be a registered elector of the City and shall have resided within the City for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of appointment. No member of the City staff shall be a member of the Council. 
(Prior code 2.53.030; Ord. 26 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 19 2, 2012) 
Sec. 2-15-40. - Organization; conduct of business; rules. 
(a)  At the first meeting of each calendar year, the Council shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair from its voting members to serve for a term of one (1) year. The Vice Chair shall have the authority to act as Chair during the absence or disability of the Chair. The Chair shall be entitled to enter into all discussions of the Council and to vote on all questions before the council, but cannot make or second any motion. The adoption of any resolution or motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of those members of the Council present at the meeting at which the vote is taken. In the case of a tie vote, the motion fails. 
(b)  No member of the Council or immediate family shall receive compensation or be eligible for grants or scholarships sponsored by the Council or the City. 
(c)  Council members and their immediate family may participate in art exhibits sponsored by the Council or the City. Council members are prohibited from receiving cash awards for their work of art submitted for any art show sponsored by the Council or the City. 
(d)  The Council shall have the power to adopt by resolution additional rules, not inconsistent with this Chapter or other provisions of this Code, for the conduct of its proceedings, including: 
(1)  All meetings and hearings of the Council or of any committee thereof shall be open to the public. The Council shall keep minutes of its proceedings and those minutes shall be filed in the office of the parks and recreation department. All such minutes shall be available for public inspection. 
(2)  At any meeting or hearing, any interested person may appear in person or by agent or attorney and offer evidence or testimony. 
(3)  The City Attorney and other City officials shall advise and assist the Council in the performance of its duties as requested by the Council. 
(Prior code 2.53.040; Ord. 26 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 19 3, 2012) 
Sec. 2-15-50. - Powers and duties. 
    The Arts and Humanities Council shall have all of the powers set forth below and shall perform all of the following duties: 
(1)  Encourage the production, presentation, exhibition, advancement or preservation of art, music, theater, dance, literature, zoology, botany, anthropology, cultural history or natural history through programs and events that add to those already available through the Curtis Arts and Humanities Center. 
(2)  Implement the City's public arts policy and provide recommendations to the City Council regarding the same. 
(3)  Initiate and produce fundraising events for the benefit of the production, presentation, exhibition, advancement or preservation of art, music, theater, dance, literature, zoology, botany, anthropology, cultural history or natural history and for the acquisition of public art in the City. 
(4)  Promote the arts and art education in the community. 
(5)  Provide recommendations to the City Council for the purpose of enhancing the City's cultural identity and promoting the arts. 
(Prior code 2.53.050; Ord. 26 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 19 4, 2012) 
Sec. 2-15-60. - Submission of budget. 
    Monies required for the operation of the Council shall come from donations, proceeds of fundraising events and grants secured by the Council and held within the Arts and Humanities Special Revenue Fund. The City Manager shall submit for consideration by the City Council an annual budget within the Arts and Humanities Special Revenue Fund for the reasonable expenses of the Council, which shall also contain an estimate of anticipated revenues for the next calendar year. 
(Prior code 2.53.060; Ord. 26 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
CHAPTER 4 - Revenue and Finance 
ARTICLE 1 - Fiscal Procedures 

Sec. 4-1-10. - Deposits and investments. 
    The Finance Director shall deposit all of the funds and moneys which come into his or her possession by virtue of his or her office as Finance Director in the name of the City in one (1) or more responsible banks located in the state of Colorado which have been designated by written resolution of the City Council. The City Council may also authorize the Finance Director, by written resolution, to invest all or any part of such funds in securities which are authorized for such investment by state law. 
(Prior code 3.04.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-1-20. - Annual audit. 
    The City Council shall select a qualified person as auditor and cause to be made an annual audit of the financial affairs and transactions of the City in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
(Prior code 3.04.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 2 - General and Special Funds 

Sec. 4-2-10. - General Fund created. 
(a)  There is established a fund to be known as the General Fund. All revenues not specifically allocated to any other fund shall be placed in the General Fund. All general functions of the City shall be financed by expenditures from the General Fund. 
(b)  The General Fund may contain a line item for contingencies. 
(Prior code 3.24.010, 3.24.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-2-20. - Special funds. 
    Additional funds which shall be known as special funds may be created by ordinance to provide for moneys to be held or used for special purposes, such as: depreciation and obsolescence; debt service; equipment and building replacement; special services; local improvements; City-owned utilities; trust funds and endowments; and such other purposes as the City Council may determine. 
(Prior code 3.24.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-2-30. - Curtis School Fund. 
    There is established a fund to be known as the Curtis School Fund, for the purpose of providing moneys for improvements to the Curtis School building located northwest of Orchard Road and South University Boulevard. The City Council may each year budget and appropriate moneys for said Fund. Donations received from individuals or businesses for such improvements shall be credited to the Fund. Moneys which are not expended during the year shall be accumulated and retained in the Fund for use in subsequent years. Payments from the Fund shall be pursuant to a duly adopted motion of the City Council. 
(Prior code 3.24.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-2-40. - Employee Award and Emergency Financial Assistance Fund. 
    There is established a fund to be known as the Employee Award and Emergency Financial Assistance Fund, for the purpose of paying bonuses or cash awards to employees who have rendered outstanding services to the City, and for the purpose of providing financial assistance to employees who are the victims of a catastrophic occurrence or emergency. The City Council may from time to time transfer moneys from the General Fund to the Employee Award and Emergency Financial Assistance Fund. Unexpended moneys in the Employee Award and Emergency Financial Assistance Fund shall be accumulated and retained in the Fund for use in subsequent years. Payment from the Fund shall be pursuant to a duly adopted motion of the City Council. 
(Prior code 3.24.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-2-50. - Insurance Reserve Fund. 
    There is established a fund to be known as the Insurance Reserve Fund, for the purpose of paying operation of the Fund; for paying attorneys' fees, costs and expenses related to litigation to which the City, its officers, agents or employees are a party; for paying claims against the City which have been settled or compromised; for paying judgments rendered against the City; and for securing and paying insurance premiums for liability insurance. The City Council shall have the power to transfer from time to time moneys from the General Fund to the Insurance Reserve Fund. Unexpended moneys in the Insurance Reserve Fund shall be accumulated and retained in the Fund for use in subsequent years. 
(Prior code 3.24.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-2-60. - Police Forfeitures Fund. 
    There is established a fund to be known as the Police Forfeitures Fund, for the purpose of receiving moneys paid to the Police Department pursuant to the abatement of public nuisances statutes, the Colorado Contraband Forfeiture Act or federal forfeiture statutes. The moneys in the Fund shall be used by the Police Department for law enforcement purposes. Moneys which are not expended during the year shall be accumulated and retained in the Fund for use in subsequent years. 
(Prior code 3.24.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-2-70. - Public Improvements Fund. 
    There is established a fund to be known as the Public Improvements Fund, for the purpose of paying the cost of capital improvements. The City Council shall have power to define by ordinance the rules and regulations pertaining to such Fund, and shall have power to transfer from time to time moneys from the General Fund to the Public Improvements Fund. Appropriations for construction or other permanent improvements from the Public Improvements Fund shall not lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made has been accomplished or abandoned. Unencumbered balances from projects accomplished or abandoned shall be used for payment of any outstanding bonded indebtedness of the City or, if none, transferred by direction of the City Council. 
(Prior code 3.24.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-2-80. - Contributions line item. 
    There is established a line item in the nondepartmental budget of the General Fund to be known as the Contributions Line Item, for the purpose of making cash donations to organizations that provide public improvements or services which benefit or promote the public health, safety and welfare, with primary consideration being given to organizations which benefit directly the citizens of the City or which provide services or amenities not provided by the City. Payment from the contributions line item shall be pursuant to a duly adopted motion of the City Council. 
(Prior code 3.24.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 3 - Sales and Use Tax 

Sec. 4-3-10. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of the levy of the tax imposed by this Article are the raising of funds for the payment of the expenses of operating and improving the City and for the payment of principal and interest due upon any general obligation bonds lawfully authorized and issued by and on behalf of the City. 
(Prior code 3.08.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-20. - Legislative intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of the City Council, in exercising the home rule powers provided by the Colorado Constitution, that through this legislation and in the manner described herein, every person who stores or puts to any use any tangible personal property or taxable services is exercising a taxable privilege. All sales, leases and purchases of tangible personal property and taxable services defined in this Article are taxable unless specifically exempted in this Article. The sales tax imposed upon tangible personal property by this Article applies to each transfer of ownership, possession and control of such property and may occur more than once during the life of the property. 
(b)  The sales tax is a transaction tax levied upon all sales, purchases and leases of tangible personal property and taxable services sold or leased by persons engaged in business in the City and is collected by the retailer or lessor and remitted to the City. The use tax is levied upon the privilege of persons in the City to store, use, distribute or consume tangible personal property located in the City and taxable services purchased or leased at retail and furnished within the City, whether purchased or leased inside or outside the City, and not subject to the sales tax imposed by this Article. The use tax is remitted to the City by the persons storing, using, distributing or consuming the tangible personal property or taxable services. The use tax is a complement to the sales tax, and its purposes are to equalize competition between in-City and out-of-City retailers and lessors of tangible personal property and services to eliminate incentives for City residents to leave the City to purchase or lease tangible personal property and taxable services. 
(Prior code 3.08.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-30. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Agricultural producer means a person regularly engaged in the business of using land for the production of commercial crops or commercial livestock. The term includes farmers, market gardeners, commercial fruit growers, livestock breeders, dairymen, poultrymen, and other persons similarly engaged, but does not include a person who breeds or markets animals, birds, or fish for domestic pets nor a person who cultivates, grows, or harvests plants or plant products exclusively for that person's own consumption or casual sale. 
    Aircraft means a device that is used or intended to be used for flight in the air. 
    Aircraft part means any tangible personal property that is intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft. 
    Aircraft simulator means a flight simulator training device (FSTD) as defined in Part I of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations that is qualified in accordance with Part 60 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations for use in a Federal Aviation Administration approved flight training program. 
    Aircraft simulator part means any tangible personal property that is originally designed and intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft, and which will also function when it is permanently affixed or attached as a component part of an aircraft simulator. 
    Airline company means any operator who engages in the carriage by aircraft of persons or property as a common carrier for compensation or hire, or the carriage of mail, or any aircraft operator who operates regularly between two (2) or more points and publishes a flight schedule. Airline company shall not include operators whose aircraft are all certified for a gross takeoff weight of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds or less and who do not engage in scheduled service or mail carriage service. 
    Auction means any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer who is either the agent for the owner of such property or is in fact the owner thereof. 
    Automotive vehicle means any vehicle or device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, or any device used or designed for aviation or flight in the air. "Automotive vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers or mobile homes. "Automotive vehicle" shall not include devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Business means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, direct or indirect. 
    Candy means a preparation of sugar, honey, or other natural or artificial sweeteners in combination with chocolate, fruit, nuts, or other ingredients or flavorings in the form of bars, drops, or pieces. Candy does not include any preparation containing flour, products that require refrigeration or marijuana infused products. 
    Carrier access services means the services furnished by a local exchange company to its customers who provide telecommunications services which allow them to provide such telecommunications services. 
    Charitable organization means any entity which: (a) has been certified as a not-for-profit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; and (b) is a religious or charitable organization. As used in this definition, a "charitable organization" is an organization which exclusively, and in a manner consistent with existing laws and for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons, freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental or spiritual needs of persons, and which thereby lessens the burdens of government. 
    Coins means monetized bullion or other forms of money manufactured from gold, silver, platinum, palladium or other such metals now, in the future or heretofore designated as a medium of exchange under the laws of this State, the United States or any foreign nation. 
    Coin operated device means any device operated by coins or currency or any substitute therefor. 
    Collection costs shall include, but are not limited to, all costs of audit, assessment, bank fees, hearings, execution, lien filing, distraint, litigation, locksmith fees, auction fees and costs, prosecution and attorney fees. 
    Commercial packaging materials means containers, labels, and/or cases, that become part of the finished product to the purchaser, used by or sold to a person engaged in manufacturing, compounding, wholesaling, jobbing, retailing, packaging, distributing or bottling for sale, profit or use, and is not returnable to said person for reuse. Commercial packaging materials do not include commercial shipping materials. 
    Commercial shipping materials means materials that do not become part of the finished product to the purchaser which are used exclusively in the shipping process. Commercial shipping materials include but are not limited to containers, labels, pallets, banding material and fasteners, shipping cases, shrink wrap, bubble wrap or other forms of binding, padding or protection. 
    Community organization means a nonprofit entity organized and operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare, primarily engaged in promoting the common good and general welfare of the community, so long as: (1) no part of the net earnings of which insures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual; (2) no substantial part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation; and (3) which does not participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of statements), any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office. 
    Construction equipment means any equipment, including mobile machinery and mobile equipment, which is used to erect, install, alter, demolish, repair, remodel, or otherwise make improvements to any real property, building, structure or infrastructure. 
    Construction materials means tangible personal property which, when combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an integral and inseparable part of a completed structure or project, including public and private improvements. "Construction materials" include, but are not limited to, such things as: asphalt, bricks, builder's hardware, caulking materials, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty, reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wall board, wall coping, wall paper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms, or other items which do not remain as an integral or inseparable part of a completed structure or project, are not construction materials. 
    Consumer means any person in the City who purchases, uses, stores, distributes or otherwise consumes tangible personal property, other taxable products or taxable services purchased from sources inside or outside the City. 
    Contract auditor means a duly authorized agent designated by the taxing authority and qualified to conduct tax audits on behalf of and pursuant to an agreement with the municipality. 
    Contractor means any person who shall build, construct, reconstruct, alter, expand, modify, or improve any building, dwelling, structure, infrastructure, or other improvement to real property for another party pursuant to an agreement. For purposes of this definition, contractor also includes subcontractor. 
    Cover charge means a charge paid to a club or similar entertainment establishment which may, or may not, entitle the patron paying such charge to receive tangible personal property, such as food and/or beverages. 
    Data processing equipment means any equipment or system of equipment used in the storage, manipulation, management, display, reception or transmission of information. 
    Digital product means an electronic product including, but not limited to: (1) "digital images" which means works that include, but are not limited to, the following that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense as "photographs," "logos," "cartoons, or "drawings." (2) "digital audio-visual works" which means a series of related images which, when shown in succession, impart an impression of motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any, (3) "digital audio works" which means works that result from the fixation of a series of musical, spoken, or other sounds, including ringtones. For purposes of the definition of "digital audio works," "ringtones" means digitized sound files that are downloaded onto a device and that may be used to alert the customer with respect to a communication, and (4) "digital books" which means works that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense as "books." 
    Distribution means the act of distributing any article of tangible personal property for use or consumption, which may include, but not be limited to, the distribution of advertising gifts, shoppers guides, catalogs, directories, or other property given as prizes, premiums, or for goodwill or in conjunction with the sales of other commodities or services. 
    Dual residency means those situations including, but not limited to, where a person maintains a residence, place of business or business presence, both within and outside the City. A person shall be deemed to have established a legitimate residence, place of business or business presence outside of the City for purposes of dual residency if the person has a physical structure owned, leased or rented by such person which is designated by street number or road location outside of the City, has within it a telephone or telephones in the name of such person and conducts business operations on a regular basis at such location in a manner that includes the type of business activities for which the business (person), as defined in this Code, is organized. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or any portion of a building designed for occupancy as complete, independent living quarters for one (1) or more persons, having direct access from the outside of the building or through a common hall and having living, sleeping, kitchen and sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
    Engaged in business in the City means performing or providing services or selling, leasing, renting, delivering or installing tangible personal property for storage, use or consumption within the City. "Engaged in business in the City" includes, but is not limited to, any one (1) of the following activities by a person: 
a.  Directly, indirectly or by a subsidiary, maintains a building, store, office, salesroom, warehouse or other place of business within the taxing jurisdiction; 
b.  Sends one (1) or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons into the taxing jurisdiction to solicit business or to install, assemble, repair, service or assist in the use of its products, or for demonstration or other reasons; 
c.  Maintains one (1) or more employees, agents or commissioned sales persons on duty at a location within the taxing jurisdiction; 
d.  Owns, leases, rents or otherwise exercises control over real or personal property within the taxing jurisdiction; or 
e.  Makes more than one (1) delivery into the taxing jurisdiction within a twelve-month period. 
    Factory built housing means a manufactured home or modular home. 
    Farm closeout sale means full and final disposition of all tangible personal property previously used by a farmer or rancher in farming or ranching operations which are being abandoned. 
    Farm equipment means any farm tractor, as defined in Section 42-1-102(33), C.R.S., any implement of husbandry, as defined in Section 42-1-102(44), C.R.S., and irrigation equipment having a per unit purchase price of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, attachments and bailing wire, binders twine and surface wrap used primarily and directly in any farm operation. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, parts that are used in the repair or maintenance of the farm equipment described in this paragraph, all shipping pallets, crates, or aids paid for by a farm operation, and aircraft designed or adapted to undertake agricultural applications. Farm equipment also includes, regardless of purchase price, dairy equipment. Except for shipping pallets, crates or aids used in the transfer or shipping of agricultural products, farm equipment does not include: (1) vehicles subject to the registration requirements of Section 42-3-103, C.R.S., regardless of the purpose for which such vehicles are used; (2) machinery, equipment, materials, and supplies used in a manner that is incidental to a farm operation; (3) maintenance and janitorial equipment and supplies; and (4) tangible personal property used in any activity other than farming, such as office equipment and supplies and equipment and supplies used in the sale or distribution of farm products, research, or transportation. 
    Farm operation means the production of any of the following products for profit, including, but not limited to, a business that hires out to produce or harvest such products: 
a.  Agricultural, viticultural, fruit, and vegetable products; 
b.  Livestock; 
c.  Milk; 
d.  Honey; and 
e.  Poultry and eggs. 
    Finance director means the Finance Director of the City or such other person designated by the City. Finance Director shall also include such person's designee. 
    Food for home consumption means food for domestic home consumption as defined in 7 U.S.C. sec. 2012 (k) (2014), as amended, for purposes of the supplemental nutrition assistance program, or any successor program, as defined in 7 U.S.C. sec. 2012 (t), as amended; except that "food" does not include carbonated water marketed in containers; chewing gum; seeds and plants to grow foods; prepared salads and salad bars; packaged and unpackaged cold sandwiches; deli trays; and hot or cold beverages served in unsealed containers or cups that are vended by or through machines or non-coin-operated coin-collecting food and snack devices on behalf of a vendor. 
    Garage sales means sales of tangible personal property, except automotive vehicles, occurring at the residence of the seller, where the property to be sold was originally purchased for use by members of the household where such sale is being conducted. The term includes, but is not limited to, yard sales, estate sales, and block sales. 
    Gross sales means the total amount received in money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all sales, leases or rentals of tangible personal property or services. 
    Internet access services means services that provide or enable computer access by multiple users to the internet, but shall not include that portion of packaged or bundled services providing phone or television cable services when the package or bundle includes the sale of internet access services. 
    Internet subscription service means software programs, systems, data and applications available online through rental, lease or subscription, that provide information and services including, but not limited to, data linking, data research, data analysis, data filtering or record compiling. 
    License means a City sales and use tax license. 
    Linen services means services involving the provision and cleaning of linens, including but not limited to rags, uniforms, coveralls and diapers. 
    Lodging services means the furnishing of rooms or accommodations by a person, partnership, association, corporation, estate, representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person who, for consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel, inn, bed and breakfast residence, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, auto camp, trailer court and park, or similar establishment, for a period of less than thirty (30) days under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement. 
    Machinery means any apparatus consisting of interrelated parts used to produce an article of tangible personal property. The term includes both the basic unit and any adjunct or attachment necessary for the basic unit to accomplish its intended function. 
    Manufactured home means any preconstructed building unit or combination of preconstructed building units, without motive power, where such unit or units are manufactured in a factory or at a location other than the residential site of the completed home, which is designed and commonly used for occupancy by persons for residential purposes, in either temporary or permanent locations, and which unit or units are not licensed as a vehicle. 
    Manufacturing means the operation or performance of an integrated series of operations which places a product, article, substance, commodity, or other tangible personal property in a form, composition or character different from that in which it was acquired whether for sale or for use by a manufacturer. The change in form, composition or character must result in a different product having a distinctive name, character or use from the raw or prepared materials. 
    Medical marijuana means marijuana acquired, possessed, cultivated, manufactured, delivered, transported, supplied, sold, or dispensed to a person who qualifies as a patient with a debilitating medical condition(s) under Article XVIII, Section 14, of the Colorado Constitution, and which person holds a valid "registry identification card" issued by the State of Colorado pursuant to Colorado Constitution, Article XVIII, Section 14. 
    Mobile machinery and self-propelled construction equipment means those vehicles, self-propelled or otherwise, which are not designed primarily for the transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which may have originally been designed for the transportation of persons or cargo over the public highways, and those motor vehicles which may have originally been designed for the transportation of persons or cargo but which have been redesigned or modified by the mounting thereon of special equipment or machinery, and which may be only incidentally operated or moved over the public highways. This definition includes but is not limited to wheeled vehicles commonly used in the construction, maintenance, and repair of roadways, the drilling of wells, and the digging of ditches. 
    Modular home means any structure that consists of multiple sections fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation and assembly at the building site, and is constructed to the building codes adopted by the State Division of Housing, created in Section 24-32-706, C.R.S., and is designed to be installed on a permanent foundation. 
    Motor fuel means gasoline, casing head or natural gasoline, benzol, benzene and naphtha, gasohol and any other liquid prepared, advertised, offered for sale, sold for use or used or commercially usable in internal combustion engines for the generation of power for the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft or railroad cars or railroad locomotives. 
    Newspaper means a publication printed on newsprint, intended for general circulation and published regularly at short intervals, containing information and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The term "newspaper" does not include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit bulletins, advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs, reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications that include an updating or revision service, or books or pocket editions of books. 
    Online garage sales means sales of tangible personal property, except automotive vehicles, occurring online, where the property to be sold was originally purchased for use by the seller or members of the seller's household. 
    Parent means a parent of a student. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Photovoltaic system means a power system designed to supply usable solar power by means of photovoltaics, a method of converting solar energy into direct current electricity using semiconducting materials that create voltage or electric current in a material upon exposure to light. It consists of an arrangement of several components, including solar panels to absorb and convert sunlight into electricity, a solar inverter to change the electric current from DC to AC, as well as mounting, cabling, metering systems and other electrical accessories to set up a working system. 
    Precious metal bullion means any precious metal, including but not limited to, gold, silver, platinum, palladium, that has been put through a process of refining and is in such a state or condition that its value depends upon its precious metal content and not its form. 
    Prepress preparation material means all materials used by those in the printing industry including, but not limited to, airbrush color photos, color keys, dies, engravings, light-sensitive film, light-sensitive paper, masking materials, Mylar, plates, proofing materials, tape, transparencies, and veloxes, which are used by printers in the preparation of customer specific layouts or in plates used to fill customers' printing orders, which are eventually sold to a customer, either in their original purchase form or in an altered form, and for which a sales or use tax is demonstrably collected from the printer's customer, if applicable, either separately from the printed materials or as part of the inclusive price therefor. Materials sold to a printer which are used by the printer for the printer's own purposes, and are not sold, either directly or in an altered form, to a customer, are not included within this definition. 
    Preprinted newspaper supplements shall mean inserts, attachments or supplements circulated in newspapers that: (1) are primarily devoted to advertising; and (2) the distribution, insertion, or attachment of which is commonly paid for by the advertiser. 
    Prescription drugs for animals means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. Sect. 301, et. seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "Rx Only", and is dispensed in accordance with any order in writing, dated and signed by a licensed veterinarian specifying the animal for which the medicine or drug is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Prescription drugs for humans means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. Sect. 301, et. seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "Rx Only", and is dispensed in accordance with any written or electronic order dated and signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist, or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and any required information of the patient for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Price or purchase price means the aggregate value measured in currency paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered in consummation of a sale, without any discount from the price on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, and exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal government or by this article, and, in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the same time and place of the exchange, if: (1) Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business, or (2) Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration, or certification under the laws of this state, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft. Any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax. 
    Price or purchase price includes: 
a.  The amount of money received or due in cash and credits. 
b.  Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
c.  Any consideration valued in money, whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the purchase price and other media of exchange. 
d.  The total price charged on credit sales including finance charges which are not separately stated at the time of sale. An amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a promissory note; except the interest or carrying charge set out separately from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and separately stated at the time of sale is not part of the purchase price. 
e.  Installation, applying, remodeling or repairing the property, delivery and wheeling-in charges included in the purchase price and not separately stated. 
f.  Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible personal property to the purchaser. 
g.  Indirect federal manufacturers' excise taxes, such as taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock. 
h.  The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon. 
    Price or purchase price shall not include: 
a.  Any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Colorado or by any political subdivision thereof. 
b.  The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is to be sold thereafter in the retailers' usual course of business. This is not limited to exchanges in Colorado. Out of state trade-ins are an allowable adjustment to the purchase price. 
c.  Discounts from the original price if such discount and the corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the purchaser, and the seller is not reimbursed for the discount by the manufacturer or someone else. An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales. 
    Private communications services means telecommunications services furnished to a subscriber, which entitles the subscriber to exclusive or priority use of any communication channel or groups of channels, or to the exclusive or priority use of any interstate inter-communications system for the subscriber's stations. 
    Prosthetic devices for animals means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for animal use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed veterinarian. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
    Prosthetic devices for humans means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular patient; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Prosthetic devices include, but are not limited to, prescribed auditory, ophthalmic or ocular, cardiac, dental, or orthopedic devices or appliances, and oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
    Purchase or sale means the acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property, other taxable products or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, sold, used, stored, distributed or consumed. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales and property and services acquired by: 
a.  Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
b.  A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property, other taxable products, or taxable services; 
c.  Performance of taxable services; or 
d.  Barter or exchange for other tangible personal property, other taxable products, or services. 
    Purchase and sale do not include: 
a.  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership; 
b.  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
c.  The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its stockholders, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
d.  A transfer of a partnership or limited liability company interest; 
e.  Reserved; 
f.  The transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership or limited liability company, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
g.  The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder; 
h.  The transfer of assets from a parent company to a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary company; 
i.  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent company to a parent company or to another subsidiary which is owned at least eighty percent (80%) by the parent corporation, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets; or 
j.  The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary companies, between subsidiary companies closely held by the same parent company, or between companies which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by this Article was paid by the transferor company at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating or physical changing of the assets by the transferor company. To such an extent, any transfer referred to in this paragraph (j) shall constitute a sale. For the purposes of this paragraph j), a closely held subsidiary corporation is one in which the parent company owns stock possessing at least eighty percent (80%) of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least eighty percent (80%) of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
    Rail carrier means as defined in Section 10102 of Title 49 of the United States Code as of October 10, 2013, and as it may be amended hereafter. 
    Rail carrier part means any tangible personal property that is originally designed and intended to be permanently affixed or attached as a component part of a locomotive or rail car used by a rail carrier. 
    Recreation services means all services relating to athletic or entertainment participation events and/or activities including but not limited to pool, golf, billiards, skating, tennis, bowling, health/athletic club memberships, coin operated amusement devices, video games and video club memberships. 
    Renewable energy means any energy resource that is naturally regenerated over a short time scale and derived directly from the sun (such as thermal, photochemical, and photoelectric), indirectly from the sun (such as wind, hydropower, and photosynthetic energy stored in biomass), or from other natural movements and mechanisms of the environment (such as geothermal and tidal energy). Renewable energy does not include energy resources derived from fossil fuels, waste products from fossil sources, or waste products from inorganic sources. 
    Resident means a person who resides or maintains one (1) or more places of business within the City, regardless of whether that person also resides or maintains a place of business outside of the City. 
    Retail sale means all sales except wholesale sales. 
    Retailer means any person selling, leasing or renting tangible personal property or services at retail. Retailer shall include any: 
a.  Auctioneer; 
b.  Salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales as a direct or indirect agent of or obtains such property or services sold from a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer; 
c.  Charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes; and 
d.  Retailer-contractor, when acting in the capacity of a seller of building supplies, construction materials, and other tangible personal property. 
    Retailer-contractor means a contractor who is also a retailer of building supplies, construction materials, or other tangible personal property, and purchases, manufactures, or fabricates such property for sale (which may include installation), repair work, time and materials jobs, and/or lump sum contracts. 
    Return means any form prescribed by the city/town administration for computing and reporting a total tax liability. 
    Sale that benefits a Colorado school means a sale of a commodity or service from which all proceeds of the sale, less only the actual cost of the commodity or service to a person or entity as described in this Code, are donated to a school or a school-approved student organization. 
    Sales tax means the tax to be collected and remitted by a retailer on sales taxed under this Article. 
    School means a public or nonpublic school for students in kindergarten through 12th grade or any portion thereof. 
    Security system services means electronic alarm and/or monitoring services. Such term does not include non-electronic security services such as consulting or human or guard dog patrol services. 
    Soft drink means a nonalcoholic beverage that contains natural or artificial sweeteners. "Soft drink" does not include beverages that contain milk or milk products, soy, rice, or similar milk substitutes, or greater than fifty percent (50%) of vegetable or fruit juice by volume. 
    Software program means a sequence of instructions that can be measured, interpreted and executed by an electronic device (e.g. a computer, tablets, smart phones) regardless of the means by which it is accessed or the medium of conveyance. Software program includes: (1) Custom software program, which is a software program prepared to the special order or specifications of a single customer; (2) Pre-written software program, which is a software program prepared for sale or license to multiple users, and not to the special order or specifications of a single customer. Pre-written software is commonly referred to as "canned," "off-the-shelf (COTS)," "mass produced" or "standardized;" (3) Modified software, which means pre-written software that is altered or enhanced by someone other than the purchaser to create a program for a particular user; and (4) The generic term "software," "software application," as well as "updates," "upgrades," "patches," "user exits," and any items which add or extend functionality to existing software programs. 
    Software as a service means software that is rented, leased or subscribed to from a provider and used at the consumer's location, including but not limited to applications, systems or programs. 
    Software license fee means a fee charged for the right to use, access, or maintain software programs. 
    Software maintenance agreement means an agreement, typically with a software provider, that may include (1) provisions to maintain the right to use the software; (2) provisions for software upgrades including code updates, version updates, code fix modifications, enhancements, and added or new functional capabilities loaded into existing software, or (3) technical support. 
    Solar thermal systems means a system whose primary purpose is to use energy from the sun to produce heat or cold for: (1) Heating or cooling a residential or commercial building; (2) Heating or cooling water; or (3) Any industrial, commercial, or manufacturing process. 
    Sound system services means the provision of broadcast or pre-recorded audio programming to a building or portion thereof. Such term does not include installation of sound systems where the entire system becomes the property of the building owner or the sound system service is for presentation of live performances. 
    Special fuel means kerosene oil, kerosene distillate, diesel fuel, all liquefied petroleum gases, and all combustible gases and liquids for use in the generation of power for propulsion of motor vehicles upon the public highways. The term does not include fuel used for the propulsion or drawing of aircraft, railroad cars or railroad locomotives. 
    Special sales event means any sales event which includes more than three (3) vendors taking place at a single location for a limited period of time not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days. 
    Storage means any keeping or retention of, or exercise dominion or control over, or possession of, for any length of time, tangible personal property not while in transit but on a stand still basis for future use when leased, rented or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the City from any person or vendor. 
    Student means any person enrolled in a school. 
    Tangible personal property means property other than land or buildings that can be one (1) or more of the following: seen, weighed, measured, felt, touched, stored, transported, exchanged, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
    Tax means the use tax due from a consumer or the sales tax due from a retailer or the sum of both due from a retailer who also consumes. 
    Tax deficiency means any amount of tax that is not reported or not paid on or before the due date. 
    Taxable sales means gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in this Article. 
    Taxable services means services subject to tax pursuant to this Article. 
    Taxpayer means any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax pursuant to the terms of this Article. 
    Telecommunications service means the service of which the object is the transmission of any two-way interactive electronic or electromagnetic communications including but not limited to voice, image, data and any other information, by the use of any means but not limited to wire, cable, fiber optical cable, microwave, radio wave, voice over internet protocol (VoIP), or any combinations of such media, including any form of mobile two-way communication. 
    Television and entertainment services means audio or visual content, that can be transmitted electronically by any means, for which a charge is imposed. 
    Therapeutic device means devices, appliances, or related accessories that correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically created abnormality. 
    Toll free telecommunications service means a telecommunications service that allows a caller to dial a number without incurring an additional charge for the call. 
    Total tax liability means the total of all tax, penalties and/or interest owed by a taxpayer and shall include sales tax collected in excess of such tax computed on total sales. 
    Transient/temporary sale means a sale by any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods within the city for a period of no more than seven (7) consecutive days. 
    Transient/temporary vendor means any person who engages in the business of transient/temporary sales. 
    Use means the exercise, for any length of time by any person within the City of any right, power or dominion over tangible personal property or services when rented, leased or purchased at retail from sources either within or without the City from any person or vendor or used in the performance of a contract in the City whether such tangible personal property is owned or not owned by the taxpayer. Use also includes the withdrawal of items from inventory for consumption. 
    Use tax means the tax paid or required to be paid by a consumer for using, storing, distributing, or otherwise consuming tangible personal property or taxable services inside the City. 
    Wholesale sales means a sale by wholesalers to retailers, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to users or consumers not for resale; latter types of sales shall be deemed to be retail sales and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Wholesaler means any person doing an organized wholesale or jobbing business and selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for the purpose of resale, and not for storage, use, consumption or distribution. 
(Prior code 3.08.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 08 1, 2013; Ord. 1 1, 2014; Ord. No. 06 ,  1, 5-1-2017) 
Sec. 4-3-40. - Imposition of sales tax. 
(a)  Levy. There is levied and there shall be collected and paid a sales tax on the full purchase price paid or charged for tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, software maintenance agreements, and taxable services sold at retail or leased by every person exercising a taxable privilege in the City by the sale or lease of such property and services. The sales tax is levied on all sales and leases of tangible personal property or taxable services except those specifically exempted, and is collected by the retailer or lessor and remitted to the City. 
(b)  Taxable transactions and items. The sales tax shall apply as follows: 
(1)  On the purchase price paid or charged for all sales and purchases of tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, and software maintenance agreements at retail. 
(2)  On the total amount due under a lease or contract when the right to possession or use of tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, and software maintenance agreements is granted therein and such transfer of possession would be taxable under this Article if an outright sale were made. 
(3)  In the case of retail sales involving the exchange of property, on the purchase price paid or charged, including the fair market value of the property exchanged at the time and place of the exchange; excluding however, from the consideration or purchase price, the fair market value of the exchanged property, provided that such exchanged property is to be sold in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
(4)  Upon telecommunication service, carrier access services and upon telephone and telegraph services, whether furnished by public or private corporations or enterprises, for all intrastate telephone and telegraph services. 
(5)  Upon the entire amount charged to any person or persons for lodging services. 
(6)  Upon the amount paid for all meals, and beverages and cover charges, if any, furnished in any restaurant, hotel, club, hospital, nursing home or other place at which meals, food or beverages are regularly sold. 
(7)  Upon the purchase price of tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, and software maintenance agreements acquired with the purchase of a business for use in the operation of such business as such purchase price is documented in the bill or contract of sale, but in no event shall the tax be based upon a valuation of property less than its fair market value. If the purchase price of the property is not itemized in the bill or contract of sale, the tax shall be based upon the book value that the purchaser uses for income tax depreciation or upon the fair market value of the property if no book value has been established. Regardless of the method used to value the property, no deduction shall be made on account of any outstanding liabilities acquired by the purchaser of the business and property. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the sales tax: 
(1)  All sales of automotive vehicles properly titled and registered to an address outside the City. 
(2)  All sales of tangible personal property if all of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The sales are to those who reside or do business outside the City; 
b.  The articles purchased are to be delivered to the purchaser outside the City by common carrier or by the conveyance of the retailer or by mail; and 
c.  The articles purchased and delivered are used outside the City. 
(3)  All sales of gasoline or motor fuel which are taxed under Title 39, Article 27, C.R.S. 
(4)  All sales of goods manufactured in the City and sold by the manufacturer thereof directly to the ultimate consumer when delivery of such goods is made by common, contract or commercial carrier or by conveyance of the retailer or purchaser to a point outside the City for use outside the City. 
(5)  All sales to the United States or any state, or departments, institutions or political subdivisions thereof, and all sales to the City and any department thereof when made in the exercise of their governmental functions, provided that such purchases are supported by official government purchase orders or charged to the governmental entity's credit card account and are paid for by draft or warrant drawn on the governmental entity's bank account or such purchases are made pursuant to a written agreement with the governmental entity in which the purchaser is to make such purchases on behalf of the governmental entity. 
(6)  All sales to charitable organizations of tangible personal property or services to be used in the conduct of the organization's regular activities to foster its expressed charitable purpose and that possesses an exemption certificate from the City. 
(7)  All sales which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States or the State. 
(8)  All sales of drugs dispensed in accordance with a prescription and all sales of prosthetic devices. 
(9)  All sales of cigarettes. 
(10)  All charges for the furnishing of rooms or accommodations to any person who is a resident of any hotel, motel, apartment house, mobile home, trailer court or park or similar place, pursuant to a written lease for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(11)  All sales of tangible personal property to a public utility doing business both within and without the City, for use in such business operations outside the City, even though delivery is made in the City. 
(12)  All sales of construction and building materials, if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the City evidencing that a local sales or use tax has been paid or is required to be paid. 
(13)  All sales of tangible personal property or taxable services, which transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule municipality in the State at a rate equal to or greater than the rate stated in Section 4-3-60 and such tax was collected. If the rate of the sales or use tax paid to such municipality is less than the rate stated in Section 4-3-60, the difference between the tax due under this Article and the tax paid previously shall be remitted to the Finance Director. 
(14)  Automotive vehicles. 
(15)  The sale of food for domestic home consumption, as defined in this Article. 
(16)  The cost of technical support, when specifically identified, as part of software programs, licenses or maintenance. 
(Prior code 3.08.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. No. 06 ,  2, 5-1-2017) 
Sec. 4-3-50. - Imposition of use tax. 
(a)  Levy. There is levied and there shall be a use tax at the rate stated in Section 4-3-60 on the full purchase price paid for or acquisition cost of tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, software maintenance agreements, and taxable services brought into the City for the purpose of using, storing, distributing or consuming such property and services. The use tax is levied upon the privilege of storing, distributing, consuming or using in the City, personally or as part of rendering a service, tangible personal property, taxable personal property or taxable services and is paid by either the retailer or the consumer. 
(b)  Exemptions. The use, storage, distribution or consumption in the City of the following is exempted from the use tax: 
(1)  Tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, and software maintenance agreements, the sale or use of which was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another municipality or county at a rate equal to or greater than the rate stated in Section 4-3-60 and such tax was collected. If the rate of the sales or use tax paid to such municipality is less than the rate stated in Section 4-3-60, the difference between the tax due under this Article and the tax paid previously shall be remitted to the Finance Director. 
(2)  Tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, and software maintenance agreements purchased in order to be sold at retail in the City either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of business. 
(3)  Gasoline or motor fuel upon which has accrued or has been paid the tax prescribed by Title 39, Article 27, C.R.S. 
(4)  Tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, software maintenance agreements, brought into the City by a nonresident for that person's own use, storage, distribution or consumption while temporarily in the City, and the tangible personal property of a resident if such property was purchased prior to becoming a resident of the City. 
(5)  Tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, software maintenance agreements, used, stored, distributed or consumed by the United States or the State or departments, institutions or political subdivisions thereof and the City and any department thereof, in their governmental capacities only. 
(6)  Tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, software maintenance agreements, purchased from a nonresident retailer by a resident common carrier, resident public utility or resident construction company, which tangible personal property is stored in the City but not used or consumed in the City. 
(7)  Tangible personal property of a person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit or use any product, which tangible, personal property becomes an ingredient or component part of the product which is manufactured or compounded and the container, label or furnished shipping case. 
(8)  Electricity, gas, coal, wood, nuclear fuel, fuel oil or coke for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, telecommunication services, street and railroad transportation services and all industrial uses; and newsprint and printers' ink used to produce newspaper. 
(9)  Tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, software maintenance agreements, used, stored, distributed or consumed by charitable organizations in the conduct of the organization's regular activities to foster its charitable purpose, provided that the organization obtains from the City a charitable organization license pursuant to Section 6-1-30 and presents the license as required. 
(10)  Cattle, sheep, lambs, swine and goats; and mares and stallions used for breeding purposes. 
(11)  Automotive vehicles and parts and accessories therefor when used or engaged in interstate commerce. 
(12)  Tangible personal property, software programs, software license fees, and software maintenance agreements, or services which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States or the State. 
(13)  Prosthetic devices and drugs dispensed in accordance with a prescription. 
(14)  The storage of construction and building materials. 
(15)  Automotive vehicles. 
(16)  The cost of technical support, when specifically identified, as part of software programs, licenses or maintenance. 
(Prior code 3.08.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. No. 06 ,  3, 5-1-2017) 
Sec. 4-3-60. - Rate of tax. 
(a)  The amount of tax levied is three percent (3%) of the purchase price of tangible personal property or taxable services. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above, in order to avoid fractions of pennies, the tax payable by the purchaser or consumer to the retailer shall be computed in accordance with schedules or systems approved by the Finance Director. The schedules or systems shall be designed so that no tax levied by this Article is charged on any purchase of sixteen cents ($0.16) or less. However, the use of the schedules in collecting taxes from purchasers shall not relieve the retailer from liability for payment of the full amount of the tax levied in Subsection (a) on all of the taxable sales or services. 
(Prior code 3.08.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-70. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsection (b) hereof, the tax to be collected as required by this Article shall be stated and charged separately from the purchase price and shown separately from the purchase price on any record thereof at the time the sale is made or at the time when evidence of the sale is issued or employed by the retailer; provided that, when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price or charge, shall be a debt from the purchaser to the retailer until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. The tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the retailer, as trustee for, agent of and on account of the City, and the retailer shall be liable for the collection thereof for and on account of the City. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit any retailer selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink from including in the purchase price for such drinks any tax levied under this Article. The brackets and tax amounts designated in Section 4-3-60 shall be used by such retailers in determining amounts to be included in such prices as provided herein. No such retailer shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the tax levied by this Article is not considered as an element in the purchase price of such drinks to the consumer. 
(Prior code 3.08.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-80. - Tax money in possession of retailer held in trust. 
    All sums of money paid by a purchaser to a retailer as taxes imposed by this Article shall be and remain public monies that are the property of the City. The retailer, as agent and trustee of and for the City, shall hold such moneys in trust for the sole use and benefit of the City until paid to the Finance Director as herein provided. As trustee for and agent of the City, the retailer/taxpayer is specifically prohibited from expending the taxes collected on behalf of the City. If the taxpayer is liable to the City for taxes collected and not remitted, and is unable to pay the taxes owed due to a lack of cash, the taxpayer is in violation of this Code. Should the taxpayer fail to have cash available to pay for the taxes collected, the taxpayer shall be deemed to have committed an act of fraud against the City and shall be subject to applicable penalties as outlined in Section 4-3-310. 
(Prior code 3.08.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-90. - Tax on credit or secured sales; bad debts. 
(a)  When tangible personal property is sold under a conditional sales contract or lease-purchase agreement whereby the retailer retains title as security for all or part of the purchase price, or whenever the retailer takes a purchase money security interest on such tangible personal property to secure all or part of the purchase price, the total tax based on the total purchase price shall become immediately due and payable. This tax shall be charged and collected by the retailer. No refund or credit shall be allowed to either party to the transaction in case of repossession. 
(b)  Taxes paid on sales which are represented by accounts not secured by conditional sales contracts, lease-purchase agreements or purchase money security interests, and which are found to be worthless and are actually and properly charged off as bad debts for the purpose of the income tax imposed by the laws of the State, may be credited upon a subsequent payment of the tax provided in this Article; however, if any such accounts are thereafter collected by the retailer, a tax shall be paid upon the amounts collected. 
(Prior code 3.08.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-100. - Street index guide. 
    The Finance Director shall make available to any requesting retailer a street index guide showing the boundaries of the City. The requesting retailer may rely on such street index guide and any update available to such retailer in determining whether to collect a sales tax. No penalty shall be imposed or action for deficiency maintained against such a retailer who in good faith complies with the most recent street index guide available. 
(Prior code 3.08.180; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-110. - Remittance of sales tax. 
(a)  Retailers shall remit to the City taxes collected pursuant to this Article. 
(b)  The Finance Director may authorize a retailer to remit the sales tax on a basis other than an accrual basis pursuant to the written request of the retailer. 
(c)  Every retailer shall file a tax return each month with the Finance Director on or before the twentieth (20th) day of each month for the preceding month and remit the tax due to the Finance Director simultaneously therewith. 
(d)  If any retailer shall, during any reporting period, or for any transaction, collect as a tax an amount in excess of the rate stated in Section 4-3-60, the retailer shall remit to the Finance Director the full amount of the tax imposed and such excess. If the retailer under-collects tax on any sale, the retailer shall remit the full amount actually due in accordance with Section 4-3-60. The retailer shall not net over-collected and under-collected taxes for reporting or remittance purposes. 
(Prior code 3.08.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-120. - Remittance of use tax. 
(a)  Every person who operates or maintains a business in the City, and who purchases or leases tangible personal property for use, storage, distribution or consumption in the City in connection with the business and taxable hereunder, and who has not paid the tax imposed by this Article to a retailer required or authorized to collect the same, shall monthly make a return and pay the tax due to the Finance Director, on or before the twentieth (20th) day of each calendar month following the month in which such purchase or lease was consummated or such later date as is approved by the Finance Director. 
(b)  Every resident of the City who purchases or leases tangible personal property for use, storage, distribution or consumption in the City and taxable hereunder, and who has not paid the tax imposed thereon by this Article to a retailer required or authorized to collect the same, shall make a return and pay the tax due to the Finance Director within thirty (30) days from the purchase or lease of such tangible personal property unless a reporting period greater than thirty (30) days is approved by the Finance Director. 
(c)  Every owner or lessee of real property in the City and of improvements and structures located upon real property in the City upon which tangible personal property acquired from sources outside the City is attached or affixed, who has not paid the tax imposed by this Article thereon to a retailer required or authorized to collect the same, shall make a return and pay the tax due to the Finance Director within thirty (30) days from the purchase or lease of such tangible personal property unless a reporting period greater than thirty (30) days is approved by the Finance Director. 
(d)  If the accounting method regularly employed by the retailer in the transaction of his or her business or other conditions are such that reports of sales made on a calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship on the retailer, the Finance Director may, upon written request of the retailer, accept returns at such intervals as will, in the Finance Director's opinion, better suit the convenience of the retailer and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax. The Finance Director may, by rule, permit a retailer whose monthly tax collected is less than sixty dollars ($60.00) to make returns and pay taxes at intervals greater than one (1) month. The Finance Director may require a bond or other financial guarantee to secure payment of the tax on such less frequent basis and may revoke permission to pay the tax on such basis if payment of the tax due becomes delinquent. 
(Prior code 3.08.210, 3.08.220, 3.08.230; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-130. - Consolidation of returns. 
    A retailer doing business in two (2) or more places or locations, whether within or without the City, and collecting taxes hereunder, may file one (1) return covering all such places or locations when accompanied by a supplemental report showing the gross and net taxable sales and the taxes collected thereon for each such place or location. 
(Prior code 3.08.240; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-140. - Tax disputes. 
    Retailers engaged in business in the City shall collect and purchasers shall pay the taxes levied by this Article, notwithstanding the fact that either the retailer or the purchaser disputes the tax liability or claims an exemption. If the application of the tax to any transaction is disputed, the retailer shall collect and the purchaser shall pay the tax, and the taxpayer may thereafter apply to the Finance Director for a refund of such taxes paid, as provided in this Article. 
(Prior code 3.08.250; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-150. - Refund of disputed tax. 
(a)  Any person who claims that a transaction or item was not taxable or claims an exemption as provided in this Article may apply for a refund of the tax paid under dispute. 
(b)  An application for a refund of sales tax paid under dispute by a purchaser who claims an exemption under Subsection 4-3-40(c) or 4-3-50(b) shall be made within sixty (60) days after the date of purchase, storage or consumption of the goods or services for which an exemption is claimed. An application for refund of taxes paid in error or by mistake shall be made within three (3) years after the date of purchase, storage or consumption of the goods for which the refund is claimed. Such applications shall be accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and shall be made upon forms prescribed and furnished by the Finance Director. 
(c)  The burden of proving that any transaction or item is not taxable or is exempt from the tax shall be upon the person asserting such claim under such reasonable requirements of proof as the Finance Director may prescribe. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application, the Finance Director shall examine the same with all due speed and shall give written notice to the applicant of his or her decision thereon. 
(Prior code 3.08.260; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-160. - Appeal of denial of refund. 
(a)  An appeal of a denial of a refund shall be submitted in writing to the Finance Director within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the denial of the refund and shall identify the amount of the refund requested and the basis for the appeal. 
(b)  An appeal of a denial of a refund may include a request for a hearing. Hearing procedures shall be as described in Section 4-3-210. 
(Prior code 3.08.265; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-170. - Right of refund not assignable. 
    The right of any person to a refund under this Article is not assignable. An application for a refund must be made by the individual who paid the tax, as shown on the sales receipt or invoice of the sale. 
(Prior code 3.08.270; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-180. - Action for recovery of refund. 
    If any person obtains any refund unlawfully, the Finance Director is empowered and directed to bring appropriate action for recovery of such refund. A conviction for the violation of Subsection 4-3-500(e) shall constitute prima facie evidence that all refunds received by such person pursuant to the application which contained the false statement were obtained unlawfully. Obtaining a refund unlawfully shall be an act of fraud against the City and shall be subject to applicable penalties as outlined in Section 4-3-310. 
(Prior code 3.08.280; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-190. - Preservation of returns and other records; confidentiality. 
(a)  Returns shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years from the date of filing with the Finance Director, after which time the Finance Director may order them destroyed. 
(b)  Except in accordance with a court order or as otherwise provided by law, the City and its agents and employees shall not divulge or make known in any way information obtained from any investigation conducted by the Finance Department or disclosed in any application, report, return or any other document kept, filed or maintained under this Article, except such information as is displayed on the tax license and license application. The persons charged with the custody of such applications, reports, returns or other documents shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained therein in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Finance Director in an action or proceeding under this Article to which the Finance Director or the City is a party or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under this Article when the report of facts shown thereby is directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of so much of the reports or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding. 
(c)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to the taxpayer or authorized representative thereof a copy of any application, report, return or any other document kept, filed or maintained in connection with such person's tax liability. Copies of such documents may be certified by the Finance Director and, when so certified, shall be evidence equal with the original documents and may be received as evidence of their contents. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and contents thereof, or the inspection of any documents by the City Attorney or other official representatives of the City. 
(e)  Notwithstanding this Section, the Finance Director may furnish to the taxing officials of the State or its political subdivisions, any other state or its political subdivisions or the United States any information contained in any application, report, return or any other document if the recipient jurisdiction agrees with the Finance Director to grant similar privileges to the City and if such information is to be used by the jurisdiction only for tax-related purposes. 
(f)  Every person who is required to obtain a license to do business in the City as required by this Code shall keep and preserve suitable records of all sales, purchases and leases made by such person, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for the collection or payment of which such person is liable hereunder. It is the duty of every such person to keep and preserve all such books, invoices and other records for a period of three (3) years following the date the taxes were due to the City. Such items shall be open for examination in accordance with Subsection 4-3-250(f). If the taxpayer has filed a tax return for any period after the due date for that period, then the records for the period must be preserved for three (3) years after the date the return was filed. If the taxpayer has not filed a tax return for any period, then the records must be preserved indefinitely. Failure to preserve all records shall be an act of fraud against the City and shall be subject to applicable penalties as outlined in Section 4-3-310. 
(Prior code 3.08.290, 3.08.300; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-200. - Examination of returns; recomputation, credits, deficiencies. 
    The Finance Director shall examine a return as soon as practicable after such return is filed. If it appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted may be greater or less than that shown in the return, the tax shall be recomputed by the Finance Director. If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the excess shall be refunded or credited against any subsequent remittance from the taxpayer. If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the amount of the deficiency with a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the deficiency, plus interest on both the deficiency and the penalty, shall be due and payable in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4-3-270. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added a fraud penalty as set forth in Section 4-3-310. 
(Prior code 3.08.310; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-210. - Investigation of records relating to taxes; hearings. 
(a)  For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, whether or not licensed under Chapter 6, Article 1, the Finance Director may hold investigations, including audits, and hearings concerning any matters covered by this Article, may examine any relevant books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person, may require the attendance of such person, any officer or employee of such person or any person having knowledge of the transactions involved, and may take testimony and evidence as proof of the information. The Finance Director shall have the power to administer oaths to such persons. 
(b)  The Finance Director may schedule a hearing, notifying all interested parties by regular mail at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing. The Finance Director is authorized to issue subpoenas as outlined in Section 4-3-220. Such hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence or filing of briefs shall be required; however, the taxpayer may elect to submit a brief, in which case the City may submit a brief. The Finance Director shall hold such hearing and issue a final decision thereon within ninety (90) days after the City's notification to the taxpayer, except that the City may extend such period if the delay in holding the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer. In any event, the Finance Director shall hold such hearing within one hundred eighty (180) days of notifying the taxpayer of the hearing. The decision shall be mailed by regular mail to the taxpayer. If a taxpayer has exhausted City remedies, the taxpayer may dispute the decision of the Finance Director either by requesting a state hearing or by appealing the decision to the District Court. 
(Prior code 3.08.320; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-220. - Subpoenas and witness fees. 
    All subpoenas issued under this Article may be served by any person over the age of eighteen (18) years. The fees of witnesses for attendance in response to a subpoena shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the District Court, such fees to be paid when the witness is excused from further attendance. When the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of the Finance Director, such fees shall be paid by the City. When a witness is subpoenaed at the instance of any other party to such proceeding, the Finance Director may require that the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee of the witness be borne by the party at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the Finance Director, in his or her discretion, may require a deposit to cover the cost of such service and witness fees prior to issuing such subpoenas. A subpoena issued as aforesaid shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued out of a court of record. 
(Prior code 3.08.330; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-230. - Attendance of witnesses and production of evidence. 
    Any judge of the District Court or the Municipal Court, upon the application of the Finance Director, may compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers, records or memoranda and the giving of testimony before the Finance Director, by an action for contempt or otherwise in the same manner as the production of evidence may be before such court. 
(Prior code 3.08.340; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-240. - Depositions. 
    The Finance Director, or any party to an investigation or hearing before the Finance Director, may cause the deposition of witnesses residing within or without the State to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for depositions in civil actions in courts of this State and, to that end, compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. 
(Prior code 3.08.350; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-250. - Audit of records. 
(a)  For the purpose of ascertaining the correct amount of tax due from any taxpayer engaged in business in the City, the Finance Director may authorize an agent to conduct an audit by examining any relevant books, accounts and records of such person. The taxpayer need not hold a license for an audit to be conducted, provided that the Finance Director finds reasonable cause to believe that taxes may be due to the City for transactions involving the taxpayer. 
(b)  All of the taxpayer's books, accounts and records shall be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by an authorized agent of the Finance Director. If any taxpayer refuses to furnish voluntarily any of the foregoing information when requested by the Finance Director or authorized agent, the Finance Director may issue a subpoena to require that the taxpayer or the taxpayer's representative attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. 
(c)  Any tax deficiency or overpayment ascertained through audit shall be computed by one (1) or more of the following methods or any other method as the agent of the Finance Director deems appropriate: 
(1)  By identifying transactions on which the tax was not properly or accurately collected or paid. 
(2)  By identifying other irregularities in the calculation of tax due. 
(3)  By estimating taxes due based on the results of testing the taxpayer's records on a statistical or other reasonable basis. 
(d)  Any charitable organization claiming exemption under this Article is subject to audit in the same manner as any other person engaged in business in the City. 
(e)  The City is authorized to audit the taxpayer's records for the thirty-six (36) calendar months preceding the month the taxpayer is notified that an audit is to be conducted. The audit period may be extended by mutual agreement of the City and the taxpayer. The ability to audit this thirty-six-month period shall not lapse due to the passage of time once the taxpayer has been notified of the audit period. If the taxpayer failed to file returns, then the City shall have the right to audit indefinitely periods not filed. If returns are filed late, then the City shall have the right to audit late returns for thirty-six (36) months following the month the return was filed. 
(f)  All taxpayer records shall be made available to the City within a fifty-mile radius of the City's sales tax office. If the taxpayer does not wish to make records available within this area, then the Finance Director may elect to assess the taxpayer for all expenses associated with sending auditors to the location selected by the taxpayer and for reasonable expenses, including food and lodging, incurred by the auditors during the period of the audit and until their return to the City. Such liability shall become part of the final audit assessment and shall be treated as an unpaid sales or other tax. 
(g)  If the taxpayer does not provide files in an organized format; if the auditors must go through taxpayer files or boxes, in order to obtain records for audit; or if the taxpayer fails to provide information in a timely fashion, the City shall be entitled to charge an hourly fee for time spent organizing, gathering or in any way assembling taxpayer records for audit. Such fee shall be determined by the Finance Director, but in no event shall the fee exceed two and one-half (2.5) times the auditor's hourly salary. 
(Prior code 3.08.360; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-260. - Coordinated audit procedure. 
(a)  Any taxpayer licensed in the City pursuant to Section 6-1-10, and holding a similar sales tax license in at least four (4) other Colorado municipalities that administer their own sales tax collection, may request a coordinated audit as provided herein. 
(b)  Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of a notice of an intended audit by any municipality that administers its own sales tax collection, the taxpayer may provide to the Finance Director, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written request for a coordinated audit indicating the municipality from which the notice of intended audit was received and the name of the official who issued such notice. Such request shall include a list of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local collection of their sales tax in which the taxpayer holds a current sales tax license and a declaration that the taxpayer will sign a waiver of any passage-of-time-based limitation upon the City's right to recover tax owed by the vendor for the audit period. 
(c)  Except as provided in Subsection (g) hereof, any taxpayer who submits a complete request for a coordinated audit and promptly signs a waiver of limitations may be audited by the City during the twelve (12) months after such request is submitted only through a coordinated audit involving all municipalities electing to participate in such an audit. 
(d)  If the City desires to participate in the audit of a taxpayer who submits a complete request for a coordinated audit pursuant to Subsection (c) hereof, the Finance Director shall so notify the finance director of the municipality whose notice of audit prompted the taxpayer's request within ten (10) days after receipt of the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit. The Finance Director shall then cooperate with other participating municipalities in the development of arrangements for the coordinated audit, including arrangement of the time during which the coordinated audit will be conducted, the period of time to be covered by the audit and a coordinated notice to the taxpayer of those records most likely to be required for completion of the coordinated audit. 
(e)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by the City, the Finance Director shall facilitate arrangements between the City and other municipalities participating in the coordinated audit unless and until an official from some other participating municipality agrees to assume this responsibility. The Finance Director shall cooperate with other participating municipalities to, whenever practicable, minimize the number of auditors that will be present on the taxpayer's premises to conduct the coordinated audit on behalf of the participating municipalities. Information obtained by or on behalf of those municipalities participating in the coordinated audit may be shared only among such participating municipalities. 
(f)  If the taxpayer's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by the City, the Finance Director shall, once arrangements for the coordinated audit between the City and other participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to the taxpayer of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be audited and the records most likely to be required by participating municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The Finance Director shall also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit. 
(g)  The coordinated audit procedures set forth in this Section shall not apply: 
(1)  When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit; 
(2)  To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to 1991; 
(3)  When a taxpayer refuses to promptly sign a waiver of limitations; or 
(4)  When a taxpayer fails to provide a timely and complete request for a coordinated audit as provided in Subsection (b) hereof. 
(Prior code 3.08.365; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-270. - Failure to make return; estimate of taxes; notices; appeal. 
(a)  If any person fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax or to file a return and pay the tax, as required by this Article, or fails, neglects or refuses to collect, report or pay any portion of the tax, the Finance Director shall make an estimate of the tax due based on available information and shall add thereto a penalty equal to the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or ten percent (10%) of the tax due, whichever is greater, and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed by Section 4-3-320, plus one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month from the date the return and tax was due, which interest shall not exceed eighteen percent (18%) in the aggregate. 
(b)  The Finance Director shall serve upon the delinquent taxpayer personally or by first-class mail, directed to the last address of the taxpayer on file with the City, written notice assessing such estimated taxes, penalty and interest. Such notice shall constitute a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment, and such assessment shall be due and payable from the taxpayer to the Finance Director within twenty (20) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing; provided, however, that, within the twenty-day period, such delinquent taxpayer may appeal the notice of assessment. 
(c)  An appeal of a notice of assessment issued to a retailer or taxpayer for failure to file a return, underpayment of tax owed or as a result of an audit shall be submitted in writing to the Finance Director within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the notice of assessment. Any such appeal shall identify the amount of tax disputed and the basis for the appeal. 
(d)  An appeal of a notice of assessment may include a request for a hearing. 
(e)  If a hearing was requested in response to the petition, the Finance Director shall notify the petitioner in writing of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 4-3-210. After such hearing, or after a consideration of the facts and figures contained in the petition if no hearing is requested, the Finance Director shall make such order in the matter as he or she deems just and proper and shall furnish a copy of such order to the petitioner. 
(Prior code 3.08.370; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-280. - Appeal from administrative hearing decision. 
    An appeal of a final decision of the Finance Director in a hearing held pursuant to Section 4-3-270 shall be commenced within thirty (30) days of such decision. 
(Prior code 3.08.375; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-290. - Duties of Enforcement Officer. 
(a)  Tax enforcement shall be the responsibility of an employee, agent or representative of the Finance Department, supervised by the Finance Director or his or her designate. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the tax enforcement employee, agent or representative to enforce this Chapter. 
(c)  The employee, agent or representative charged with tax enforcement shall be deemed a peace officer for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions delineated in Subsection (b) hereof and shall have the power to issue summonses and complaints for violations of those provisions pursuant to the Municipal Court Rules of Procedures. 
(d)  The employee, agent or representative charged with tax enforcement shall not be deemed to be a sworn member of the Police Department and shall not carry a weapon. 
(Prior code 3.08.380; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-300. - Assessment and recurring assessment penalty. 
    If any taxpayer has failed, neglected or refused to pay the tax imposed by this Article within the time specified for payment, the Finance Director may assess the following penalties, in addition to the taxes, penalties and interest provided for elsewhere in this Article, the additional amount being imposed to compensate the City for administrative and collection costs incurred in collecting such delinquent taxes: 
(1)  Upon the first or second issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per notice. 
(2)  Upon the third, fourth or fifth issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or fifteen percent (15%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(3)  Upon the sixth or more issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifty dollars ($50.00) or thirty percent (30%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(Prior code 3.08.390; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-310. - Penalties. 
(a)  Compliance penalty. A penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed for each section of this Article which the taxpayer violates. This penalty shall be in addition to any other applicable penalties and interest. 
(b)  Fraud penalty. In the event that the taxpayer commits an act of fraud upon the City, the City shall be entitled to assess a fraud penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or one hundred percent (100%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Article. An additional three-percent-per-month penalty on the amount of fraud penalty shall be added from the date the penalty was due until it is paid. 
(c)  Special penalty. In the event that the taxpayer is audited and deficiencies are found in the taxpayer's records which result in unpaid taxes owed to the City, the taxpayer shall have six (6) months from the date of the audit assessment in which to correct its records. If the deficiencies are not corrected and result in unpaid taxes due to the City in the future, then the City shall be entitled to assess a special penalty against the taxpayer. Such special penalty shall be assessed from the first day after the last day through which taxpayer's records were previously audited. The special penalty shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or fifty percent (50%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Article. 
(Prior code 3.08.400, 3.08.410, 3.08.420; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-320. - Rate of interest; method of calculation. 
    When interest is required or permitted to be charged under this Article, the annual rate of interest shall be calculated using the rate established by the State Commissioner of Banking pursuant to Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S. For the purpose of calculating the amount of interest due, the date the return and tax were due shall be determined without regard to any extension of time for payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. 
(Prior code 3.08.430; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-330. - Tax constitutes lien. 
(a)  The sales and use tax imposed by this Article, along with all penalties and interest pertaining thereto, is a first and prior lien upon the goods, stock-in-trade and business fixtures in which the retailer has an ownership interest, except for goods that have been purchased in the ordinary course of business by retail purchasers, and such lien takes priority over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature on such property. 
(b)  The sales and use tax imposed by this Article, along with all penalties and interest pertaining thereto, is a first and prior lien on the real and personal property of the taxpayer, and such lien takes priority. 
(c)  Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer is placed in receivership or bankruptcy, seized under distraint for nonpayment of property taxes or an assignment is made for the benefit of creditors, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article and for which the taxpayer is in any way liable under this Article are a prior and preferred claim against all the property of the taxpayer. No sheriff, receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any taxpayer subject to this Article under process or order of any court without first ascertaining from the Finance Director the amount of any taxes, penalties or interest due and payable under this Article. If there are any such taxes, penalties or interest due, owing or unpaid, it is the duty of such officer to first pay the amount of the taxes, penalties or interest out of the proceeds of such sale before paying any moneys to judgment creditors or other claimants, except that the officer may pay costs of the proceedings and other preexisting liens or claims taking lawful precedence over the City's claim. 
(d)  In the event that the taxpayer discharges its debts through bankruptcy, dissolution, reorganization or other means, the City shall be empowered to pursue collection of the unpaid taxes from any officer, agent, trustee or other official of the taxpayer. The City may collect the taxes due through garnishment, liens or any other lawful methods, including but not limited to enforcement actions applicable to the taxpayer as outlined in this Code. 
(e)  If any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this Article and shown due by returns filed by the taxpayer or by assessments made by the City as provided in this Article is not paid within five (5) days after it is due, the Finance Director may issue a notice, setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax penalties and interest, the date of its accrual and the fact that the City claims a first and prior lien therefor on the real and personal property of the taxpayer. The notice of lien shall be made on forms prescribed by the Finance Director and verified by the Finance Director, and may be filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in the State in which the taxpayer owns real or personal property, or with any person in possession of any personal property or rights to property belonging to the taxpayer. 
(f)  The Finance Director shall release any lien as shown on the records of the county clerk and recorder as herein provided, upon payment of all taxes, penalties and interest covered thereby, in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released. 
(Prior code 3.08.440; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-340. - Sale of business subject to lien. 
(a)  Any person who sells a business or stock of goods or closes a business shall complete and file the returns required under this Article; pay the taxes, penalties and interest due within ten (10) days of the date on which such person sold the business or stock of goods or closed the business; and indicate that it is a final return, that the business is sold or closed and the name and address of the purchaser of the business, if any. 
(b)  The tax imposed by this Article shall be a first and prior lien on the real or personal property, goods, furniture, fixtures, furnishings, equipment and/or inventory owned or used by a retailer. This lien shall take priority over all other claims or liens against the property. A purchaser of a business who has acquired the real or personal property, goods, furniture, fixtures, equipment and/or inventory of the business shall withhold sufficient funds from the purchase money to cover the amount of taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article due and unpaid until the seller provides a receipt from the Finance Director showing that such taxes, penalties and interest have been paid. If taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article are due and unpaid after the ten-day period provided herein, such purchaser of the business is personally liable for the payment of the taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article due and unpaid to the City to the same extent as the seller of the business or stock of goods. 
(c)  Any person who obtains by purchase, foreclose sale or otherwise, except at a sale conducted pursuant to Subsection 4-3-370(e), any goods, stock in trade or business fixtures owned or leased by any person takes them subject to the lien of the City for any delinquent taxes owed by the prior owner of the property and is liable to pay all delinquent taxes of the prior owner, but only up to and including the value of property so acquired. 
(Prior code 3.08.460; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-350. - Certificate of discharge of lien. 
(a)  If any real or personal property is subject to a lien for payment of tax due to the City under this Article, the Finance Director may issue a certificate of discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien if the Finance Director finds that the fair market value of that part of such property remaining subject to the lien is at least twice the amount of the unsatisfied tax liability plus the value of any liens on the property that have priority over the City's lien. 
(b)  If any real or personal property is subject to a lien for payment of tax due to the City under this Article, the Finance Director may issue a certificate of discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien if the Finance Director is paid in partial satisfaction of the tax liability an amount determined by the Finance Director to be not less than the value of the City's interest in the part of the property so discharged. In determining the value of the part of the property to be discharged, the Finance Director shall consider the fair market value of the property and the value of any liens on the property that have priority over the City's lien. 
(c)  A certificate of release of lien issued under this Section is conclusive evidence that the City's lien upon the property is extinguished, but does not extinguish or release any portion of the lien on property not specified in the release. 
(Prior code 3.08.470; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-360. - Jeopardy assessment. 
(a)  If the Finance Director finds that collection of the tax will be jeopardized for any reason, the Finance Director may declare the taxable period immediately terminated, determine the tax and issue a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment. Notwithstanding Section 4-3-270, the tax shall then be due and payable forthwith, and the Finance Director may proceed to collect the tax as provided in Section 4-3-370. 
(b)  If the taxpayer subject to a jeopardy assessment provides security for payment of the tax satisfactory to the Finance Director, the Finance Director may forego the jeopardy assessment collection proceedings. 
(Prior code 3.08.480; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-370. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Finance Director may issue a warrant directed to any employee, agent or representative of the City, commanding such person to distrain, seize and sell any personal property in which the taxpayer has an ownership interest, except such property as is exempt from the execution and sale by any statute of the State, for the payment of tax due together with interest and penalties thereon and costs of execution for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within twenty (20) days from the date of the notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment and no hearing or extension has been requested in a timely manner; 
(2)  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment and no appeal from such notice has been docketed in the Municipal Court or District Court during such time, except that if the Finance Director finds that collection of the tax will be jeopardized during such period, the Finance Director may immediately issue a distraint warrant; 
(3)  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within the time prescribed in the judgment and order of court on any appeal to the District Court; 
(4)  Immediately upon making a jeopardy assessment or issuing a demand for payment upon jeopardy assessment as provided in Section 4-3-360; or 
(5)  After or concurrently with the filing of a notice of lien as provided in Subsection 4-3-330(d). 
(b)  The Finance Director may apply to a judge of the Municipal Court for a warrant authorizing the Finance Director to search for and seize property located within the City for the purpose of enforcing the collection of taxes under this Article. The Finance Director may apply to a judge of the District Court for a warrant outside the City. The judge shall issue such warrant after the Finance Director determines that: 
(1)  The premises to which entry is sought contains property that is subject to levy and sale for taxes due; and 
(2)  At least one (1) of the preconditions of Subsection (a) hereof has been satisfied; however, if a jeopardy assessment has been declared under Section 4-3-360, the Finance Director must set forth the reasons that collection of the tax will be jeopardized. 
(c)  The procedures to be followed in issuing and executing a warrant in Municipal Court pursuant to Subsection (b) hereof shall comply with the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
(d)  The taxpayer may contest a warrant previously issued under the procedure provided by the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, except that no proceeding to contest such warrant may be brought after five (5) days prior to the date fixed for sale of the distrained property. 
(e)  The agent charged with the search and seizure shall make or cause to be made an account of the goods or effects distrained, and shall leave a copy of such account, signed by the agent making such distraint, with the owner or possessor of the property; or, if the owner or possessor of the property is unavailable at the owner's or possessor's usual place of abode, with some family member over the age of eighteen (18) years; or at the owner's or possessor's usual place of business with an employee of the owner; or if the taxpayer is a corporation, with any officer, manager, general agent or agent for process; with a statement of the sum demanded and time and place of sale. The agent charged with collection shall forthwith cause to be published a notice of the time and place of sale and a description of the property to be sold in a newspaper within the county wherein distraint is made or, in lieu thereof and in the discretion of the Finance Director, the agent shall cause such notice to be publicly posted at the county courthouse wherein such distraint is made and copies thereof shall be posted in at least two (2) other public places within the county. The time fixed for the sale shall not be less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of such notification to the owner or possessor of the property and the publication or posting of such notices. The sale may be adjourned or postponed from time to time by the agent, if the agent deems it advisable, to a date certain but not for a time to exceed in all ninety (90) days from the date first fixed for the sale. When any personal property is advertised for sale under distraint, the agent making the seizure shall proceed to sell such property at public auction, offering the property at not less than a fair minimum price that includes the expenses of making the seizure and of advertising the sale. If the amount bid for the property at the sale does not equal the fair minimum price so fixed, the agent conducting the sale may declare the same to be purchased for the City. The property so purchased may then be sold by the agent under such regulations as may be prescribed for disposing of City property. The goods, chattels or effects so distrained shall be restored to the owner or possessor if, prior to the sale, the amount due is paid, together with the expenses, fees and other charges, or they may be redeemed by any person holding a chattel mortgage or other evidence of right of possession. 
(f)  In all cases of sale, the agent making the sale shall issue a certificate of sale to each purchaser, and such certificate is prima facie evidence of the right of the agent to make such sale and conclusive evidence of the regularity of the proceedings in making the sale. The certificate transfers to the purchaser all right, title and interest of the delinquent taxpayer in and to the property sold. Where such property consists of certificates, securities, or other evidence of indebtedness in the possession of the agent, the taxpayer shall endorse such certificates to the purchaser thereof and supply the purchaser with proof of the taxpayer's authority to transfer the same or with any other requisite that may be necessary to obtain registration of the transfer of the certificate. Any surplus remaining above, first, the City's taxes, penalties, interest, costs and expenses of making the seizure and of advertising the sale; and then any amounts distributed pro rata to other jurisdictions under recorded sales, use, personal property, ad valorem, or other tax liens, shall be returned to the property owner of such person having a legal right to the property; and, on demand, the Finance Director shall render an account in writing of the sale. 
(g)  In any case where a taxpayer has refused or neglected to pay any tax due to the City under this Article and a lien has been filed as provided in Section 4-3-330, the Finance Director may, in addition to pursuing other collection remedies, certify the amount of the tax, penalties and interest due, together with the appropriate amount for costs of county collection, to the County Treasurer, to be levied against the person's property for collection by the County in the same manner as delinquent general taxes upon such property are collected. Before certifying such amounts to the County for collection, the Finance Director shall provide to the property owner an opportunity for a hearing to contest the authority of the City to impose the tax, or the amount thereof. The Finance Director shall mail the notice to the property owner by first-class mail addressed to the last known owner of the property in the records of the County Assessor. If the Finance Director's decision after a hearing affirms the imposition of charges, the decision shall include notice that the charges are due and payable within ten (10) days of the date of the decision and that, if not paid when due, they will be certified to the County Treasurer for collection, along with an appropriate amount for the cost of county collection. Whenever the Finance Director certifies any such amounts to the County Treasurer for collection, the Finance Director shall record notice of such certification with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
(Prior code 3.08.490; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-380. - Recovery of unpaid tax by action at law. 
(a)  In addition to other remedies provided in this Article, the Finance Director may treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as a debt due to the City from the taxpayer. If a taxpayer fails to pay the tax or any portion thereof or any penalty or interest thereon, when due, the Finance Director may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest in the Municipal Court or in any county or district court wherein the taxpayer resides or has a principal place of business, that has jurisdiction over the amounts sought to be collected. The return filed by the taxpayer or the notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment issued by the Finance Director is prima facie proof of the amount due. 
(b)  The City Attorney is hereby authorized upon request by the Finance Director to commence any legal action or suit for the recovery of the tax due under this Article. 
(c)  Such actions may be actions in attachment, and writs of attachment may be issued to the Sheriff. In any such proceedings, no bonds shall be required of the City, nor shall any sheriff require of the Finance Director an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings. The City may also prosecute appeals or writs of error in such cases without the necessity of providing a bond therefor. 
(d)  In any case in which a taxpayer has refused or neglected to pay any tax, penalty or interest due to the City under this Article and a lien has been filed upon any real or personal property, the Finance Director may cause a civil action to be filed in the District Court or Municipal Court in which is situated any such property subject to such lien to enforce the lien and subject any real or personal property or any right, title or interest in such property to the payment of the amount due. The Court shall decree a sale of such real property and distribute the proceeds of such sale according to the Court's findings concerning the interest of the parties and of the City. The proceedings with regard to the redemption of property from such sale and the execution of any deed of conveyance shall be in accordance with the law of foreclosures of mortgages upon real property. In any such action, the Court may appoint a receiver of the property involved in such action if equity so requires. 
(Prior code 3.08.500; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-390. - City may be party in title actions. 
    In any action affecting the title to real property or the ownership or right to possession of personal property, the City may be made a party defendant for the purpose of obtaining an adjudication or determination of its lien upon the property involved therein. 
(Prior code 3.08.510; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-400. - Injunctive relief. 
    The Finance Director may seek injunctive or other equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this Article. 
(Prior code 3.08.520; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-410. - Waiver of penalties, interest and fees by Finance Director. 
    The Finance Director is authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty, interest or fee imposed under this Article. 
(Prior code 3.08.530; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-420. - Obligations of fiduciaries and others. 
(a)  For the purpose of facilitating settlement and distribution of estates, trusts, receiverships, other fiduciary relationships and the assets of corporations in the process of dissolution or that have been dissolved, the Finance Director may agree with the fiduciary or surviving corporate directors upon an amount of taxes due from the decedent or from the decedent's estate, the trust, receivership or other fiduciary relationship, or corporation for any of the periods of tax liability under this Article. Payment in accordance with such agreement fully satisfies the tax liability for the periods that the agreement covers, unless the taxpayer has committed fraud or misrepresented a material fact regarding the tax or liability therefor. 
(b)  Except as provided in Subsection (d) hereof, any personal representative of a decedent or the estate of a decedent, any trustee, receiver or other person acting in a fiduciary capacity, or any director of a corporation in the process of dissolution or that has been dissolved, who distributes the estate or fund under such person's control without having first paid any taxes covered by this Article due from such decedent, decedent's estate, trust estate, receivership or corporation and that may be assessed within the periods authorized by this Article is personally liable to the extent of the property distributed by such person for any unpaid taxes of the decedent, decedent's estate, trust estate, receivership or corporation imposed by or due under this Article and assessed within the periods authorized by this Article. 
(c)  The distributee of a decedent's estate, a trust estate or fund and the stockholder of any dissolved corporation who receives any of the property of such decedent's estate, trust estate, fund or corporation is personally liable to the same extent that the decedent, trust estate, fund or corporation is liable under this Article. 
(d)  If a tax under this Article is due from a decedent or the decedent's estate, the personal liability of the persons enumerated in this Section shall remain in effect only if a determination of the tax due is made and notice and demand therefor issues within eighteen (18) months after the decedent's personal representative files with the Finance Director a written request for such determination, which request shall be filed after he or she has filed the decedent's final return or the decedent's estate's return to which the request applies. A request for determination under this Subsection does not extend the otherwise applicable period of limitation. 
(e)  If a tax under this Article is due from a corporation that is in the process of dissolution or has been dissolved, the personal liability of directors or stockholders as provided in this Section shall remain in effect only if a determination of the tax due is made and notice and demand issued within eighteen (18) months after the corporation files with the Finance Director a written request for such determination, which request shall be filed after it has filed the corporation's return, but only if the request states that the dissolution was begun in good faith before the expiration of the eighteen-month period and the dissolution is completed. A request for determination under this Subsection does not extend the otherwise applicable period of limitation. 
(Prior code 3.08.540; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-430. - Review of decisions of Finance Director. 
    In the event the taxpayer has exhausted all local remedies, the taxpayer may apply for a review of the decision of the Finance Director in the District Court in accordance with Section 29-2-106.1(8), C.R.S., or the taxpayer may elect to request a new hearing before the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue pursuant to Section 29-2-106.1(3), C.R.S. Such review must be sought not later than thirty (30) days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. 
(Prior code 3.08.550; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-440. - Review bond required. 
    Within fifteen (15) days after making application to the District Court for review of the decision of the Finance Director, the party making such application shall file with the District Court a surety bond in twice the amount of the taxes, penalties, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the Finance Director which are contested on appeal. The taxpayer may, at his or her option, satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account or deposit in or a certificate of deposit issued by a state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with Section 11-35-101(1), C.R.S., equal to twice the amount of the taxes, penalties, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the Finance Director. The taxpayer may, at his or her option, deposit the disputed amount with the Finance Director in lieu of posting a surety bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the contested amount during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, after appeal or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the Court, either retained by the Finance Director and applied against the amount due or returned in whole or in part with interest due to the taxpayer from the date it was paid to the Finance Director. No claim for refund of amounts deposited with the Finance Director need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in accordance with the direction of the Court. 
(Prior code 3.08.560; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-450. - Notices. 
    All written notices required to be given to any taxpayer under this Article shall be hand delivered or mailed by first-class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such taxpayer at the last known address of the taxpayer on file with the City. 
(Prior code 3.08.570; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-460. - License and tax in addition to all other licenses and taxes. 
    The license and tax imposed by this Article shall be in addition to all other licenses and taxes imposed by law, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Prior code 3.08.580; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-470. - Hearings to be held in City. 
    Every hearing before the Finance Director shall be held in the City. 
(Prior code 3.08.590; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-480. - Administration by Finance Director; rules and regulations. 
    The administration of this Article is vested in and shall be exercised by the Finance Director, who shall prescribe forms and formulate and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with this Article for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of taxes imposed and for the proper administration and enforcement thereof. 
(Prior code 3.08.600; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-490. - Authority to compromise taxes. 
    The Finance Director shall have the authority to compromise or enter into a payment plan with respect to any liability for taxes where the total amount of the liability does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Where the total amount of the liability is in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) but does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), any compromise or payment plan must be approved by the City Manager upon the recommendation of the Finance Director. Where the total amount of the liability exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), any compromise or payment plan must be approved by the City Council upon the recommendation of the Finance Director. In any action involving the City Council, the taxpayer expressly waives its right to confidentiality as outlined in Section 4-3-190(b). 
(Prior code 3.08.610; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-500. - Violations and fines. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any retailer to fail to collect or for any purchaser or user to fail to pay any tax, penalty or interest levied by this Article, regardless of whether the tax liability is disputed or an exemption is claimed. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any retailer to retain any tax collected in excess of the rate stated in Section 4-3-60 or to fail to remit punctually to the Finance Director the full amount required by this Article, including taxes, penalties and interest. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to make or file any return required to be made or filed by this Article or to make any false or fraudulent return or any false or fraudulent statement in any return. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to do business without the license required by this Article or to continue to do business after such license is revoked. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any applicant for a tax refund to make a false statement in connection with such application. 
(f)  Except as provided for by rule or regulation of the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue, it is unlawful for any person who is a resident of the City to register any motor vehicle owned by such person or to obtain a license or to procure a certificate of title at any address other than: 
(1)  For a motor vehicle which is owned by a business and operated primarily for business purposes, the address from which such vehicle is principally operated and maintained; or 
(2)  For any motor vehicle for which the provisions of Paragraph (1) hereof do not apply, the address of the owner's residence; except that, if a motor vehicle is permanently operated and maintained at an address other than the address of the owner's residence, such motor vehicle shall be registered at the address from which such motor vehicle is permanently operated and maintained. 
For purposes of this Subsection, a person's residence shall be his or her principal or primary home or place of abode, to be determined in the same manner as residency for voter registration purposes as provided in Section 1-2-102, C.R.S., and Section 31-10-201, C.R.S., except that "voter registration" shall be substituted for "motor vehicle registration" as a circumstance to be taken into account in determining such principal or primary home or place of abode. 
(g)  It is unlawful for any retailer to advertise, hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by this Article will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer, that it will not be added to the purchase price of the property sold or, if added, that it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(h)  It is unlawful for any person other than the City to become enriched or to gain any benefit from the collection or payment of the taxes levied by this Article. 
(i)  It is unlawful for any person to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax imposed by this Article. 
(j)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any other provisions of this Article. 
(k)  A criminal action may be brought against any person, officer, employee, agent or other representative who violates this Article. Each day that this Article is violated and/or each action violated shall constitute a separate violation. Action may be brought in District Court or Municipal Court. Each violation is punishable in accordance with Section 1-4-20. 
(Prior code 3.08.620; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-510. - Limitations on actions to collect. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no assessment shall be made nor shall any notice of lien be filed, distraint warrant be issued, bond be collected upon, suit for collection be instituted or any other action to collect the same be commenced, more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was due and payable. In addition, no lien shall continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, when a notice of lien regarding such taxes was filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which case the lien shall continue for only one (1) year after the filing of notice thereof. Liens which expire may be renewed indefinitely until amounts are paid. 
(b)  In the case of a false return, fraudulent act or failure to file a return, the tax, together with interest and penalties, may be assessed or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be commenced at any time. 
(c)  Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the Finance Director may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the previously agreed upon extension. In the event that the taxpayer refuses to extend the period of limitation, the Finance Director may extend the period of limitation upon holding a hearing and finding good cause for the extension as a result of delays caused by the taxpayer. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit any right accrued or to revive any liability barred by any statute in effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this Article was derived. 
(Prior code 3.08.630; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-520. - Claims for recovery. 
    The intent of this Section is to streamline and standardize procedures related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer or retailer to correctly pay, collect and remit sales and use taxes to the City. 
(1)  As used herein, claim for recovery means a claim for reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
(2)  When the Finance Director determines that sales and use tax owed to the City has been reported and paid to another municipality, the City shall promptly notify the retailer that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted and that, as of the date of the notice, the retailer must cease improper tax collections and remittances. 
(3)  The City may make a written claim for recovery directly to the municipality that received taxes or penalty and interest owed to the City or, in the alternative, may institute procedure for collection of the tax from the taxpayer or retailer. The decision to make a claim for a recovery lies in the sole discretion of the City. Any claim for recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer or retailer, releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to substantiate the claim and a request that the municipality approve or deny, in whole or in part, the claim within ninety (90) days of its receipt. The municipality to which the City submits a claim for recovery may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the claim, and approval of such extension by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(4)  Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a claim for recovery, the City shall verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the municipality submitting the claim in writing that the claim is either approved or denied in whole or in part, including the reasons for the decision. If the claim is approved in whole or in part, the City shall remit the undisputed amount to the municipality submitting the claim within thirty (30) days of approval. If a claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a vendor or taxpayer, the check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a claim for recovery may only be made for good cause. 
(5)  The City may deny a claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a claim for recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer. 
(6)  The period subject to a claim for recovery shall be limited to the thirty-six-month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid the tax receives the claim for recovery. 
(Prior code 3.08.640; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-530. - Notice of amendment. 
(a)  In order to initiate a central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the Finance Director shall file with the Colorado Municipal League prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section a copy of the City sales and use tax ordinance reflecting all provisions in effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Section. 
(b)  In order to keep current the central register of sales and use tax ordinances for municipalities that administer local sales tax collection, the Finance Director shall file with the Colorado Municipal League prior to the effective date of any amendment a copy of each sales and use tax ordinance amendment enacted by the City. 
(c)  Failure of the City to file such ordinance amendment pursuant to this Section shall not invalidate any provision of the sales and use tax ordinance or any amendment thereto. 
(Prior code 3.08.650; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-3-540. - Participation in simplification meetings. 
    The Finance Director shall cooperate with and participate on an as-needed basis with a permanent statewide sales and use tax committee convened by the Colorado Municipal League which is composed of state and municipal sales and use tax officials and business officials. The committee will meet for the purpose of discussing and seeking resolution to sales and use tax problems which may arise. 
(Prior code 3.08.660; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 4 - Use Tax on Building Materials 

Sec. 4-4-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Building materials means all concrete, steel, glass, stone, bricks, lumber, masonry and any other materials used in or connected with the construction, alteration, expansion, modification or improvement of any building or other structure. 
    Consumption means the normal use of property for the purpose for which it was intended. Consumption includes waste or destruction. 
    Cost of construction means the total cost of constructing a building or other structure, exclusive of the cost of the land. 
    Director means the Finance Director of the City as defined in Section 4-3-30. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity. The term "person" includes the plural as well as the singular number. 
    Purchase price means the aggregate value in money of anything or things paid or delivered by a purchaser to a seller or any person in the consummation of a sale. Purchase price does not include any direct tax imposed by the federal government, the State or this Article. 
    Taxpayer means the person obligated to pay the use tax imposed by this Article. 
    Use means the exercise, for any length of time, by any person within the City, of any right, power or dominion over building materials, but shall not include the storage of building materials. 
(Prior code 3.20.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-20. - Imposed. 
    There is imposed a use tax on the privilege of using or consuming building materials for the construction or improvement of any building or other structure in the City. The tax shall be payable to the City by any person who builds, constructs or improves any building or structure in the City. The tax shall be in an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the purchase price paid for the building materials by the person who builds, constructs or improves any building or structure in the City. 
(Prior code 3.20.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-30. - Payment of estimated tax. 
    An estimate of the amount of tax payable pursuant to Section 4-4-20 shall be payable by the taxpayer prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction or improvement of any building or other structure. The estimated amount shall be three percent (3%) of sixty percent (60%) of the cost of construction or improvement of the building or other structure. The cost of construction or improvement shall be determined by the Building Official upon receipt of an application for a building permit, and shall be indicated by the Building Official on the building permit. 
(Prior code 3.20.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-40. - Receipt for payment of estimated tax. 
    When the tax is paid, the Finance Director shall issue a receipt to the taxpayer. The receipt shall indicate the building permit number and the property to which the building permit relates. No City sales tax shall be payable with respect to purchases of building materials for which the use tax has been paid. Upon presentation by the taxpayer of a receipt for payment of the use tax, a retailer or vendor shall not collect the City's sales tax with respect to purchases of building materials for which the use tax has been paid. 
(Prior code 3.20.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-50. - Payment required prior to building permit issuance. 
    No building permit shall issue until any estimated use tax payable pursuant to Section 4-4-30 has been paid. 
(Prior code 3.20.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-60. - Deficiency notice. 
(a)  If the Finance Director believes that the amount of estimated tax paid pursuant to Section 4-4-30 is less than three percent (3%) of the purchase price paid for the building materials, the Finance Director may, within thirty-six (36) months after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building or other structure into which the building materials were incorporated, make a determination as to the amount of additional tax due. Within such thirty-six-month period, the Finance Director shall mail by certified mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer of the amount of additional tax, penalty and interest due. The notice shall include a demand for payment of the tax. The deficiency notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, that the taxpayer has the right to elect a hearing on the deficiency pursuant to Section 29-2-106(3), C.R.S. 
(b)  The mailing of the deficiency notice shall constitute an assessment and the assessment shall become final, due and payable after ten (10) days from the date of the mailing of the notice and demand unless, within that ten-day period, the taxpayer files with the Finance Director a written request for a hearing to revise, modify or cancel the assessment. The request must state the reasons for the requested revision, modification or cancellation. The request shall be heard and determined by the Finance Director in accordance with Section 4-4-80. 
(Prior code 3.20.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-70. - Refund requests. 
    If the taxpayer believes that the amount of estimated tax paid pursuant to Section 4-4-30 is more than three percent (3%) of the purchase price paid for the building materials, he or she may, within the time limitations established in Section 4-4-180, file with the Finance Director a written request for refund of the amount of estimated tax paid in excess of three percent (3%) of the purchase price paid for the building materials. In the event the request for refund is denied, the taxpayer may request a hearing. Any request by the taxpayer for a hearing shall be heard and determined by the Finance Director in accordance with Section 4-4-80. 
(Prior code 3.20.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-80. - Hearing procedure; final determination; appeal. 
(a)  If the Finance Director receives a request pursuant to Subsection 4-4-60(b) for a hearing to revise, modify or cancel the assessment, or if the Finance Director receives, pursuant to Section 4-4-70, a request for refund, the Finance Director shall schedule a hearing on the request. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by certified mail to the taxpayer at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. The Finance Director shall have the authority to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses. Such hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence or filing of briefs shall be required; however, the taxpayer may elect to submit a brief, in which case the City may submit a brief. The burden shall be on the taxpayer to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the taxpayer is entitled to a revision, modification or cancellation of the assessment or that the taxpayer is entitled to the requested refund. The Finance Director shall hold such hearing and issue the final decision thereon within ninety (90) days after the City's receipt of the taxpayer's request therefor; however, the City may extend such period if the delay in holding the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer. In any such event, the Finance Director shall hold such hearing and issue the decision thereon within one hundred eighty (180) days of the taxpayer's written request therefor. The decision shall be sent by regular mail to the taxpayer. If the Finance Director determines that any tax is due, the tax shall be due and payable as of the date the Finance Director mails the decision to the taxpayer. 
(b)  State hearing. 
(1)  If a taxpayer has exhausted City remedies, the taxpayer may either request a state hearing on such deficiency notice or claim for refund or appeal to the District Court. 
(2)  As used in this Section, the term state hearing means a hearing before the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue or delegate thereof as provided in Section 29-2-106.1(3), C.R.S. 
(c)  A request for a state hearing shall be made within thirty (30) days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of City remedies. The taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if the taxpayer has not exhausted City remedies or if the taxpayer fails to request such hearing within the time period provided for in this Subsection. For purposes of this Section, exhaustion of City remedies means: 
(1)  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the Finance Director and the Finance Director has held the hearing and issued a final decision thereon; or 
(2)  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the Finance Director and the Finance Director has failed to hold such hearing or has failed to issue a final decision thereon within the time periods prescribed in Subsection (a) hereof. 
(d)  An appeal directly to the District Court of the County shall be made within thirty (30) days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of City remedies. Before commencing an action in District Court, the taxpayer shall file with the Finance Director a bond in the form set forth in Subsection (g) hereof. The taxpayer shall have no right to such appeal if the taxpayer has not exhausted City remedies, fails to request such appeal within the time period provided for in this Subsection or fails to post the bond required by this Subsection. 
(e)  If the taxpayer appeals to District Court the decision rendered by the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue or his or her delegate as a result of the state hearing, the taxpayer shall file a bond with the Finance Director in the form set forth in Subsection (g) hereof, unless payment of the tax or the posting of a bond was previously required, in which case such previous payment or posting shall continue in effect. The taxpayer shall have no right to such appeal unless such bond has been posted. 
(f)  If the City reasonably finds that collection of the tax will be jeopardized by delay, or if the taxpayer requests a postponement of either the hearing before the City or the state hearing, other than on account of a death, physical illness or injury, or catastrophe which substantially impairs the taxpayer's ability to present the taxpayer's case, the taxpayer shall, prior to the hearing before the City or the State, file with the Finance Director a bond in the form set forth in Subsection (g) hereof. 
(g)  If the taxpayer is required by this Article to file a bond with the Finance Director, the bond shall be in the form of a surety bond in twice the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the deficiency notice or final determination and which are contested by the taxpayer. The taxpayer may, at the taxpayer's option, satisfy the surety bond requirement by the assignment to the City of a savings account or deposit in, or a certificate of deposit issued by, a state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with Section 11-35-101(1), C.R.S., equal to twice the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the deficiency notice or final determination. The taxpayer may, at the taxpayer's option, deposit the disputed amount with the Finance Director in lieu of posting a surety bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the deficiency contested during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, after appeal to the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeals, or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the court, or the City Council if the matter has not been appealed to a court, either retained by the Finance Director and applied against the deficiency or returned in whole or in part to the taxpayer with interest at the rate imposed under Section 4-4-110. No claim for refund of amounts deposited with the Finance Director need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in accordance with the direction of the court or of the City Council. 
(h)  If the City reasonably finds that the collection of the use tax will be jeopardized by delay, the City may utilize the procedures set forth in Section 39-21-111, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 3.20.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-90. - Amount of estimated tax paid to be amount of use tax payable. 
    Unless additional tax is assessed pursuant to Section 4-4-60, or unless a request for refund is filed pursuant to Section 4-4-70, the amount of estimated tax paid pursuant to Section 4-4-30 shall be the amount of tax due and payable under Section 4-4-20. 
(Prior code 3.20.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-100. - Exemptions and credits. 
(a)  The following are exempt from taxation under this Article: 
(1)  The use or consumption of building materials with respect to which the taxpayer has paid the retail sales tax imposed by Article 3 of this Chapter. 
(2)  The first three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) of the total purchase price of building materials used in or connected with the construction, alteration, expansion, modification or improvement of any building or other structure. Where one (1) building permit has been issued for the construction of more than one (1) building or other structure, which constitute a single construction project, the buildings or other structures shall be considered under this Subsection to be one (1) building or other structure. 
(3)  The use or consumption of building materials by the United States government, the State, its departments and institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof. 
(4)  The use or consumption of building materials by religious, charitable and eleemosynary organizations when used or consumed by said organizations in the conduct of their regular charitable functions and activities. 
(5)  The use or consumption by a contractor or subcontractor of building materials for the construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of streets, roads, buildings, and other structures owned and used by: 
a.  The United States government, the State, its departments and institutions, and the political subdivisions thereof. 
b.  Religious, charitable and eleemosynary organizations in the conduct of their regular charitable functions and activities. 
(b)  The sales or use tax shall not apply to the use or consumption of building materials, the sale or use of which has already been subject to a sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule municipality legally imposed on the purchaser or user equal to or in excess of three percent (3%). A credit shall be given against the use tax with respect to the purchaser's or user's use or consumption in the City of the building materials, the amount of the credit to equal the tax paid by such purchaser or user by reason of the imposition of the sales or use tax on the other statutory or home rule municipality on his or her purchase or use of the building materials. The amount of the credit shall not exceed three percent (3%). 
(Prior code 3.20.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-110. - Interest and penalties. 
(a)  If any amount of use tax is not paid on or before the last date prescribed for payment, interest on such amount at the rate imposed under Subsection (h) hereof shall be paid for the period from such last date to the date paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without regard to any extension of time for payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. In the case of a tax for which the last date for payment is not otherwise prescribed, the last date for payment shall be deemed to be the date liability for the tax arises, and in no event shall it be later than the date that written notice and demand for payment of the tax is made by the Finance Director. 
(b)  If any part of the deficiency in payment of the use tax is due to negligence or intentional disregard of this Article or of authorized rules and regulations of the City with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added to the amount owed a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the deficiency. Penalty interest in such case shall be collected at the rate imposed under Subsection (h), in addition to the interest provided by Subsection (a) hereof, on the amount of the deficiency from the time the return was due, from the person required to file the return, which penalty and interest shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand for payment is given to such person by the Finance Director. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added to the amount owed a penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the total amount of the deficiency. In such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the penalty, shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand for payment is given to such person by the Finance Director, and an additional three percent (3%) per month on such amount shall be added from the date the return was due until paid. 
(c)  If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of the use tax or to pay any use tax as required, the Finance Director shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent, and shall add thereto a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under Subsection (h) hereof, plus one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month from the date when due. 
(d)  Any use tax due and unpaid shall be a debt to the City, and shall draw penalty interest at the rate imposed under Subsection (h) hereof, in addition to the interest provided by Subsection (a) hereof, from the time when due until paid. 
(e)  Interest prescribed under Subsections (a) through (d) hereof shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as the use tax to which it is applicable. 
(f)  If any portion of a use tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed on the portion of the use tax so satisfied for any period during which, if the period had not been made, interest would have been allowed with respect to such overpayment. 
(g)  Interest prescribed under Subsections (a) through (d) hereof on any use tax may be assessed and collected at any time during the period within which the tax to which such interest relates may be assessed and collected. 
(h)  When interest is required or permitted to be charged under any provisions of Subsections (a) through (d) hereof, the annual rate of interest shall be that established by the State Commissioner of Banking pursuant to Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S. 
(i)  Nothing in Subsections (a) through (d) hereof shall preclude the City from utilizing any other applicable penalties or remedies for the collection or enforcement of the use tax. 
(Prior code 3.20.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-120. - Duty to keep books and records. 
    Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this Article shall keep, for a period of three (3) years following the date the tax was due and payable, records of all purchases made by him or her of building materials used or consumed in the construction or improvement of any building or structure in the City. Such records shall be in a form which enables the Finance Director to determine the amount of tax payable under this Article. The records shall be open for examination at any reasonable time by the Finance Director. If the records, or any part thereof, are kept outside the City, the person subject to the tax imposed by this Article shall, upon request by the Finance Director, make such records available for inspection by the Finance Director at a suitable place within the City to be designated by the Finance Director. The Finance Director may examine such records at a place outside the City, provided that the taxpayer agrees to reimburse the City for all costs and expenses incurred by the director in the inspection of such records outside the City. 
(Prior code 3.20.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-130. - Lien. 
    The tax imposed by Section 4-4-20, together with accrued interest, shall be a first and prior lien on any real property into which the building materials are incorporated, subject only to any valid deed of trust, mortgage or other lien of record on the date of the filing with the County Clerk and Recorder of the notice of lien provided in Section 4-4-140. 
(Prior code 3.20.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-140. - Notice of lien. 
    If the tax imposed by Section 4-4-20 is not paid when due, the Finance Director may issue a notice setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax and any accrued interest, and stating that the City claims a first and prior lien in the amount of the tax and accrued interest on the real property into which the building materials subject to the tax were incorporated. Such notice shall be in the form prescribed by the Finance Director, shall be verified by him or her, and may be filed with the County Clerk and Recorder. The filing of such notice of lien shall constitute notice thereof. 
(Prior code 3.20.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-150. - Foreclosure. 
    The lien provided in Sections 4-4-130 and 4-4-140 may be foreclosed by the City in accordance with the statutory procedures for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property. 
(Prior code 3.20.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-160. - Release of lien. 
    Upon payment in full of the use tax and accrued interest, the Finance Director shall execute a release of the lien provided in Sections 4-4-130 and 4-4-140. The release shall be in the form prescribed by the Finance Director and shall be verified by him or her. The execution of such release by the Finance Director shall terminate such lien, and such release may be filed by the taxpayer with the County Clerk and Recorder to give notice of the release of the lien. 
(Prior code 3.20.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-170. - Tax constitutes debt. 
    The tax imposed by Section 4-4-20 and any accrued interest thereon shall constitute a debt payable by the taxpayer to the City, and the City may file suit in the appropriate state court to collect such debt. 
(Prior code 3.20.170; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-180. - Limitations. 
(a)  The use tax shall not be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of building materials within the City which occurs more than three (3) years after the most recent sale of the building materials if, within the three (3) years following such sale, the building materials have been significantly used within the State for the principal purpose for which they were purchased. 
(b)  No use tax, or interest thereon or penalties with respect thereto, shall be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, distraint warrant issued or suit for collection be instituted; nor shall any other action to collect the same be commenced, more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which case such lien shall continue only for one (1) year after the filing of notice thereof. Before the expiration of a period of limitation, the taxpayer and the Finance Director may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(c)  In the case of failure to file a return or the filing of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the use tax, together with penalties and interest thereon, may be assessed and collected at any time. 
(d)  An application for refund of use tax paid under dispute by a purchaser or user who claims an exemption pursuant to Section 4-4-100 shall be made within sixty (60) days after use or consumption of the building materials for which an exemption is claimed. 
(e)  An application for refund of tax moneys paid in error or by mistake shall be made within three (3) years after the date of use or consumption of the goods for which the refund is claimed. 
(Prior code 3.20.180; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-190. - Authority to compromise taxes. 
    The Finance Director is authorized to compromise or enter into a payment plan with respect to any liability for taxes, interest or penalties where the total amount of the liability is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Where the total amount of the liability is in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), any compromise or payment plan must be approved by the City Council upon the recommendation of the Finance Director. 
(Prior code 3.20.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-4-200. - Liability of officers and partners. 
(a)  The officers of a corporation or the partners of a partnership shall be liable to the City for payment of any taxes payable by a corporation or a partnership pursuant to this Article where such officers or partners have willfully failed to collect, account for or pay over such tax, or have willfully attempted in any manner to evade or defeat the payment of such tax. 
(b)  As used in this Section, the term willfully means that the act or failure to act was done voluntarily, consciously and intentionally. 
(Prior code 3.20.210; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 5 - Sales and Use Tax Rebate Program 

Sec. 4-5-10. - Established. 
    There is established within the City a sales and use tax rebate program ("SUTRP"). 
(Prior code 3.36.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-5-20. - Objectives of program. 
    The objectives of the SUTRP created hereby include the desire to maintain the existing sales and use tax base of the community; to foster future retail sales and use tax revenues by improving the character and quality of commercial areas within the City; and to promote a unified identity of all Greenwood Village commercial areas. 
(Prior code 3.36.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-5-30. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Enhanced sales tax means the amount of the sales tax collected by the City over and above a base amount negotiated by, and agreed upon by, the applicant and the City, and which amount is approved by the City Council, which base amount shall never be lower than the amount of sales tax collected by the City at the property in question in the previous twelve (12) months. 
    Owner or proprietor means the record owner or operator of an individual business; or, in the case of a shopping center, the owner of the real property upon which more than one (1) business is operated, provided that said owner (whether an individual, corporation, partnership or other entity) is the owner or lessor of the individual businesses operated thereon. 
(Prior code 3.36.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-5-40. - Participation; rules and regulations. 
    Participation in SUTRP shall be subject to compliance with and satisfaction of all criteria and limitations set forth in this Article and any sales and use tax rebate program rules and regulations which are promulgated by the City Manager and approved by the City Council by resolution. Authority is expressly delegated to the City Manager to promulgate such proposed rules and regulations, and thereafter to administer the same upon their adoption by the City Council. 
(Prior code 3.36.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-5-50. - Tax to be used for costs of improvements. 
(a)  Approval by the City Council of an agreement implementing this SUTRP shall entitle the successful applicant to use enhanced sales taxes derived from the applicant's property or business to pay costs of agreed and approved improvements thereto. Upon such approval, the City will return an amount up to one hundred percent (100%) of the enhanced sales taxes and the use taxes derived from the property above an established base year to reimburse and/or retire payment costs incurred by the applicant in the making of private property development improvements. Any such rebate of enhanced sales and/or use taxes is limited by the following maximum amounts: 
(1)  The City shall not pay more than fifty percent (50%) of the incremental increase in sales and use tax revenues above the base year in any given year. 
(2)  The City shall not pay more than forty percent (40%) of the total cost of eligible improvements. 
(3)  The City shall not pay more than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of any approved work item. 
(b)  The City will reimburse all approved costs of improvements for a period not to exceed sixty (60) months from the date of completion of all agreed and approved improvements. Costs incurred in making such improvements shall be submitted to the City not more frequently than quarterly and will be reimbursed on a quarterly basis in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the enhanced sales tax revenues received by the City during the same quarter of the base year. Reimbursement shall occur within forty-five (45) calendar days of the close of the previous quarter, provided that complete and accurate documentation as specified in the rules and regulations promulgated by the City Manager has been provided. 
(c)  Under no circumstances shall the City rebate or reimburse any enhanced sales tax revenues or use taxes to an applicant or owner in advance of receipt by the City of enhanced sales taxes which exceed those received by the City during the base year. 
(Prior code 3.36.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-5-60. - Uses eligible for funds. 
(a)  The uses to which said shared enhanced sales taxes may be put by an applicant shall be strictly limited to those identified in this Section, which uses are determined by the City Council to be public or public-related in nature. 
(b)  Funds which are subject to sharing pursuant to this Article may be utilized for the construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation and remodeling of existing private and public property improvements. In no case will the City rebate more than one hundred percent (100%) of the enhanced sales and use tax revenues above the like base year fiscal quarter or more than fifty percent (50%) of the cost of any approved work item. 
(c)  Enhanced sales and/or use taxes may be used for the following eligible purposes: 
(1)  Private property improvements: 
a.  Bringing property into compliance with an originally approved plan; 
b.  Bringing property into compliance with current City Code provisions; 
c.  Improving aesthetic qualities of commercial properties consistent with the City's design and appearance code (guidelines); 
d.  Replacing signs and sign faces to bring the same into compliance with City requirements; 
e.  Costs of meeting Americans with Disability Act requirements; and 
f.  Accelerating the amortization of legal nonconforming signage in areas annexed into the City. 
(2)  Public property improvements: 
a.  Making improvements to the public right-of-way consistent with the City's unified area development plan that provides for streetscape elements, including but not limited to public signage, pavement treatments, street improvements, sidewalks, street lighting, street furniture and landscaping; 
b.  Traffic improvements to improve safety and air quality and/or relieve congestion in accordance with the City's transportation plan; and 
c.  Burying public utility lines. 
(3)  Other costs. 
a.  Costs associated with changing address information to reflect Greenwood Village; and 
b.  Audit costs. 
(d)  The City Council determines that the following costs shall not be eligible for reimbursement: 
(1)  New construction or development that adds to the existing gross floor area of the property; 
(2)  Infrastructure to serve new development; 
(3)  Consulting fees, including architectural and engineering expenses; 
(4)  Legal costs and attorney fees; 
(5)  Payment of interest and other financing expenses; 
(6)  Loss of business expenses; and 
(7)  Building permits and fees. 
(Prior code 3.36.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-5-70. - Enhanced sales tax only used for program. 
    Existing sources of City sales tax revenues shall not be used, impaired or otherwise affected by this SUTRP. Therefore, only the sales taxes generated by the properties described in an application shall be subject to division under this SUTRP. It shall be the affirmative duty of the Finance Director to collect and hold all such enhanced sales taxes in a separate account apart from the sales taxes generated by and collected from the other sales tax-generating uses and businesses within the City and to provide an accounting system which accomplishes the overriding purpose of this Section. 
(Prior code 3.36.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-5-80. - Application approval. 
    Approval of an application for inclusion in this SUTRP shall be given by the City Council, at a public hearing held as a portion of a regularly scheduled City Council meeting, based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The amount of enhanced sales taxes which are reasonably to be anticipated to be derived by the City through the expanded or new retail sales tax-generating business; 
(2)  The public benefits which are provided by the applicant through public works, public improvements, additional employment for the City residents, etc.; 
(3)  The amount of expenditures which may be deferred by the City based upon public improvements to be completed by the applicant; 
(4)  The conformance of the applicant's property or project with the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinances of the City; 
(5)  The agreement required by Section 4-4-90 having been reached, which agreement shall contain and conform to all requirements of said Section 4-4-90; and 
(6)  The compliance by the applicant with this Article and all the rules and regulations promulgated by the City Manager and approved by the City Council. 
Approval shall be by motion adopted by a majority of the entire City Council. 
(Prior code 3.36.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-5-90. - Agreement terms. 
    Each application for approval submitted to the City Council shall be subject to approval by the City Council solely on its own merits. Approval of an application shall require that an agreement be executed by the owner and the City, which agreement shall, at a minimum, contain: 
(1)  A list of those public or public-related improvements which justify the approval of the application, and the amount which shall be spent on said improvements; 
(2)  The maximum amount of enhanced sales taxes to be shared, and the maximum time during which said agreement shall continue, it being expressly understood that any such agreement shall expire and be of no further force and effect upon the occurrence of the earlier to be reached of the maximum time of the agreement (whether or not the maximum amount to be shared has been reached) or the maximum amount to be shared (whether or not the maximum time set forth has expired); 
(3)  A statement that this is a personal agreement which is not transferable and which does not run with the land; 
(4)  That this agreement shall never constitute a debt or obligation of the City within any constitutional or statutory provision; 
(5)  The base amount which is agreed upon by month, and the fact that if, in any month as specified, sales taxes received from the property do not at least equal said amount, there shall be no sharing of funds for said month; 
(6)  The base amount shall be agreed upon which shall consider the historic level of sales at the property in question, or a similar property within the area in the event of a new business, and a reasonable allowance for increased sales due to the improvements and upgrades completed as a result of inclusion within this program; 
(7)  A provision that any enhanced sales taxes subject to sharing shall be escrowed in the event there is a legal challenge to this SUTRP or the approval of any application therefor; 
(8)  An affirmative statement that the obligations, benefits and/or provisions of the agreement may not be assigned in whole or in any part without the expressed authorization of the City Council, and further that no third party shall be entitled to rely upon or enforce any provision hereof; and 
(9)  Any other provisions agreed upon by the parties and approved by the City Council. 
(Prior code 3.36.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-5-100. - Purpose; liability of City. 
    The City Council has enacted this SUTRP as a joint benefit to the public at large and to private owners for the purpose of: providing the City with increased sales tax revenues generated upon and by properties improved as a result of this program; public improvements being completed by private owners through no debt obligation being incurred on the part of the City; and allowing applicants an opportunity to improve properties which generate sales activities, which improvements make those properties more competitive in the marketplace and further provide to the applicant additional contingent sources of revenues for upgrading said properties. The City Council specifically finds and determines that creation of this SUTRP is consistent with the City's power as a home rule municipal corporation, and that exercise of said powers in the manner set forth herein is in furtherance of the public health, safety and welfare. Notwithstanding any provision hereof, the City shall never be a joint venture in any private entity or activity which participates in this SUTRP, and the City shall never be liable or responsible for any debt or obligation of any participant in this SUTRP. 
(Prior code 3.36.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 6 - Business Occupational Privilege Tax 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 4-6-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the levy of the taxes imposed by this Article is to raise funds for the payment of the expenses of operating the City. In accordance with this purpose, all proceeds of the tax shall be placed in the capital projects fund of the City. 
(Prior code 3.16.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling of any kind carried on or engaged in by a person, having a fixed or transitory locations within the City. 
    Employee means any natural person who performs sufficient services for an employer to receive as compensation therefor no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per calendar month, upon a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, for services performed within the City during any period in a calendar month. To facilitate compliance with this Article and to ease the burden of reporting, the following shall be considered an employee : 
a.  Any person who receives a W-2 for services rendered within the City. 
b.  Any person who receives a 1099 for services rendered within the City and does not receive a W-2 from any other employer for services rendered within the City equal to or in excess of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per month. 
c.  Any person who is provided a work area by any business within the City and earned a compensation of no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) during any period in a calendar month. 
    Employer means an individual, association, corporation (including a corporation not for profit), firm, authority, board, body, branch, bureau, department, division, subdivision, section, unit or any other entity, that employs one (1) or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis. For purposes of this Section, every defined employee shall have a corresponding employer. 
    Engaged in business means to carry on or take part in the operation of the business as owner, operator or agent. 
    Finance Director means the Finance Director of the City or such other person designated by the municipality. Finance Director shall also include such person's designee. 
    Person means any natural person, individual, partnership, association, organization or corporation of any kind or character. 
    Taxpayer means any employer who is required to withhold and pay the tax imposed by this Article. 
(Prior code 3.16.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-30. - Intent. 
    The City Council finds, determines and declares that, considering the businesses and occupations in the City and the relation of such businesses and occupations to the municipal welfare, as well as the relation thereof to the expenditures required by the City and proper, just and equitable distribution of the tax burdens within the City and all matters proper to be considered in relation thereto, the tax imposed on each business defined in this Article is reasonable, proper, uniform, nondiscriminatory and necessary for a just and proper distribution of tax burdens within the City. 
(Prior code 3.16.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-40. - Tax levied. 
(a)  In each and every calendar month, there is levied by the City upon, and there shall be collected monthly from and paid to the Finance Director by every person engaged in any business, trade, profession or calling of any kind having a fixed or transitory locations within the City, for any period of time in a calendar month, a business occupational privilege tax in the sum of two dollars ($2.00) per month for the first owner, partner, manager or employee, and the additional sum of two dollars ($2.00) per month, for each and every additional owner, partner, manager, officer or employee who performs, within the City for any period of time in a calendar month, any services or other activities in the operation of such business, trade, occupation, profession or calling. 
(b)  Each and every person engaged in business within the City shall, for each and every calendar month, on or before the last day of the month following, prepare and file a return for such taxable calendar month, and at the same time pay to the Finance Director the tax imposed in this Article for such calendar month, computed at the rate as set forth in Subsection (a) hereof, upon the number of owners, partners, managers and employees who performed in the City, for any period of time, any services or other activities in the operation of the business within the City during each taxable calendar month. 
(c)  The tax levied under this Article is imposed for the support of the government of the City as set forth in Section 4-6-30; and the levy of the tax under this Article is in addition to all other taxes, excises and licenses levied and imposed under any other provisions of this Code or any ordinances of the City, and in addition to any taxes, excises or licenses imposed under the laws of the State. 
(d)  Where the business occupational privilege tax is otherwise payable for an employee who performs services for a single employer within the City and within one (1) or more Colorado cities which also levy an employer or business occupational privilege tax, the tax shall be payable unless such services, in terms of number of hours in the calendar month performed in the City for such employer, are less than such services performed in any other city in the State which levies an employer or business occupational privilege tax. 
(Prior code 3.16.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-50. - Occupational privilege tax license required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any business, trade, profession or calling of any kind having a fixed or transitory location within the City, for any period of time, without first having obtained a license therefor, which license shall be granted and issued by the Finance Director and shall be in full force and effect until revoked. 
(b)  Such license shall be granted only upon the submittal of an application stating the name and address of the person desiring such license, the name and nature of the business, the location, including the street number, of such business, and such other facts as may be reasonably required by the Finance Director. 
(c)  If an application for a license is submitted by an individual or business which previously held a license, the Finance Director may require that any taxes, penalties and interest due under the previous license be paid and a bond posted in an amount set by the Finance Director to ensure payment of taxes under the new license prior to the issuance of such new license. 
(Prior code 3.16.045; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 2 - Collection and Remittance 

Sec. 4-6-110. - Effect of payment or nonpayment of tax. 
(a)  Payment of the tax imposed by this Article shall not relieve the person paying the same from the payment of any other tax now or thereafter imposed by any chapter of this Code for any business, unless so provided by the chapter imposing the tax. 
(b)  No delinquency in payment of the tax provided for in this Article and no violation of this Article shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of any license other than the City's general business license issued to any person engaged in business within the City under any licensing provisions of this Code, nor shall the same be grounds for the suspension or revocation of any other license issued by any licensing authority pursuant to the state statutes. 
(Prior code 3.16.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-120. - Collection and filing of return. 
(a)  For each and every calendar month, every employer within the City, as well as every employer situated outside of the City, who engages in business within the City, and who employs one (1) or more natural persons exercising within the City the taxable privilege set forth in Section 4-6-30, is charged with the duty of collecting monthly from each of his or her employees exercising the taxable privilege set forth in Section 4-6-30, the sum of two dollars ($2.00) per month for each month in which such privilege is exercised, and with the duty of making a return and payment of the tax to the Finance Director. Further, each employer is authorized to deduct this tax from each employee in his or her employ, whether the employee is paid by salary, wages, commission or other compensation, and whether or not part or all such services are performed within the City. 
(b)  Each employer shall, on or before the last day of each and every month, prepare and file a return for the preceding calendar month showing computation of the tax imposed in this Article, upon such forms as the Finance Director may prescribe for each taxable calendar month, and at the same time shall pay to the Finance Director the taxes so collected and withheld from his or her employees taxable under this Article. If the employer fails to file the return and to pay such tax, whether or not he or she makes collection thereof from the salary, wages, commissions or other compensation paid to the employee, the employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax imposed in this Article as though the tax had originally been levied against him or her. 
(c)  The Finance Director may, by rule, permit an employer whose monthly tax due is less than forty dollars ($40.00) to make returns and pay taxes at intervals greater than one (1) month. The Finance Director may require a bond or other financial guarantee to secure payment of the tax on such less frequent basis and may revoke permission to pay the tax on such basis if payment of the tax due becomes delinquent. 
(d)  All amounts deducted and withheld by an employer from the wages of an employee shall be considered a tax collected under this Article, and no employee shall have any right of action against his or her employer with respect to any monies so deducted and withheld from wages and paid over to the City in compliance with this Article. 
(e)  Every employer who deducts and withholds any amounts under this Article shall hold the same in trust for the City for the payment thereof to the Finance Director in the manner and at the time provided for in this Article. The City shall have a lien to secure the payment of any amounts withheld and not remitted as provided in this Article upon the real and personal property of the taxpayer located within a county, upon the filing with the clerk and recorder of that county of a notice of deficiency, notice of estimated taxes or notice of jeopardy assessment. 
(f)  In the event an employer is exempt from the withholding provisions of this Article, the employee of such exempt employer shall make and file with the Finance Director a monthly return for the preceding calendar month in such a manner and upon such forms as the Finance Director may prescribe, commencing on the last day of each month thereafter, and at the same time such employee shall pay the Finance Director the tax imposed in this Article for the preceding calendar month; provided, however, that the Finance Director, upon application by such employee, may permit the employee to make returns and pay taxes at intervals greater than one (1) month. The Finance Director may require a bond or other financial guarantee to secure payment of the tax on such less frequent basis and may revoke permission to pay the tax on such basis if payment of the tax due becomes delinquent. 
(g)  Each employee who has more than one (1) employer within the City shall be subject to the payment of this tax by his or her principal employer, who shall deduct this tax and, when requested to do so, shall deliver to the employee evidence on a form to be furnished to the employer by the Finance Director, which form shall be evidence of the deduction having been made, and when presented to any other employer, shall be authority for such employer to not deduct this tax from the employee's wages. 
(h)  The failure or omission by any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the employee from the payment of the tax or from compliance by such employee with such regulations with respect to making returns and payment of the tax as may be fixed in this Section or established by the Finance Director. The City shall collect the tax from either the employer or the employee. If the City collects from the employer, it shall be the employer's responsibility to collect the tax from the employee. 
(Prior code 3.16.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-130. - Exemptions. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to empower the City to levy and collect the tax imposed by this Article upon any taxpayer not within the taxing power of the City under the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution and laws of the State. 
(Prior code 3.16.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-140. - Procedure for refund of disputed tax. 
(a)  An employee who for any reason claims that he or she is exempt from the tax imposed by this Article, after payment of the tax to the Finance Director by such employee or after deduction of the tax from his or her wages by the employer, may apply to the Finance Director to determine the question of exemptions. 
(b)  Application for the refund based on a claimed exemption must be made within sixty (60) days from the date of payment of the tax to the Finance Director by the employee or the date of the deduction of the tax from the wages of the employee by the employer, whichever is applicable, and must be supported by the receipt of payment or certificate of deduction issued by the employer, as the case may be, on such forms as shall be prescribed and furnished by the Finance Director. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application, the Finance Director shall examine the same with all due speed and shall give written notice to the applicant of his or her decision thereon. 
(Prior code 3.16.071; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-150. - Denial of refund. 
(a)  An appeal of a denial of a refund shall be submitted in writing to the Finance Director within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the denial of the refund and shall identify the amount of the refund requested and the basis for the appeal. 
(b)  An appeal of a denial of a refund may include a request for a hearing. Hearing procedures shall be as described in Section 4-6-240. 
(Prior code 3.16.072; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-160. - Right of refund not assignable. 
    The right of any person to a refund under this Article is not assignable. An application for a refund must be made by the individual who paid the tax. 
(Prior code 3.16.073; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-170. - Action for recovery of refund. 
    If any person obtains any refund unlawfully, the Finance Director is thereby empowered and directed to bring appropriate action for recovery of such refund. A conviction for the violation of Subsection 4-6-550(c) shall constitute prima facie evidence that all refunds received by such person pursuant to the application which contained the false statement were obtained unlawfully. Obtaining a refund unlawfully shall be an act of fraud against the City and shall be subject to applicable penalties as outlined in Section 4-6-360. 
(Prior code 3.16.074; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 3 - Administration 

Sec. 4-6-210. - Preservation of returns and other records; confidentiality. 
(a)  Returns shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years from the date of filing with the Finance Director, after which time the Finance Director may order them destroyed. 
(b)  Except in accordance with a court order or as otherwise provided by law, the City and its agents and employees shall not divulge or make known in any way information obtained from any investigation conducted by the Finance Department or disclosed in any application, report, return or any other document kept, filed or maintained under this Article except such information as is displayed on the tax license and license application. The persons charged with the custody of such applications, reports, returns or other documents shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained therein in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Finance Director in an action or proceeding under this Article to which the Finance Director or the City is a party or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under this Article when the report of facts shown thereby is directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of so much of the reports or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding. 
(c)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to the taxpayer or his or her duly authorized representative of a copy of any application, report, return or any other document kept, filed or maintained in connection with such person's tax liability. Copies of such documents may be certified by the Finance Director and, when so certified, shall be evidence equal with the original documents and may be received as evidence of their contents. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and contents thereof, or the inspection of any documents by the City Attorney or other official representatives of the City. 
(e)  Notwithstanding this Section, the Finance Director may furnish to the taxing officials of the State or its political subdivisions, any other state or its political subdivisions or the United States any information contained in any application, report, return or any other document if the recipient jurisdiction agrees with the Finance Director to grant similar privileges to the City and if such information is to be used by the jurisdiction only for tax-related purposes. 
(Prior code 3.16.075; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-220. - Records and accounts to be kept. 
    Every person who is required to obtain a license to do business in the City as required by this Code shall keep and preserve suitable records and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for the collection or payment of which such person is liable thereunder. It is the duty of every such person to keep and preserve all such books, invoices and other records for a period of three (3) years following the date the taxes were due to the City. Such items shall be open for examination in accordance with Subsection 4-6-310(f). If the taxpayer has filed a tax return for any period after the due date for that period, the records for the period must be preserved for three (3) years after the date the return was filed. If the taxpayer has not filed a tax return for any period, the records must be preserved indefinitely. Failure to preserve all records shall be an act of fraud against the City and shall be subject to applicable penalties as outlined in Section 4-6-360. 
(Prior code 3.16.076; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-230. - Examination of returns; recomputation, credits, deficiencies. 
    As soon as practicable after a return is filed, the Finance Director shall examine it. If it appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted may be greater or less than that shown in the return, the tax shall be recomputed by the Finance Director. If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the excess shall be refunded or credited against any subsequent remittance from the taxpayer. If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the amount of the deficiency, with a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the deficiency, plus interest on both the deficiency and the penalty, shall be due and payable in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4-6-320. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, there shall be added a fraud penalty as set forth in Section 4-6-360. 
(Prior code 3.16.077; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-240. - Investigation of records relating to taxes; hearings. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining the correctness of a return or the correct amount of tax due from any person, whether licensed under this Article or not, the Finance Director may hold investigations, including audits, and hearings concerning any matters covered by this Article, may examine any relevant books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person, may require the attendance of such person or any officer or employee of such person, or of any person having knowledge of the transactions involved, and may take testimony and evidence as proof of the information. The Finance Director shall have the power to administer oaths to such persons. 
(b)  The Finance Director may schedule a hearing, notifying all interested parties by regular mail at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing. The Finance Director is authorized to issue subpoenas as outlined in Section 4-6-250. Such hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence or filing of briefs shall be required; however, the taxpayer may elect to submit a brief, in which case the City may submit a brief. The Finance Director shall hold such hearing and issue a final decision thereon within ninety (90) days after the City's notification to the taxpayer; however, the City may extend such period if the delay in holding the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer. In any event, the Finance Director shall hold such hearing within one hundred eighty (180) days of notifying the taxpayer of the hearing. The decision shall be mailed by regular mail to the taxpayer. If a taxpayer has exhausted City remedies, the taxpayer may dispute the decision of the Finance Director either by requesting a state hearing or by appealing the decision to the District Court. 
(Prior code 3.16.078; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-250. - Subpoenas and witness fees. 
    All subpoenas issued under this Article may be served by any person over the age of eighteen (18) years. The fees of witnesses for attendance in response to a subpoena shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the District Court, such fees to be paid when the witness is excused from further attendance. When the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of the Finance Director, such fees shall be paid by the City. When a witness is subpoenaed at the instance of any other party to such preceding, the Finance Director may require that the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee of the witness be borne by the party at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the Finance Director may require a deposit to cover the cost of such service and witness fees prior to issuing such subpoenas. A subpoena issued as aforesaid shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued out of a court of record. 
(Prior code 3.16.079; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-260. - Attendance of witnesses and production of evidence. 
    Any judge of the District Court or the Municipal Court, upon the application of the Finance Director, may compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers, records or memoranda and the giving of testimony before the Finance Director, by an action for contempt or otherwise in the same manner as the production of evidence may be before such court. 
(Prior code 3.16.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-270. - Depositions. 
    The Finance Director, or any party to an investigation or hearing before the Finance Director, may cause the deposition of witnesses residing within or without the State to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for depositions in civil actions in courts of the State and, to that end, compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. 
(Prior code 3.16.081; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 4 - Enforcement 

Sec. 4-6-310. - Audit of records. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining the correctness of a return or the correct amount of tax due from any taxpayer engaged in business in the City, the Finance Director may authorize an agent to conduct an audit by examining any relevant books, accounts and records of such person. The taxpayer need not hold a license for an audit to be conducted, provided that the Finance Director finds reasonable cause to believe that taxes may be due to the City. 
(b)  All of the taxpayer's books, accounts and records shall be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by an authorized agent of the Finance Director. If any taxpayer refuses to furnish voluntarily any of the foregoing information when requested by the Finance Director or authorized agent, the Finance Director may issue a subpoena to require that the taxpayer or the taxpayer's representative attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. 
(c)  Any tax deficiency or overpayment ascertained through audit shall be computed by one (1) or more of the following methods or any other method as the agent of the Finance Director deems appropriate: 
(1)  By identifying employees on which the tax was not properly or accurately withheld or paid. 
(2)  By identifying other irregularities in the calculation of tax due. 
(3)  By estimating taxes due based on the results of testing the taxpayer's records on a statistical or other reasonable basis. 
(d)  Any charitable organization claiming exemption under this Article is subject to audit in the same manner as any other person engaged in business in the City. 
(e)  The City is authorized to audit the taxpayer's records for the thirty-six (36) calendar months preceding the month the taxpayer is notified that an audit is to be conducted. The audit period may be extended by mutual agreement of the City and the taxpayer. The ability to audit this thirty-six-month period shall not lapse due to the passage of time once the taxpayer has been notified of the audit period. If the taxpayer failed to file returns, then the City shall have the right to audit indefinitely periods not filed. If returns are filed late, then the City shall have the right to audit late returns for thirty-six (36) months following the month the return was filed. 
(f)  All taxpayer records shall be made available to the City within a fifty-mile radius of the City's municipal office. If the taxpayer does not wish to make records available within this area, then the Finance Director may elect to assess the taxpayer for all expenses associated with sending auditors to the location selected by the taxpayer and for reasonable expenses, including food and lodging, incurred by the auditors during the period of the audit and until their return to the City. Such liability shall become part of the final audit assessment and shall be treated as an unpaid tax. 
(g)  If the taxpayer does not provide files in an organized format; if the auditors must go through taxpayer files and boxes in order to obtain records for audit; or if the taxpayer fails to provide information in a timely fashion, the City shall be entitled to charge an hourly fee for time spent organizing, gathering or in any way assembling taxpayer records for audit. Such fee shall be determined by the Finance Director, but in no event shall said fee exceed two and one-half (21/2) times the auditor's hourly salary. 
(Prior code 3.16.082; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-320. - Failure to make return; estimate of taxes; notices; appeal. 
(a)  If any person fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax or to file a return and pay the tax, as required by this Article, or fails, neglects or refuses to collect, report or pay any portion of the tax, the Finance Director shall make an estimate of the tax due based on available information and shall add thereto a penalty equal to the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or ten percent (10%) of the tax due, whichever is greater, and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed by Section 4-6-370, plus one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month from the date the return and tax was due, which interest shall not exceed eighteen percent (18%) in the aggregate. 
(b)  The Finance Director shall serve upon the delinquent taxpayer personally, or by first-class mail directed to the last address of the taxpayer on file with the City, written notice assessing such estimated taxes, penalty and interest. Such notice shall constitute a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment, and such assessment shall be due and payable from the taxpayer to the Finance Director within twenty (20) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing; provided, however, that, within the twenty-day period, such delinquent taxpayer may appeal the notice of determination. 
(c)  An appeal of a notice of assessment issued to a taxpayer for failure to file a return, for underpayment of tax owed or as a result of an audit shall be submitted in writing to the Finance Director within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice of assessment. Any such appeal shall identify the amount of tax disputed and the basis for the appeal. 
(d)  An appeal of a notice of assessment may include a request for a hearing. 
(e)  If a hearing was requested in response to a notice of assessment, the Finance Director shall notify the petitioner in writing of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 4-6-240. After such hearing, or after a consideration of the facts and figures contained in the petition if no hearing is requested, the Finance Director shall make such order in the matter as he or she deems just and proper and shall furnish a copy of such order to the petitioner. 
(Prior code 3.16.083; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-330. - Appeal of decision of Finance Director. 
    An appeal of a final decision of the Finance Director in a hearing held pursuant to Section 4-6-320 shall be commenced within thirty (30) days of such decision. 
(Prior code 3.16.084; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-340. - Duties of Enforcement Officer. 
(a)  The Tax Enforcement Officer shall be an employee of the Finance Department, supervised by the Finance Director. 
(b)  It is the duty of the Tax Enforcement Officer to enforce this Chapter. 
(c)  The Tax Enforcement Officer shall be deemed a peace officer for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions delineated in Subsection (b) hereof and shall have the power to issue summonses and complaints for violations of those provisions pursuant to Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. The Tax Enforcement Officer shall also have other duties as outlined in rules and regulations promulgated by the Finance Director. 
(d)  The Tax Enforcement Officer shall not be deemed to be a sworn member of the Police Department and shall not carry a weapon. 
(Prior code 3.16.085; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-350. - Assessment and recurring assessment penalty. 
    If any taxpayer has failed, neglected or refused to pay the tax imposed by this Article within the time specified for payment, the Finance Director may assess the following penalties, in addition to the taxes, penalties and interest provided for elsewhere in this Article, the additional amount being imposed to compensate the City for administrative and collection costs incurred in collecting such delinquent taxes: 
(1)  Upon the first or second issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per notice. 
(2)  Upon the third, fourth or fifth issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or fifteen percent (15%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(3)  Upon the sixth or more issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifty dollars ($50.00) or thirty percent (30%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(Prior code 3.16.086; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-360. - Penalties. 
(a)  Compliance penalty. A penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed for each section of this Article which the taxpayer violates. This penalty shall be in addition to any other applicable penalties and interest. 
(b)  Fraud penalty. In the event that the taxpayer commits an act of fraud upon the City, the City shall be entitled to assess a fraud penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or one hundred percent (100%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Article. An additional penalty of three percent (3%) per month on the amount of fraud penalty shall be added from the date the penalty was due until it is paid. 
(c)  Special penalty. In the event that the taxpayer is audited and deficiencies are found in the taxpayer's records which result in unpaid taxes owed to the City, the taxpayer shall have six (6) months from the date of the audit assessment in which to correct its records. If the deficiencies are not corrected and result in unpaid taxes due to the City in the future, then the City shall be entitled to assess a special penalty against the taxpayer. Such special penalty shall be assessed from the first day after the last day on which the taxpayer's records were previously audited. The special penalty shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or fifty percent (50%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Chapter. 
(Prior code 3.16.087, 3.16.088, 3.16.089; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-370. - Rate of interest; method of calculation. 
    When interest is required or permitted to be charged under any provision of this Article, the annual rate of interest shall be calculated at the rate of one percent (1%) per month from the date when due. For the purpose of calculating the amount of interest due, the date the return and tax were due shall be determined without regard to any extension of time for payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. 
(Prior code 3.16.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-380. - Tax constitutes lien. 
(a)  The occupational privilege tax imposed by this Article, along with all penalties and interest pertaining thereto, is a first and prior lien upon the goods, stock-in-trade and business fixtures in which the taxpayer has an ownership interest, and such lien takes priority over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature on such property. 
(b)  The occupational privilege tax imposed by this Article, along with all penalties and interest pertaining thereto, is a first and prior lien on the real and personal property of the taxpayer, and such lien takes priority over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature on such property. 
(c)  Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer is placed in receivership or bankruptcy, seized under distraint for nonpayment of property taxes or an assignment is made for the benefit of creditors, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article and for which the taxpayer is in any way liable under this Article are a prior and preferred claim against all the property of the taxpayer. No sheriff, receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any taxpayer subject to this Article under process or order of any court without first ascertaining from the Finance Director the amount of any taxes, penalties or interest due and payable under this Article. If there are any such taxes, penalties or interest due, owing or unpaid, it is the duty of such officer to first pay the amount of the taxes, penalties or interest out of the proceeds of such sale before paying any monies to judgment creditors or other claimants, except that the officer may pay costs of the proceedings and other pre-existing liens or claims taking lawful precedence over the City's claim. 
(d)  In the event that the taxpayer discharges its debts through bankruptcy, dissolution, reorganization or other means, the City shall be empowered to pursue collection of the unpaid taxes from any officer, agent, trustee or other official of the taxpayer. The City may collect the taxes due through garnishment, liens or any other lawful methods, including but not limited to enforcement actions applicable to the taxpayer as outlined in this Code. 
(e)  If any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this Article and shown due by returns filed by the taxpayer or by assessments made by the City is not paid within five (5) days after it is due, the Finance Director may issue a notice, setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax penalties and interest, the date of its accrual, and the fact that the City claims a first and prior lien therefor on the real and personal property of the taxpayer. The notice of lien shall be made on forms prescribed by the Finance Director and verified by the Finance Director and may be filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in the State in which the taxpayer owns real or personal property or with any person in possession of any personal property or rights to property belonging to the taxpayer. 
(f)  The Finance Director shall release any lien as shown on the records of the county clerk and recorder as therein provided, upon payment of all taxes, penalties and interest covered thereby, in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released. 
(Prior code 3.16.091; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-390. - Sale of business subject to lien. 
(a)  Any person who sells a business or stock of goods or closes a business shall complete and file the returns required under this Article; pay the taxes, penalties and interest due within ten (10) days of the date on which such person sold the business or stock of goods or closed the business; and indicate that it is a final return, that the business is sold or closed, and the name and address of the purchaser of business, if any. 
(b)  The tax imposed by this Article shall be a first and prior lien on the real or personal property, goods, furniture, fixtures, furnishings, equipment and/or inventory owned or used by a taxpayer. This lien shall take priority over all other claims or liens against the property. A purchaser of a business who has acquired the real or personal property, goods, furniture, fixtures, equipment and/or inventory of the business shall withhold sufficient funds from the purchase money to cover the amount of taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article due and unpaid until the seller provides a receipt from the Finance Director showing that such taxes, penalties and interest have been paid. If taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article are due and unpaid after the ten-day period therein provided, such purchaser of the business is personally liable for the payment of the taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article due and unpaid to the City to the same extent as the seller of the business or stock of goods. 
(c)  Any person who obtains by purchase, foreclosure sale or otherwise, except at a sale conducted pursuant to Subsection 4-6-420(e), any goods, stock-in-trade or business fixtures owned or leased by any person takes them subject to the lien of the City for any delinquent taxes owed by the prior owner of the property and is liable to pay all delinquent taxes of the prior owner, but only up to and including the value of the property so acquired. 
(Prior code 3.16.092; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-400. - Certificate of discharge of lien. 
(a)  If any real or personal property is subject to a lien for payment of tax due under this Article, the Finance Director may issue a certificate of discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien if the Finance Director finds that the fair market value of that part of such property remaining subject to the lien is at least twice the amount of the unsatisfied tax liability plus the value of any liens on the property that have priority over the City's lien. 
(b)  If any real or personal property is subject to a lien for payment of tax due under this Article, the Finance Director may issue a certificate of discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien if the Finance Director is paid in partial satisfaction of the tax liability an amount determined by the Finance Director to be not less than the value of the City's interest in the part of the property so discharged. In determining the value of the part of the property to be discharged, the Finance Director shall consider the fair market value of the property and the value of any liens on the property that have priority over the City's lien. 
(c)  A certificate of release of lien issued under this Section is conclusive evidence that the City's lien upon the property is extinguished, but does not extinguish or release any portion of the lien on property not specified in the release. 
(Prior code 3.16.093; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-410. - Jeopardy assessment. 
(a)  If the Finance Director finds that collection of the tax will be jeopardized for any reason, the Finance Director may declare the taxable period immediately terminated, determine the tax and issue a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment. Notwithstanding Section 4-6-320, the tax shall then be due and payable forthwith, and the Finance Director may proceed to collect the tax as provided in Section 4-6-420. 
(b)  If the taxpayer subject to a jeopardy assessment provides security for payment of the tax satisfactory to the Finance Director, the Finance Director may forego the jeopardy assessment collection proceedings. 
(Prior code 3.16.094; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-420. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Finance Director may issue a warrant directed to any employee, agent or representative of the City or any sheriff of any county of the State, commanding such person to distrain, seize and sell any personal property in which the taxpayer has an ownership interest, except such property as is exempt from the execution and sale by any state statute, for the payment of tax due, together with interest and penalties thereon and costs of execution, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within twenty (20) days from the date of the notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment and no hearing or extension has been requested in a timely manner; 
(2)  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment and no appeal from such notice has been docketed in the Municipal Court or District Court during such time; however, if the Finance Director finds that collection of the tax will be jeopardized during such period, the Finance Director may immediately issue a distraint warrant; 
(3)  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within the time prescribed in the judgment and order of court on any appeal to the District Court; 
(4)  Immediately upon making a jeopardy assessment or issuing a demand for payment upon jeopardy assessment as provided in Section 4-6-410; or 
(5)  After or concurrently with the filing of a notice of lien as provided in Subsection 4-6-380(d). 
(b)  The Finance Director may apply to the Municipal Court for a warrant authorizing the Finance Director to search for and seize property located within the City limits for the purpose of enforcing the collection of taxes under this Article. The Finance Director may apply to the District Court for a warrant outside the City limits. The judge shall issue such warrant after the Finance Director determines that: 
(1)  The premises to which entry is sought contain property that is subject to levy and sale for taxes due; and 
(2)  At least one (1) of the preconditions of Subsection (a) of this Section have been satisfied; however, if a jeopardy assessment has been declared under Section 4-6-410, the Finance Director must set forth the reasons that collection of the tax will be jeopardized. 
(c)  The procedures to be followed in issuing and executing a warrant in Municipal Court pursuant to Subsection (b) hereof shall comply with the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
(d)  The taxpayer may contest a warrant previously issued under the procedure provided by the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, except that no proceeding to contest such warrant may be brought after five (5) days prior to the date fixed for sale of the distrained property. 
(e)  The agent charged with the search and seizure shall make or cause to be made an account of the goods or effects distrained, and shall leave a copy of such account, signed by the agent making such distraint, with the owner or possessor of the property; or, if the owner or possessor of the property is unavailable at the owner's or possessor's usual place of abode, with some family member over the age of eighteen (18) years; or at the owner's or possessor's usual place of business with a stenographer, bookkeeper or chief clerk; or if the taxpayer is a corporation, with any officer, manager, general agent or agent for process; with a statement of the sum demanded and time and place of sale. The agent charged with collection shall forthwith cause to be published a notice of the time and place of sale and a description of the property to be sold in a newspaper within the county wherein distraint is made or, in lieu thereof and in the discretion of the Finance Director, the agent shall cause such notice to be publicly posted at the county courthouse wherein such distraint is made and copies thereof shall be posted in at least two (2) other public places within the county. The time fixed for the sale shall not be less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of such notification to the owner or possessor of the property and the publication or posting of such notices. The sale may be adjourned or postponed from time to time by the agent, if the agent deems it advisable, to a date certain but not for a time to exceed in all ninety (90) days from the date first fixed for the sale. When any personal property is advertised for sale under distraint, the agent making the seizure shall proceed to sell such property at public auction, offering the property at not less than a fair minimum price that includes the expenses of making the seizure and of advertising the sale. If the amount bid for the property at the sale does not equal the fair minimum price so fixed, the agent conducting the sale may declare the same to be purchased for the City. The property so purchased may then be sold by the agent under such regulations as may be prescribed for disposing of City property. The goods, chattels or effects so distrained shall be restored to the owner or possessor if, prior to the sale, the amount due is paid, together with the expenses, fees and other charges, or they may be redeemed by any person holding a chattel mortgage or other evidence of right of possession. 
(f)  In all cases of sale, the agent making the sale shall issue a certificate of sale to each purchaser, and such certificate is prima facie evidence of the right of the agent to make such sale and conclusive evidence of the regularity of the proceedings in making the sale. The certificate transfers to the purchaser all rights, title and interest of the delinquent taxpayer in and to the property sold. Where such property consists of certificates, securities or other evidence of indebtedness in the possession of the agent, the taxpayer shall endorse such certificates to the purchaser thereof and supply the purchaser with proof of the taxpayer's authority to transfer the same or with any other requisite that may be necessary to obtain registration of the transfer of the certificate. Any surplus remaining above shall be applied first to the City's taxes, penalties, interest, costs and expenses of making the seizure and of advertising the sale; then any amounts shall be distributed pro rata to other jurisdictions under recorded sales, use, personal property, ad valorem or other tax liens; the balance, if any, shall be returned to the property owner or such person having a legal right to the property; and, on demand, the Finance Director shall render an account in writing of the sale. 
(g)  In any case where a taxpayer has refused or neglected to pay any tax due to the City under this Article and a lien has been filed as provided in Section 4-6-380, the Finance Director may, in addition to pursuing other collection remedies, certify the amount of the tax, penalties and interest due, together with the appropriate amount for costs of county collection, to the County Treasurer to be levied against the person's property for collection by the County in the same manner as delinquent general taxes upon such property are collected. Before certifying such amounts to the County for collection, the Finance Director shall provide to the property owner an opportunity for a hearing to contest the authority of the City to impose the tax, or the amount thereof. The Finance Director shall mail the notice to the property owner by first-class mail, addressed to the last known owner of the property on the records of the County Assessor. If the Finance Director's decision after a hearing affirms the imposition of charges, the decision shall include notice that the charges are due and payable within ten (10) days of the date of the decision and that, if not paid when due, they will be certified to the County Treasurer for collection, along with an appropriate amount for the cost of county collection. Whenever the Finance Director certifies any such amounts to the County Treasurer for collection, the Finance Director shall record notice of such certification with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
(Prior code 3.16.095; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-430. - Recovery of unpaid tax by action at law. 
(a)  In addition to other remedies provided in this Article, the Finance Director may treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as a debt due to the City from the taxpayer. If the taxpayer fails to pay the tax or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest thereon, when due, the Finance Director may recover by law the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest in Municipal Court or in any district court wherein the taxpayer resides or has a principal place of business, that has jurisdiction over the amounts sought to be collected. The return filed by the taxpayer or the notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment issued by the Finance Director is prima facie proof of the amount due. 
(b)  The City Attorney is hereby authorized upon request by the Finance Director to commence any legal action or suit for the recovery of the tax due under this Article. 
(c)  Such actions may be actions in attachment, and writs of attachment may be issued to the sheriff. In any such proceedings, no bonds shall be required of the City, nor shall any sheriff require of the Finance Director an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings. The City may also prosecute appeals or writs of error in such cases without the necessity of providing for the bond therefor. 
(d)  In any case in which a taxpayer has refused or neglected to pay any tax, penalty or interest due to the City under this Article and a lien has been filed upon any real or personal property, the Finance Director may cause a civil action to be filed in the district court or municipal court in which is situated any such property subject to such lien to enforce the lien and subject any real or personal property or any right, title or interest in such property to the payment of the amount due. The court shall decree a sale of such real property and distribute the proceeds of such sale according to the court's findings concerning the interest of the parties and of the City. The proceedings with regard to the redemption of property from such sale and the execution of any deed of conveyance shall be in accordance with the law of foreclosures of mortgages upon real property. In any such action, the court may appoint a receiver of the property involved in such action if equity so requires. 
(Prior code 3.16.096; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-440. - City as party in title actions. 
    In any action affecting the title to real property or the ownership or right to possession of personal property, the City may be made a party defendant for the purpose of obtaining an adjudication or determination of its lien upon the property involved therein. 
(Prior code 3.16.097; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-450. - Injunctive relief. 
    The Finance Director may seek injunctive or other equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this Article. 
(Prior code 3.16.098; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-460. - Waiver of penalties, interest and fees by Finance Director. 
    The Finance Director is authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty, fee or interest imposed under this Article. 
(Prior code 3.16.099; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-470. - Obligations of fiduciaries and others. 
(a)  For the purpose of facilitating settlement and distribution of estates, trusts, receiverships, other fiduciary relationships and the assets of corporations in the process of dissolution or that have been dissolved, the Finance Director may agree with the fiduciary or surviving corporate directors upon an amount of taxes due from the decedent or from the decedent's estate, the trust, receivership or other fiduciary relationship, or the corporation for any of the periods of tax liability under this Article. Payment in accordance with such agreement fully satisfies the tax liability for the periods that the agreement covers, unless the taxpayer has committed fraud or misrepresented a material fact regarding the tax or liability therefor. 
(b)  Except as provided in Subsection (d) hereof, any personal representative of a decedent, the estate of a decedent, any trustee, receiver or other person acting in a fiduciary capacity, or any director of a corporation in the process of dissolution or that has been dissolved, who distributes the estate or fund under such person's control, without having first paid any taxes covered by this Article due from such decedent, decedent's estate, trust estate, receivership or corporation that may be assessed within the periods authorized by this Article, is personally liable to the extent of the property distributed by such person for any unpaid taxes of the decedent, the decedent's estate, trust estate, receivership or corporation imposed by or due under this Article and assessed within the periods authorized by this Article. 
(c)  The distributee of a decedent's estate, a trust estate or fund and the stockholder of any dissolved corporation who receives any of the property of such decedent's estate, trust estate, fund or corporation is personally liable under this Article to the same extent that the decedent, trust estate, fund or corporation is liable under this Article. 
(d)  If a tax is due from a decedent or the decedent's estate, the personal liability of the persons enumerated in this Section shall remain in effect only if a determination of the tax due is made and notice and demand therefor issues within eighteen (18) months after the decedent's personal representative files with the Finance Director a written request for such determination, which request shall be filed after he or she has filed the decedent's final return or the decedent's estate's return to which the request applies. A request for determination under this Subsection does not extend the otherwise applicable period of limitation. 
(e)  If a tax under this Article is due from a corporation that is in the process of dissolution or has been dissolved, the personal liability of directors or stockholders as provided in this Section shall remain in effect only if a determination of the tax due is made and notice and demand issued within eighteen (18) months after the corporation files with the Finance Director a written request for such determination, which request shall be filed after it has filed the corporation's return, but only if the request states that the dissolution was begun in good faith before the expiration of the eighteen-month period and the dissolution is completed. A request for determination under this Subsection does not extend the otherwise applicable period of limitation. 
(Prior code 3.16.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-480. - Review of decisions of Finance Director. 
    In the event the taxpayer has exhausted all local remedies, the taxpayer may apply for a review of the decision of the Finance Director in the District Court, in accordance with Section 29-2-106.1(8), C.R.S. Such review must be sought no later than thirty (30) days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. 
(Prior code 3.16.101; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-490. - Review bond required. 
    Within fifteen (15) days after making application to the District Court for review of the decision of the Finance Director, the party making such application shall file with the District Court a surety bond in the amount of twice the taxes, penalties, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the Finance Director which are contested on appeal. The taxpayer may, at his or her option, satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account or deposit in or a certificate of deposit issued by a state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with Section 11-35-101(1), C.R.S., equal to twice the amount of the taxes, penalties, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the Finance Director. The taxpayer may, at his or her option, deposit the disputed amount with the Finance Director in lieu of posting a surety bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the contested amount during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, after appeal or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the court, either retained by the Finance Director and applied against the amount due or returned in whole or in part with interest due to the taxpayer from the date it was paid to the Finance Director. No claim for refund of amounts deposited with the Finance Director need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in accordance with the direction of the court. 
(Prior code 3.16.102; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-500. - Notices. 
    All written notices required to be given to any taxpayer under this Article shall be hand delivered or mailed by first-class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such taxpayer at the last known address of the taxpayer on file with the City. 
(Prior code 3.16.103; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-510. - Tax in addition to all other taxes. 
    The tax imposed by this Article shall be in addition to all other taxes imposed by law, except as therein otherwise provided. 
(Prior code 3.16.104; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-520. - Hearings to be held in City. 
    Every hearing before the Finance Director shall be held in the City. 
(Prior code 3.16.105; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-530. - Administration by Finance Director; rules and regulations. 
    The administration of this Article is vested in and shall be exercised by the Finance Director who shall prescribe forms and formulate and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with this Article for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of taxes imposed and for the proper administration and enforcement thereof. 
(Prior code 3.16.106; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-540. - Authority to compromise taxes. 
    The Finance Director shall have the authority to compromise or enter into a payment plan with respect to any liability for taxes, interest or penalties where the total amount of the liability does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Where the total amount of the liability is in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) but does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), any compromise or payment plan must be approved by the City manager upon the recommendation of the Finance Director. Where the total amount of the liability exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), any compromise or payment plan must be approved by the City Council upon the recommendation of the Finance Director. In any action involving the City Council, the taxpayer expressly waives its right to confidentiality as outlined in Subsection 4-6-210(b). 
(Prior code 3.16.107; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-6-550. - Violations and fines. 
(a)  It is unlawful for: 
(1)  Any person to fail or refuse to make or file any return required to be made or filed by this Article or to make any false or fraudulent return or any false or fraudulent statement in any return. 
(2)  Any applicant for a tax refund to make a false statement in connection with such application. 
(3)  Any person other than the City to become enriched or to gain any benefit from the collection or payment of the taxes levied by this Article. 
(4)  Any person to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax imposed by this Article. 
(5)  Any person to violate any other provisions of this Article. 
(b)  A criminal action may be brought against any person, officer, employee, employer, agent or other representative who violates this Article. Each day that this Article is violated and each action violated shall constitute a separate violation. A criminal action may be brought in District Court or Municipal Court. Each violation is punishable by the maximum fine allowed under Chapter 1 of this Code or three (3) days in the county jail. 
(Prior code 3.16.108; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11 3, 2013) 
Sec. 4-6-560. - Limitations on actions to collect. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no assessment shall be made, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, distraint warrant be issued, bond be collected upon, suit for collection be instituted or any other action to collect the same be commenced more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was due and payable. In addition, no lien shall continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, when a notice of lien regarding such taxes was filed prior to the expiration of such period. In which case, the lien shall continue for only one (1) year after the filing of notice thereof. Liens which expire may be renewed indefinitely until all assessed taxes are paid. 
(b)  In the case of a false return, fraudulent act or failure to file a return, the tax, together with interest and penalties, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be commenced at any time. 
(c)  Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the Finance Director may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the previously agreed-upon extension. In the event that the taxpayer refuses to extend the period of limitation, the Finance Director may extend the period of limitation upon holding a hearing and finding good cause for the extension as a result of delays caused by the taxpayer. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit any right accrued or to revive any liability barred by any statute in effect on the effective date of the initial ordinance codified herein. 
(Prior code 3.16.109; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 7 - Employee Occupational Privilege Tax 

Sec. 4-7-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the levy of the taxes imposed by this Article is to raise funds for the payment of the expenses of operating the City. In accordance with this purpose, all proceeds of the tax shall be placed in the Capital Projects Fund. 
(Prior code 3.12.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Employee means any natural person who performs sufficient services for an employer to receive, as compensation therefor, no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) upon a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, for services performed within the City during any period in a calendar month. To facilitate in the compliance of this Article and to ease the burden of reporting, the following shall be considered an employee : 
a.  Any person who receives a W-2 for services rendered within the City. 
b.  Any person who receives a 1099 for services rendered within the City and does not receive a W-2 from any other employer for services rendered within the City equal to or in excess of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per month. 
c.  Any person who is provided a work area by any business within the City and has earned a compensation of no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) during any period in a calendar month. 
    Employer means an individual, association, corporation, (including a corporation not for profit), governmental administration, agency, arm, authority, board, body, branch, bureau, department, division, subdivision, section or unit, or any other entity, that employs one (1) or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis. For the purposes of this Section, every defined employee shall have a corresponding employer. 
    Finance Director means the Finance Director of the City or such other person designated by the municipality; Finance Director shall also include such person's designee. 
    Person means any natural person, individual, partnership, association, organization or corporation of any kind or character. 
    Taxpayer means any employer who is required to withhold and pay the tax imposed by this Article, or the employee who is taxed in this Article, as the case may be. 
    Wages means any compensation for services performed by an employee for any employer, including the cash value of all such compensation paid in any medium or form other than cash. 
(Prior code 3.12.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-30. - Intent. 
(a)  The performance of services within the City by an employee for an employer for any period of time in a calendar month for wages is the exercise of a taxable privilege, whether or not all or only part of the services of such natural person are performed within the City. 
(b)  Considering the relationship existing between the exercise by employees of the taxable privilege set forth in Subsection (a) hereof and the expenditures required by the City for street maintenance, police and fire protection and other municipal services, and to provide for the general welfare, and the relationship of the exercise of the taxable privilege by employees to a proper, just and equitable distribution of the tax burdens within the City, and all matters considered in relation thereto, the tax imposed in this Article on employees is reasonable, proper, uniform, nondiscriminatory and necessary for a just and proper distribution of the tax burdens within the City. 
(Prior code 3.12.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-40. - Levied. 
(a)  There is levied by the City upon and there shall be collected monthly from and paid to the Finance Director by each employee who performs services within the City for any period of time in a calendar month for an employer, an employee occupational privilege tax, at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) per month for each and every month in which such employee is, for any period of time, so employed. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature levied by the City. 
(b)  Where an employee otherwise subject to the employee occupational privilege tax performs services for a single employer within the City and within one (1) or more Colorado municipalities which also levy an employee occupational privilege tax, the City's tax shall be payable, unless such services, in terms of number of hours in the calendar month performed in the City for such employer, are less than such services performed in any other Colorado city which levies an employee occupational privilege tax. 
(Prior code 3.12.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-50. - Occupational privilege tax license required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any business, trade, profession or calling of any kind having a fixed or transitory location within the City, for any period of time without first having obtained a license therefor, which license shall be granted and issued by the Finance Director and shall be in full force and effect until revoked. 
(b)  Such license shall be granted only upon the submittal of an application stating the name and address of the person desiring such license, the name and nature of the business, the location, including the street number of such business and such other facts as may be reasonably required by the Finance Director. 
(c)  If an application for a license is submitted by an individual or business which previously held a license, the Finance Director may require that any taxes, penalties and interest due under the previous license be paid and a bond posted in an amount set by the Finance Director to ensure payment of taxes under the new license prior to the issuance of such new license. 
(Prior code 3.12.045; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-60. - Collection; filing of return. 
(a)  Every employer within the City as well as every employer situated outside of the City who engages in business within the City and who employs one (1) or more natural persons exercising within the City the taxable privilege set forth in Section 4-7-30, is charged with the duty of collecting monthly, from each employee exercising the taxable privilege set forth in Section 4-7-30, and with the duty of making a return and payment of the tax to the Finance Director, the sum of two dollars ($2.00) per month for the first month in which such privilege is exercised and each and every month thereafter. Further, each employer is authorized to deduct this tax from each employee, whether the employee is paid by salary, wages, commission or other compensation and whether or not part or all such services are performed within the City. 
(b)  Each employer shall, on or before the last day of each and every month, prepare and file a return for the preceding calendar month showing computation of the tax imposed in this Article, upon such forms as the Finance Director may prescribe for each taxable calendar month and, at the same time, shall pay to the Finance Director the taxes so collected and withheld by the employer from his or her employees taxable under this Article. If the employer fails to file the return and to pay such tax, whether or not the employer makes collection thereof from the salary, wages, commissions or other compensation paid by the employer to the employee, the employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax imposed in this Article as though the tax had originally been levied against the employer. 
(c)  The Finance Director may, by rule, permit an employer whose monthly tax due is less than forty dollars ($40.00) to make returns and pay taxes at intervals greater than one (1) month. The Finance Director may require a bond or other financial guarantee to secure payment of the tax on such less-frequent basis and may revoke permission to pay the tax on such basis, if payment of the tax due becomes delinquent. 
(d)  All amounts deducted and withheld by an employer from the wages of an employee shall be considered a tax collected under this Article, and no employee shall have any right of action against his or her employer with respect to any monies so deducted and withheld from his or her wages and paid over to the City in compliance with this Article. 
(e)  Every employer who deducts and withholds any amounts under this Article shall hold the same in trust for the City for the payment thereof to the Finance Director in the manner and at the time provided for in this Article. The City shall have a lien to secure the payment of any amounts withheld and not remitted as provided in this Article upon the real and personal property of the taxpayer located within a county, upon the filing with the clerk and recorder of that county of a notice of deficiency, notice of estimated taxes or notice of jeopardy assessment. 
(f)  In the event an employer is exempt from the withholding provisions of this Article, the employee of such exempt employer shall make and file with the Finance Director a monthly return for the preceding calendar month in such a manner and upon such forms as the Finance Director may prescribe, commencing on the last day of each month thereafter, and at the same time such employee shall pay the Finance Director the tax imposed in this Article for the preceding calendar month, provided that the Finance Director, upon application by such employee, may permit the employee to make returns and pay taxes at intervals greater than one (1) month. The Finance Director may require a bond or other financial guarantee to secure payment of the tax on such less-frequent basis and may revoke permission to pay the tax on such basis, if payment of the tax due becomes delinquent. 
(g)  Each employee who has more than one (1) employer within the City shall be subject to the payment of this tax by his or her principal employer, and his or her principal employer shall deduct this tax and, when requested to do so, shall deliver to the employee evidence on a form to be furnished to the employer by the Finance Director, which shall be evidence of the deduction having been made and, when presented to any other employer, shall be authority for such employer to not deduct this tax from the employee's wages. 
(h)  The failure or omission by any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the employee from the payment of the tax or from compliance by such employee with such regulations with respect to making returns and payment of the tax as may be fixed in this Section or established by the Finance Director. The City shall collect the tax from either the employer or the employee. If the City collects from the employer, it shall be the employer's responsibility to collect the tax from the employee. 
(Prior code 3.12.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-70. - Exemptions. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to empower the City to levy and collect the tax imposed by this Article upon any taxpayer not within the taxing power of the City, under the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution and laws of the state of Colorado. 
(Prior code 3.12.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-80. - Procedure for refund of disputed tax. 
(a)  An employee who, for any reason, claims that he or she is exempt from the tax imposed by this Article, after payment of the tax to the Finance Director by said employee or after deduction of tax from his or her wages by his or her employer, may apply to the Finance Director to determine his or her eligibility for exemption. 
(b)  Application for a refund based on a claimed exemption must be made within sixty (60) days from the date of payment of the tax to the Finance Director by the employee or the date of the deduction of the tax from the wages of the employee by the employer, whichever is applicable, and must be supported by receipt of payment or certificate of deduction issued by the employer, as the case may be, on such forms as shall be prescribed and furnished by the Finance Director, which forms shall contain such information as the Finance Director shall prescribe. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application, the Finance Director shall examine the same and shall give written notice to the applicant of his or her decision thereon. 
(Prior code 3.12.061; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-90. - Denial of refund. 
(a)  An appeal of a denial of a refund shall be submitted in writing to the Finance Director within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the denial of the refund and shall identify the amount of the refund requested and the basis for the appeal. 
(b)  An appeal of a denial of a refund may include a request for a hearing. Hearing procedures shall be as described in Section 4-7-150. 
(Prior code 3.12.062; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-100. - Right of refund not assignable. 
    The right of any person to a refund under this Article is not assignable. An application for a refund must be made by the individual who paid the tax. 
(Prior code 3.12.063; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-110. - Action for recovery of refund. 
    If any person obtains any refund unlawfully, the Finance Director is hereby empowered and directed to bring appropriate action for recovery of such refund. A conviction for a violation of Subsection 4-7-430(c) shall constitute prima facie evidence that all refunds received by such person pursuant to the application which contained the false statement were obtained unlawfully. Obtaining a refund unlawfully shall be an act of fraud against the City and shall be subject to applicable penalties as outlined in Section 4-7-240. 
(Prior code 3.12.064; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-120. - Preservation of returns and other records; confidentiality. 
(a)  Returns shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years from the date of filing with the Finance Director, after which time the Finance Director may order them destroyed. 
(b)  Except in accordance with a court order or as otherwise provided by law, the City and its agents and employees shall not divulge or make known in any way information obtained from any investigation conducted by the Finance Department or disclosed in any application, report, return or any other document kept, filed or maintained under this Article, except such information as is displayed on the tax license and license application. The persons charged with the custody of such applications, reports, returns or other documents shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained therein in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the Finance Director in an action or proceeding under this Article to which the Finance Director or the City is a party or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under this Article when the report of facts shown thereby is directly involved in such action or proceeding. In either of which events, the court may require the production of so much of the reports or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding. 
(c)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to the taxpayer, or a duly authorized representative thereof, a copy of any application, report, return or any other document kept, filed or maintained in connection with such person's tax liability. Copies of such documents may be certified by the Finance Director and, when so certified, shall be evidence equal with the original documents and may be received as evidence of their contents. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and contents thereof, or the inspection of any documents by the City attorney or other official representatives of the City. 
(e)  Notwithstanding this Section, the Finance Director may furnish to the taxing officials of the State or its political subdivisions, any other state or its political subdivisions or the United States any information contained in any application, report, return or any other document, if the recipient jurisdiction agrees with the Finance Director to grant similar privileges to the City and if such information is to be used by the jurisdiction only for tax-related purposes. 
(Prior code 3.12.065; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-130. - Records and accounts to be kept. 
    Every person who is required to obtain a license to do business in the City shall keep and preserve suitable records and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for the collection or payment of which such person is liable hereunder. It is the duty of every such person to keep and preserve all such books and other records for a period of three (3) years following the date the taxes were due to the City. Such items shall be open for examination in accordance with Subsection 4-7-190(f). If the taxpayer has filed a tax return for any period after the due date for that period, then the records for the period must be preserved for three (3) years after the date the return was filed. If the taxpayer has not filed a tax return for any period, then the records must be preserved indefinitely. Failure to preserve all records shall be an act of fraud against the City and shall be subject to applicable penalties as outlined in Section 4-7-240. 
(Prior code 3.12.066; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-140. - Examination of returns; recomputation, credits, deficiencies. 
    As soon as practicable after a return is filed, the Finance Director shall examine it. If it appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted may be greater or less than that shown in the return, the tax shall be recomputed by the Finance Director. If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the excess shall be refunded or credited against any subsequent remittance from the taxpayer. If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the amount of the deficiency with a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the deficiency plus interest on both the deficiency and the penalty shall be due and payable in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4-7-200. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added a fraud penalty as set forth in Section 4-7-240. 
(Prior code 3.12.067; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-150. - Investigation of records relating to taxes; hearings. 
(a)  For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return, or for the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, whether licensed under this Article or not, the Finance Director may hold investigations, including audits, and hearings concerning any matters covered by this Article, may examine any relevant books, papers, records or memoranda of any such person, may require the attendance of such person, or any officer or employee of such person, or of any person having knowledge of the transactions involved and may take testimony and evidence as proof of the information. The Finance Director shall have the power to administer oaths to such persons. 
(b)  The Finance Director may schedule a hearing, notifying all interested parties by regular mail at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing. The Finance Director is authorized to issue subpoenas as outlined in Section 4-7-160. Such hearing shall be informal, and no transcript, rules of evidence or filing of briefs shall be required; but the taxpayer may elect to submit a brief; in which case, the City may submit a brief. The Finance Director shall hold such hearing and issue a final decision within ninety (90) days after the City's notification to the taxpayer, except that the City may extend such period if the delay in holding the hearing or issuing the decision was occasioned by the taxpayer. In any event, the Finance Director shall hold such hearing within one hundred eighty (180) days of notifying the taxpayer of the hearing. The decision shall be mailed by regular mail to the taxpayer. If a taxpayer has exhausted City remedies, the taxpayer may dispute the decision of the Finance Director either by requesting a state hearing or by appealing the decision to the District Court. 
(Prior code 3.12.068; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-160. - Subpoenas and witness fees. 
    All subpoenas issued under the terms of this Article may be served by any person over the age of eighteen (18) years. The fees of witnesses for attendance in response to a subpoena shall be the same as the fees of witnesses before the District Court, such fees to be paid when the witness is excused from further attendance. When the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of the Finance Director, such fees shall be paid by the City. When a witness is subpoenaed at the instance of any other party to such proceeding, the Finance Director may require that the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee of the witness be borne by the party at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the Finance Director, in his or her discretion, may require a deposit to cover the cost of such service and witness fees prior to issuing such subpoenas. A subpoena issued as aforesaid shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued out of a court of record. 
(Prior code 3.12.069; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-170. - Attendance of witnesses and production of evidence. 
    Any judge of the District Court or the Municipal Court, upon the application of the Finance Director, may compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers, records or memoranda and the giving of testimony before the Finance Director, by an action for contempt or otherwise in the same manner as the production of evidence may be before such court. 
(Prior code 3.12.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-180. - Depositions. 
    The Finance Director, or any party to an investigation or hearing before the Finance Director, may cause the deposition of witnesses residing within or outside the State to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for depositions in civil actions in courts of this State and, to that end, compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. 
(Prior code 3.12.071; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-190. - Audit of records. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining the correctness of a return or the correct amount of tax due from any taxpayer engaged in business in the City, the Finance Director may authorize an agent to conduct an audit by examining any relevant books, accounts and records of such person. The taxpayer need not hold a license for an audit to be conducted, provided that the Finance Director finds reasonable cause to believe that taxes may be due to the City. 
(b)  All of the taxpayer's books, accounts and records shall be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the Finance Director. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested by the Finance Director, the Finance Director may issue a subpoena to require that the taxpayer or the taxpayer's representative attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination. 
(c)  Any tax deficiency or overpayment ascertained through audit shall be computed by one (1) or more of the following methods or any other method as the Finance Director deems appropriate: 
(1)  Identifying employees on which the tax was not properly or accurately withheld or paid. 
(2)  Identifying other irregularities in the calculation of tax due. 
(3)  Estimating taxes due based on the results of testing taxpayer's records on a statistical or other reasonable basis. 
(d)  Any charitable organization claiming exemption under this Article is subject to audit in the same manner as any other person engaged in business in the City. 
(e)  The City is authorized to audit taxpayers' records for the thirty-six (36) calendar months proceeding the month the taxpayer is notified that an audit is to be conducted. The audit period may be extended by mutual agreement of the City and the taxpayer. The ability to audit this thirty-six-month period shall not lapse due to the passage of time, once the taxpayer has been notified of the audit period. If the taxpayer failed to file returns, then the City shall have the right to indefinitely audit periods not filed. If returns are filed late, then the City shall have the right to audit late returns for thirty-six (36) months following the month the return was filed. 
(f)  All taxpayer records shall be made available to the City within a fifty-mile radius of the City's municipal office. If the taxpayer does not wish to make records available within this area, then the Finance Director may elect to assess the taxpayer for all expenses associated with sending auditors to the location selected by the taxpayer and for reasonable expenses, including food and lodging, incurred by the auditors during the period of the audit and until their return to the City. Such liability shall become part of the final audit assessment and shall be treated as an unpaid tax. 
(g)  If the taxpayer does not provide files in an organized format; if the auditors must go through taxpayer files and boxes in order to obtain records for audit; or if the taxpayer fails to provide information in a timely fashion, the City shall be entitled to charge an hourly fee for time spent organizing, gathering or in any way assembling taxpayer records for audit. Such fee shall be determined by the Finance Director, but in no event shall such fee exceed two and one-half (21/2) times the auditor's hourly salary. 
(Prior code 3.12.072; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-200. - Failure to make return; estimate of taxes; notices; appeal. 
(a)  If any person fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax, or to file a return and pay the tax as required by this Article, or fails, neglects or refuses to collect, report or pay any portion of the tax, the Finance Director shall make an estimate of the tax due based on available information and shall add thereto a penalty equal to the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or ten percent (10%) of the tax due, whichever is greater, and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed by Section 4-7-250, plus one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month from the date the return and tax was due, which interest shall not exceed eighteen percent (18%) in the aggregate. 
(b)  The Finance Director shall serve upon the delinquent taxpayer personally or by first-class mail, directed to the last address of the taxpayer on file with the City, written notice assessing such estimated taxes, penalty and interest. Such notice shall constitute a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment, and such assessment shall be due and payable from the taxpayer to the Finance Director within twenty (20) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing; provided, however, that within the twenty-day period such delinquent taxpayer may appeal the notice of determination. 
(c)  An appeal of a notice of assessment issued to a taxpayer for failure to file a return, underpayment of tax owed or as a result of an audit shall be submitted in writing to the Finance Director within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice of assessment. Any such appeal shall identify the amount of tax disputed and the basis for the appeal. 
(d)  An appeal of a notice of assessment may include a request for a hearing. 
(e)  If a hearing was requested in response to a notice of assessment, the Finance Director shall notify the petitioner in writing of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held in accordance with Section 4-7-150. After such hearing, or after a consideration of the facts and figures contained in the petition if no hearing is requested, the Finance Director shall make such order in the matter as he or she deems just and proper and shall furnish a copy of such order to the petitioner. 
(Prior code 3.12.073; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-210. - Appeal from administrative hearing decision of Finance Director. 
    An appeal of a final decision of the Finance Director in a hearing held pursuant to Section 4-7-200 shall be commenced within thirty (30) days of such decision. 
(Prior code 3.12.074; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-220. - Duties of Enforcement Officer. 
(a)  The Tax Enforcement Officer shall be an employee of the Finance Department, supervised by the Finance Director. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Tax Enforcement Officer to enforce this Chapter. 
(c)  The Tax Enforcement Officer shall be deemed a peace officer for the limited purpose of enforcing the provisions delineated in Subsection (b) hereof and shall have the power to issue summonses and complaints pursuant to Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. The Tax Enforcement Officer shall also have other duties as outlined in rules and regulations promulgated by the Finance Director. 
(d)  The Tax Enforcement Officer shall not be deemed to be a sworn member of the Police Department and shall not carry a weapon. 
(Prior code 3.12.075; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-230. - Assessment and recurring assessment penalty. 
    If any taxpayer has failed, neglected or refused to pay the tax imposed by this Article within the time specified, the Finance Director may assess the following penalties, in addition to the taxes, penalties and interest provided for elsewhere in this Article, the additional amount being imposed to compensate the City for administrative and collection costs incurred in collecting such delinquent taxes: 
(1)  Upon the first or second issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifteen dollars ($15.00) per notice. 
(2)  Upon the third, fourth or fifth issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or fifteen percent (15%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(3)  Upon the sixth or more issuance of a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment within twelve (12) months, fifty dollars ($50.00) or thirty percent (30%) of the delinquent taxes, penalties and interest, whichever is greater, per notice. 
(Prior code 3.12.076; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-240. - Penalties. 
(a)  Compliance penalty. A penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed for each section of this Article which the taxpayer violates. This penalty shall be in addition to any other applicable penalties and interest. 
(b)  Fraud penalty. In the event that the taxpayer commits an act of fraud upon the City, the City shall be entitled to assess a fraud penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or one hundred percent (100%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Article. An additional three-percent-per-month penalty on the amount of the fraud penalty shall be added from the date the penalty was due until it is paid. 
(c)  Special penalty. If the taxpayer is audited and deficiencies are found in the taxpayer's records which result in unpaid taxes owed to the City, the taxpayer shall have six (6) months from the date of the audit assessment in which to correct its records. If the deficiencies are not corrected and result in unpaid taxes due to the City in the future, then the City shall be entitled to assess a special penalty against the taxpayer. Such special penalty shall be assessed from the first day after the last day on which the taxpayer's records were previously audited. The special penalty shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or fifty percent (50%) of the taxes owed, whichever is greater. Such penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties to which the City is entitled under this Article. 
(Prior code 3.12.077, 3.12.078, 3.12.079; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-250. - Rate of interest; method of calculation. 
    When interest is required or permitted to be charged under any provision of this Article, the annual rate of interest shall be calculated at the rate of one percent (1%) per month from the date when due. For the purpose of calculating the amount of interest due, the date the return and tax was due shall be determined without regard to any extension of time for payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. 
(Prior code 3.12.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-260. - Tax constitutes lien. 
(a)  The occupational privilege tax imposed by this Article, along with all penalties and interest pertaining thereto, is a first and prior lien upon the goods, stock-in-trade and business fixtures in which the taxpayer has an ownership interest, and such lien takes priority over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature on such property. 
(b)  The occupational privilege tax imposed by this Article, along with all penalties and interest pertaining thereto, is a first and prior lien on the real and personal property of the taxpayer, and such lien takes priority over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature on such property. 
(c)  Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer is placed in receivership, bankruptcy, seized under distraint for nonpayment of property taxes or an assignment is made for the benefit of creditors, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article and for which the taxpayer is in any way liable under this Article are a prior and preferred claim against all the property of the taxpayer. No sheriff, receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any taxpayer subject to this Article under process or order of any court, without first ascertaining from the Finance Director the amount of any taxes, penalties or interest due and payable under this Article. If there are any such taxes, penalties or interest due, owing or unpaid, it is the duty of such officer to first pay the amount of the taxes, penalties or interest out of the proceeds of such sale before paying any monies to judgment creditors or other claimants, except that the officer may pay costs of the proceedings and other preexisting liens or claims taking lawful precedence over the City's claim. 
(d)  If a taxpayer discharges its debts through bankruptcy, dissolution, reorganization or other means, the City shall be empowered to pursue collection of the unpaid taxes from any officer, agent, trustee or other official of the taxpayer. The City may collect the taxes due through garnishment, liens or any other lawful methods, including but not limited to enforcement actions applicable to the taxpayer as outlined in this Code. 
(e)  If any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this Article and shown due by returns filed by the taxpayer or by assessments made by the City is not paid within five (5) days after it is due, the Finance Director may issue a notice, setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax penalties and interest, the date of its accrual and the fact that the City claims a first and prior lien therefor on the real and personal property of the taxpayer. The notice of lien shall be made on forms prescribed by the Finance Director and verified by the Finance Director and may be filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of any county in the state in which the taxpayer owns real or personal property or with any person in possession of any personal property or rights to property belonging to the taxpayer. 
(f)  The Finance Director shall release any lien as shown on the records of the county clerk and recorder as herein provided, upon payment of all taxes, penalties and interest covered thereby, in the same manner as mortgages and judgments are released. 
(Prior code 3.12.081; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-270. - Sale of business subject to lien. 
(a)  Any person who sells a business or stock of goods or closes a business shall complete and file the returns required under this Article, shall pay the taxes, penalties and interest due within ten (10) days of the date on which such person sold the business or stock of goods or closed the business and shall indicate that it is a final return, that the business is sold or closed and the name and address of the purchaser of the business, if any. 
(b)  The tax imposed by this Article shall be a first and prior lien on the real or personal property, goods, furniture, fixtures, furnishings, equipment and/or inventory owned or used by a taxpayer. This lien shall take priority over all other claims or liens against the property. A purchaser of a business who has acquired the real or personal property, goods, furniture, fixtures, equipment and/or inventory of the business shall withhold sufficient funds from the purchase money to cover the amount of taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article due and unpaid until the seller provides a receipt from the Finance Director showing that such taxes, penalties and interest have been paid. If taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article are due and unpaid after the ten-day period herein provided, such purchaser of the business is personally liable for the payment of the taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this Article due and unpaid to the City to the same extent as the seller of the business or stock of goods. 
(c)  Any person who obtains by purchase, foreclosure or sale otherwise, except at a sale conducted pursuant to Subsection 4-7-300(e), any goods, stock-in-trade or business fixtures owned or leased by any person, takes them subject to the lien of the City for any delinquent taxes owed by the prior owner of the property and is liable to pay all delinquent taxes of the prior owner, but only up to and including the value of property so acquired. 
(Prior code 3.12.082; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-280. - Certificate of discharge of lien. 
(a)  If any real or personal property is subject to a lien for payment of tax due to the City under this Article, the Finance Director may issue a certificate of discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien, if the Finance Director finds that the fair market value of that part of such property remaining subject to the lien is at least twice the amount of the unsatisfied tax liability plus the value of any liens on the property that have priority over the City's lien. 
(b)  If any real or personal property is subject to a lien for payment of tax due to the City under this Article, the Finance Director may issue a certificate of discharge of any part of the property subject to the lien, if the Finance Director is paid in partial satisfaction of the tax liability an amount determined by the Finance Director to be not less than the value of the City's interest in the part of the property so discharged. In determining the value of the part of the property to be discharged, the Finance Director shall consider the fair market value of the property and the value of any liens on the property that have priority over the City's lien. 
(c)  A certificate of release of lien issued under this Section is conclusive evidence that the City's lien upon the property is extinguished, but does not extinguish or release any portion of the lien on property not specified in the release. 
(Prior code 3.12.083; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-290. - Jeopardy assessment. 
(a)  If the Finance Director finds that collection of the tax will be jeopardized for any reason, the Finance Director may declare the taxable period immediately terminated, determine the tax and issue a notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment. Notwithstanding Section 4-9-200, the tax shall then be due and payable forthwith, and the Finance Director may proceed to collect the tax as provided in Section 4-7-300. 
(b)  If the taxpayer, subject to a jeopardy assessment, provides security for payment of the tax satisfactory to the Finance Director, the Finance Director may forego the jeopardy assessment collection proceedings. 
(Prior code 3.12.084; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-300. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Finance Director may issue a warrant directed to any employee, agent or representative of the City or any sheriff of any county of the State, commanding such person to distrain, seize and sell any personal property in which the taxpayer has an ownership interest, except such property as is exempt from the execution and sale by any state statute, for the payment of tax due, together with interest and penalties thereon and costs of execution for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within twenty (20) days from the date of the notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment and no hearing or extension has been requested in a timely manner. 
(2)  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment and no appeal from such notice has been docketed in the Municipal Court or District Court during such time, except that if the Finance Director finds that collection of the tax will be jeopardized during such period, the Finance Director may immediately issue a distraint warrant. 
(3)  When any deficiency in tax is not paid within the time prescribed in the judgment and order of court on any appeal to the District Court. 
(4)  Immediately upon making a jeopardy assessment or issuing a demand for payment upon jeopardy assessment as provided in Section 4-7-290. 
(5)  After or concurrently with the filing of a notice of lien as provided in Subsection 4-7-260(d). 
(b)  The Finance Director may apply to the Municipal Court for a warrant authorizing the Finance Director to search for and seize property located within the City for the purpose of enforcing the collection of taxes under this Article. The Finance Director may apply to the District Court for a warrant outside the City limits. The judge shall issue such warrant after the Finance Director determines that: 
(1)  The premises to which entry is sought contain property that is subject to levy and sale for taxes due; and 
(2)  At least one (1) of the preconditions of Subsection (a) hereof have been satisfied; but if a jeopardy assessment has been declared under Section 4-7-290, the Finance Director shall set forth the reasons that collection of the tax will be jeopardized. 
(c)  The procedures to be followed in issuing and executing a warrant in Municipal Court pursuant to Subsection (b) hereof shall comply with the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
(d)  The taxpayer may contest a warrant previously issued under the procedure provided by the Colorado Municipal Court Rules of Procedure, except that no proceeding to contest such warrant may be brought after five (5) days prior to the date fixed for sale of the distrained property. 
(e)  The agent charged with the search and seizure shall make or cause to be made an account of the goods or effects distrained, and shall leave a copy of such account, signed by the agent making such distraint, with the owner or possessor of the property; or if the owner or possessor of the property is unavailable at the owner's or possessor's usual place of abode, with some family member over the age of eighteen (18) years; or at the owner's or possessor's usual place of business with a stenographer, bookkeeper or chief clerk; or if the taxpayer is a corporation, with any officer, manager, general agent or agent for process; with a statement of the sum demanded and time and place of sale. The agent charged with collection shall forthwith cause to be published a notice of the time and place of sale and a description of the property to be sold in a newspaper within the county wherein distraint is made, or, in lieu thereof and in the discretion of the Finance Director, the agent shall cause such notice to be publicly posted at the county courthouse wherein such distraint is made, and copies thereof shall be posted in at least two (2) other public places within the county. The time fixed for the sale shall not be less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of such notification to the owner or possessor of the property and the publication or posting of such notices. The sale may be adjourned or postponed from time to time by the agent, if the agent deems it advisable, to a date certain but not for a time to exceed in all ninety (90) days from the date first fixed for the sale. When any personal property is advertised for sale under distraint, the agent making the seizure shall proceed to sell such property at public auction, offering the property at not less than a fair minimum price that includes the expenses of making the seizure and of advertising the sale. If the amount bid for the property at the sale does not equal the fair minimum price so fixed, the agent conducting the sale may declare the same to be purchased for the City. The property so purchased may then be sold by the agent under such regulations as may be prescribed for the disposal of City property. The goods, chattels or effects so distrained shall be restored to the owner or possessor, if, prior to the sale, the amount due is paid together with the expenses, fees and other charges, or they may be redeemed by any person holding a chattel mortgage or other evidence of right of possession. 
(f)  In all cases of sale, the agent making the sale shall issue a certificate of sale to each purchaser, and such certificate is prima facie evidence of the right of the agent to make such sale and conclusive evidence of the regularity of the proceedings in making the sale. The certificate transfers to the purchaser all right, title and interest of the delinquent taxpayer in and to the property sold. Where such property consists of certificates, securities or other evidence of indebtedness in the possession of the agent, the taxpayer shall endorse such certificates to the purchaser thereof and supply the purchaser with proof of the taxpayer's authority to transfer the same or with any other requisite that may be necessary to obtain registration of the transfer of the certificate. Any surplus remaining above, shall be applied first to the City's taxes, penalties, interest, costs and expenses of making the seizure and of advertising the sale; and then any amounts distributed pro rata to other jurisdictions under recorded sales, use, personal property, ad valorem or other tax liens, shall be returned to the property owner of such person having a legal right to the property; and, on demand, the Finance Director shall render an account in writing of the sale. 
(g)  If a taxpayer has refused or neglected to pay any tax due to the City under this Article and a lien has been filed as provided in Section 4-7-260, the Finance Director may, in addition to pursuing other collection remedies, certify the amount of the tax, penalties and interest due, together with the appropriate amount for costs of county collection, to the County Treasurer to be levied against the person's property for collection by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes upon such property are collected. Before certifying such amounts to the county for collection, the Finance Director shall provide to the property owner an opportunity for hearing to contest the authority of the City to impose the tax, or the amount thereof. The Finance Director shall mail the notice to the property owner by first-class mail addressed to the last known owner of the property on the records of the County Assessor. If the Finance Director's decision after a hearing affirms the imposition of charges, the decision shall include notice that the charges are due and payable within ten (10) days of the date of the decision and that, if not paid when due, they will be certified to the County Treasurer for collection, along with an appropriate amount for the cost of county collection. Whenever the Finance Director certifies any such amounts to the County Treasurer for collection, the Finance Director shall record notice of such certification with the County Clerk and Recorder. 
(Prior code 3.12.085; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-310. - Recovery of unpaid tax by action at law. 
(a)  In addition to other remedies provided in this Article, the Finance Director may treat any such taxes, penalties or interest due and unpaid as a debt due to the City from the taxpayer. If a taxpayer fails to pay the tax, any portion thereof or any penalty or interest thereon when such payment is due, the Finance Director may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest in Municipal Court or in any county or district court wherein the taxpayer resides or has a principal place of business, that has jurisdiction over the amounts sought to be collected. The return filed by the taxpayer or the notice of determination, assessment and demand for payment issued by the Finance Director is prima facie evidence of the amount due. 
(b)  The City Attorney is authorized, upon request by the Finance Director, to commence any legal action or suit for the recovery of the tax due under this Article. 
(c)  Such actions may be actions in attachment, and writs of attachment may be issued to the sheriff. In any such proceedings, no bonds shall be required of the City, nor shall any sheriff require of the Finance Director an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment or writ of execution upon any judgment entered in such proceedings. The City may also prosecute appeals or writs of error in such cases without the necessity of providing bond therefor. 
(d)  If a taxpayer has refused or neglected to pay any tax, penalty or interest due to the City and a lien has been filed upon any real or personal property, the Finance Director may cause a civil action to be filed in the District Court or Municipal Court in which is situated any such property subject to such lien to enforce the lien and subject any real or personal property or any right, chapter or interest in such property to the payment of the amount due. The Court shall decree a sale of such real property and distribute the proceeds of such sale according to the Court's findings concerning the interest of the parties and of the City. The proceedings with regard to the redemption of property from such sale and the execution of any deed of conveyance shall be in accordance with the law of foreclosures of mortgages upon real property. In any such action, the Court may appoint a receiver of the property involved in such action if equity so requires. 
(Prior code 3.12.086; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-320. - City may be party in title actions. 
    In any action affecting the title to real property or the ownership or right to possession of personal property, the City may be made a party defendant for the purpose of obtaining an adjudication or determination of its lien upon the property involved therein. 
(Prior code 3.12.087; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-330. - Injunctive relief. 
    The Finance Director may seek injunctive or other equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce this Article. 
(Prior code 3.12.088; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-340. - Waiver of penalties, interest and fees by Finance Director. 
    The Finance Director is authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty, fee or interest imposed under this Article. 
(Prior code 3.12.089; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-350. - Obligations of fiduciaries and others. 
(a)  For the purpose of facilitating settlement and distribution of estates, trusts, receiverships, other fiduciary relationships and the assets of corporations in the process of dissolution or that have been dissolved, the Finance Director may agree with the fiduciary or surviving corporate directors upon an amount of taxes due from the decedent or from the decedent's estate, the trust, receivership or other fiduciary relationship or corporation for any of the periods of tax liability under this Article. Payment in accordance with such agreement fully satisfies the tax liability for the periods that the agreement covers, unless the taxpayer has committed fraud or misrepresented a material fact regarding the tax or liability therefor. 
(b)  Except as provided in Subsection (d) hereof, any personal representative of a decedent or the estate of a decedent, any trustee, receiver or other person acting in a fiduciary capacity or any director of a corporation in the process of dissolution or that has been dissolved, who distributes the estate or fund under such person's control without having first paid any taxes covered by this Article due from such decedent, decedent's estate, trust estate, receivership or corporation and that may be assessed within the periods authorized by this Article is personally liable to the extent of the property distributed by such person for any unpaid taxes of the decedent, decedent's estate, trust estate, receivership or corporation imposed by or due under this Article and assessed within the periods authorized by this Article. 
(c)  The distributee of a decedent's estate, a trust estate or fund and the stockholder of any dissolved corporation who receives any of the property of such decedent's estate, trust estate, fund or corporation is personally liable to the same extent that the decedent, trust estate, fund or corporation is liable under this Article. 
(d)  If a tax under this Article is due from a decedent or the decedent's estate, the personal liability of the persons enumerated in this Section shall remain in effect only if a determination of the tax due is made and notice and demand therefor issued within eighteen (18) months after the decedent's personal representative files with the Finance Director a written request for such determination, which request shall be filed after he or she has filed the decedent's final return or the decedent's estate's return to which the request applies. A request for determination under this Subsection does not extend the otherwise applicable period of limitation. 
(e)  If a tax under this Article is due from a corporation that is in the process of dissolution or has been dissolved, the personal liability of directors or stockholders as provided in this Section shall remain in effect only if a determination of the tax due is made and notice and demand issued within eighteen (18) months after the corporation files with the Finance Director a written request for such determination, which request shall be filed after it has filed the corporation's return, but only if the request states that the dissolution was begun in good faith before the expiration of the eighteen-month period and the dissolution is completed. A request for determination under this Subsection does not extend the otherwise applicable period of limitation. 
(Prior code 3.12.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-360. - Review of decisions of Finance Director. 
    In the event the taxpayer has exhausted all local remedies, the taxpayer may apply for a review of the decision of the Finance Director in the District Court in accordance with Section 29-2-106.1(8), C.R.S. Such review must be sought no later than thirty (30) days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. 
(Prior code 3.12.091; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-370. - Review bond required. 
    Within fifteen (15) days after making application to the District Court for review of the decision of the Finance Director, the party making such application shall file with the District Court a surety bond in the amount of twice the taxes, penalties, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the Finance Director which are contested on appeal. The taxpayer may, at his or her option, satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account or deposit in, a certificate of deposit issued by a state or national bank, or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with Section 11-35-101(1), C.R.S., equal to twice the amount of the taxes, penalties, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the Finance Director. The taxpayer may, at his or her option, deposit the disputed amount with the Finance Director in lieu of posting a surety bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the contested amount during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, after appeal or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the Court, either retained by the Finance Director and applied against the amount due or returned in whole or in part with interest due to the taxpayer from the date it was paid to the Finance Director. No claim for a refund of amounts deposited with the Finance Director need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in accordance with the direction of the Court. 
(Prior code 3.12.092; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-380. - Notices. 
    All written notices required to be given to any taxpayer under this Article shall be hand delivered or mailed by first-class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such taxpayer at the last known address of the taxpayer on file with the City. 
(Prior code 3.12.093; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-390. - Tax in addition to all other taxes. 
    The tax imposed by this Article shall be in addition to all other taxes imposed by law, except as herein otherwise provided. 
(Prior code 3.12.094; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-400. - Hearings to be held in City. 
    Every hearing before the Finance Director shall be held in the City. 
(Prior code 3.12.095; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-410. - Administration by Finance Director; rules and regulations. 
    The administration of this Article is vested in and shall be exercised by the Finance Director who shall prescribe forms and formulate and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with this Article for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of taxes imposed and for the proper administration and enforcement thereof. 
(Prior code 3.12.096; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-420. - Authority to compromise taxes. 
    The Finance Director is authorized to compromise or enter into a payment plan with respect to any liability for taxes, interest or penalties where the total amount of the liability does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Where the total amount of the liability is in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) but does not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), any compromise or payment plan must be approved by the City Manager upon the recommendation of the Finance Director. Where the total amount of the liability exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), any compromise or payment plan must be approved by the City Council upon the recommendation of the Finance Director. In any action involving City Council, the taxpayer expressly waives its right to confidentiality as outlined in Subsection 4-7-120(b). 
(Prior code 3.12.097; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-7-430. - Violations and fines. 
(a)  It is unlawful for: 
(1)  Any person to fail or refuse to make or file any return required to be made or filed by this Article or to make any false or fraudulent return or any false or fraudulent statement in any return. 
(2)  Any applicant for a tax refund to make a false statement in connection with such application. 
(3)  Any person other than the City to become enriched or to gain any benefit from the collection or payment of the taxes levied by this Article. 
(4)  Any person to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax imposed by this Article. 
(5)  Any person to violate any other provisions of this Article. 
(b)  A criminal action may be brought against any person, officer, employer, employee, agent or other representative who violates this Article. Each day that this Article is violated and each action violated shall constitute a separate violation. A criminal action may be brought in District Court or Municipal Court. Each violation is punishable by the maximum fine allowed under Chapter 1 of this Code or three (3) days in the county jail. 
(Prior code 3.12.098; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11 4, 2013) 
Sec. 4-7-440. - Limitations on actions to collect. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no assessment shall be made nor shall any notice of lien be filed, distraint warrant be issued, bond be collected upon, suit for collection be instituted or any other action to collect the same be commenced more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was due and payable. In addition, no lien shall continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, when a notice of lien regarding such taxes as filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which case the lien shall continue for only one (1) year after the filing of notice thereof. Liens which expire may be renewed indefinitely until all amounts due are paid. 
(b)  In the case of a false return, fraudulent act or failure to file a return, the tax, together with interest and penalties, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may be commenced at any time. 
(c)  Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the Finance Director may agree in writing to an extension, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the previously agreed-upon extension. In the event that the taxpayer refuses to extend the period of limitation, the Finance Director may extend the period of limitation upon holding a hearing and finding good cause for the extension as a result of delays caused by the taxpayer. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit any right accrued or to revive any liability barred by any statute in effect on the effective date of the initial ordinance codified herein. 
(Prior code 3.12.099; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 8 - Lodging Tax 

Sec. 4-8-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the levy of the tax imposed by this Article is for the raising of funds for the payment of the expenses of operating and improving the City. In accordance with the purpose, the proceeds of the tax shall become a part of the General Fund. 
(Prior code 3.10.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-8-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Finance Director means the Director of Finance of the City. Finance Director shall also include such person's designee. 
    Lodging means the transaction of furnishing rooms or accommodations to a person or persons who, for consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, mobile home, auto camp, trailer court or trailer park, or residential dwelling, under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
    Lodging tax means a tax payable to the provider of lodging or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a vendor during the period for which such person is required to report the collections of lodging tax as herein specified. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by the court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit, and includes the plural as well as the singular number. 
    Purchaser means any person to whom the taxable service of lodging has been rendered. 
    Taxpayer means any person obligated to account to the Finance Director for taxes collected or to be collected under the terms of this Article. 
    Vendor means any person making sales to a purchaser in the City of the taxable service of lodging. 
(Prior code 3.10.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 07  3, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 4-8-30. - Tax levied. 
    There is levied and shall be paid and collected an excise tax of three percent (3%) on the price paid for the leasing, rental or furnishing of any lodging located in the City. This tax shall be in addition to the sales tax established pursuant to Article 3 of this Chapter. It is a violation of this Code for any purchaser of lodging within the City to fail to pay, or for any vendor of such lodging to fail to collect, the tax levied pursuant to this Section. 
(Prior code 3.10.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-8-40. - Transaction exempt from tax. 
    The following lodging transactions are exempt from taxation under this Article: 
(1)  All lodging provided to the United States government; to the State, its departments or institutions and political subdivisions in their governmental capacities only, including the City and any department thereof. 
(2)  All lodging provided to religious, charitable and eleemosynary functions and activities only. 
(3)  All lodging provided to persons which the City is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States or the State. 
(4)  All lodging provided to any person for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(Prior code 3.10.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-8-50. - Returns; collection of tax on lodging. 
(a)  Every vendor providing lodging shall collect the tax thereon on behalf of the City and shall act as a trustee therefor. On or before the twentieth day of the month following the reporting period, or as otherwise directed by the Finance Director, every vendor shall file a lodging tax return on a form prescribed by the Finance Director. The vendor shall, at that time, also remit the taxes due pursuant to Section 4-8-30. Timely filing shall be evidenced by the postmark date. 
(b)  Unless the context indicates clearly to the contrary, the collection, filing of returns, vendor's fee, reporting, accounting and maintenance of records for the tax on lodging shall be accomplished pursuant to Article 3 of this Chapter. In interpreting such sections, substitution of this Article shall be made where appropriate. 
(Prior code 3.10.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-8-60. - Administration. 
    The administration of this Article is vested in the Finance Director or his or her authorized agent. Unless the context indicates clearly to the contrary, the provisions on investigations, confidentiality of records, refunds, credits, deficiencies, estimates, penalties, interest, disputed tax, hearings, subpoenas, notices, review and bonds specified in Article 3 of this Chapter, shall be applied to this Article. In interpreting these sections, substitutions of this Article shall be made where appropriate. 
(Prior code 3.10.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-8-70. - Enforcement. 
    The collection of the tax on lodging shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions specified in Article 3 of this Chapter. In interpreting such sections, substitution of this Article shall be made where appropriate. 
(Prior code 3.10.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-8-80. - Violation; summons and complaint; penalty. 
(a)  It is a violation of this Article for any person subject to the tax on lodging levied by the City to refuse to make any return provided to be made in this Article, to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statement in any return or to fail or refuse to make timely payment to the Finance Director or his or her authorized agent of any taxes collected or due to the City, or in any manner to evade the collection and timely payment of the tax, or any part thereof, imposed by this Article, or for any person or purchaser to fail or refuse to pay any such tax or evade the timely payment thereof, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the timely payment of tax imposed by this Article. 
(b)  The Finance Director may direct the issuance of a complaint and summons to appear before the Municipal Court to any person who may be in violation of this Article. 
(c)  Any person who violates this Article shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment, pursuant to the limits established in Section 1-4-20. Each and every twenty-four-hour continuation of any violation shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Prior code 3.10.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 9 - Special Improvement Districts 
Division 1 - Local Improvement Districts[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 21,  1, adopted October 16, 2017, added div. 1 and div. 2 to art. 9. 

Sec. 4-9-10. - Creation. 
    The creation of local improvement districts for the construction, installation or improvement of public improvements of whatsoever character, which confer a special benefit upon the property within the district and a general benefit upon the City as a whole, and which are to be paid for either wholly or in part by a levy of special assessments upon the real property within the district, may be established by the City Council on its own initiative or upon a petition signed by a majority of the landowners within the proposed district, in accordance with Article XIII, Section 13.1 of the Charter and with this Article. 
(Prior code 3.28.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-9-20. - General law to control. 
    Except as provided by the Charter and except as provided in this Article, the procedure for the creation of local improvement districts in the City, the procedure for notice, the method and manner of making such improvements, letting contracts therefor, assessing the costs therefor and issuing and paying bonds for costs and expenses of such districts and of construction or installation of such improvements shall be as provided by the general laws of the State relating to improvement districts by statutory municipalities as such laws exist at the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, or as may be amended, except insofar as such laws pertain to the interest rates applicable on bonds and assessments, which interest rates shall be established by ordinance by the City Council, and except as set forth in this Article are in conflict therewith. 
(Prior code 3.28.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-9-30. - Improvements authorized. 
    Local improvements which may be authorized by the City Council pursuant to this Article may be of any nature which serve a municipal purpose and which confer a special benefit upon the real property within the district, including but not limited to the grading, paving, curbing, guttering, parking or otherwise improving the whole or any part of any street, alley, road or highway within the City, the construction, installation or improvement of any sidewalks, water mains, sewers, sewage disposal works, street lighting, parks, parkways and off-street parking facilities and all appurtenances thereof and the burying or undergrounding of electric power transmission lines and related facilities. The creation of such districts pursuant to this Article shall not be the exclusive method therefor, and the City Council may authorize any construction, installation or improvement in any other lawful manner. 
(Prior code 3.28.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-9-40. - Petition; filing; contents. 
(a)  Proceedings for the creation of a special improvement district pursuant to this Article may be initiated by the filing of a written petition with the City Clerk signed by a majority of the owners of real property within the district designated in the petition, which petition shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the area to be included within the district. 
(2)  A description of the improvements petitioned for and the location thereof. 
(3)  The names and addresses of the signers thereof, together with the legal description of the parcels of real property owned by each. 
(b)  Any such petition which substantially complies with Subsection (a) hereof shall be deemed to be sufficient. 
(Prior code 3.28.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-9-50. - Council consideration; resolution. 
    The City Council shall consider each such petition so filed without, however, being compelled to act favorably upon the same. Upon the City Council's favorable consideration of any such petition, or upon the City Council's own initiative, the City Council shall adopt a resolution of intention to create a local improvement district, shall set a time and place for a public hearing thereon and shall direct the City Clerk to give public notice thereof. 
(Prior code 3.28.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-9-60. - Public notice. 
    Notice of public hearing concerning the proposed improvement district shall be published once per week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, and, in addition, a copy of such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to each known owner of real property within the proposed district. Such notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the proposed district. 
(2)  A description of the improvements proposed. 
(3)  The estimated cost of the improvements, excluding the cost of engineering, collection, inspection, incidentals and interest. 
(4)  The portion of the cost, if any, to be paid by the City. 
(5)  The estimated total revenue to be raised by special assessments to be levied upon the real property within the district. 
(6)  The time and place set for public hearing. 
(7)  A statement that any owner of real property to be assessed may appear at the public hearing and be heard. 
(Prior code 3.28.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-9-70. - Authorizing ordinance. 
    Subsequent to the public hearing, the City Council may, by ordinance, establish the district for the proposed improvements and may, by resolution, provide for notice to contractors to submit bids therefor and shall, by ordinance, provide for the issuance of bonds for the payment of such improvements. 
(Prior code 3.28.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-9-80. - Assessment of costs. 
    All costs of the construction and installation of the improvement less the portion, if any, to be borne by the City shall be assessed by ordinance against the property within the district specially benefited. In adopting a method for assessment, the City Council may use a frontage, zone, square footage or other equitable basis, in accordance with the benefits, as the same may be determined by the City Council. 
(Prior code 3.28.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-9-90. - Assessments; notice and hearing. 
    Once the total cost of the improvements has been reliably ascertained, there shall be introduced before the City Council a bill for an ordinance levying assessments on the real property within the district. Prior to final passage thereof, the City Council shall, by resolution, set a time and place for a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published in three (3) consecutive issues of a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The date of hearing shall be not less than fifteen (15) days after first publication of such notice. 
(Prior code 3.28.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-9-100. - Assessments; levy. 
    Subsequent to the public hearing on assessments, and subsequent to any amendments to the bill for an ordinance levying assessments, the City Council shall pass such ordinance assessing the cost of the improvements, and passage thereof shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that the property assessed is benefited in the amount of the assessment and that such assessments have been lawfully levied. 
(Prior code 3.28.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 2 - Business Improvement Districts 

Sec. 4-9-110. - Purpose. 
(a)  This Article establishes guidelines and criteria under which the City will consider applications for the formation of a Business Improvement District ("BID"). 
(b)  The City reserves all the powers and authority granted to municipalities by Section 31-25-1101 et seq., C.R.S. The provisions of this Article shall be construed and applied to supplement the applicable provisions of 31-25-1201 et seq. and, to the extent provided herein, supersede conflicting provisions of said statutes pursuant to the home rule powers granted by Article XX of the Colorado Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  2, 10-16-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 21 ,  2, adopted October 16, 2017, repealed  4-9-110 and enacted a new  4-9-110 as set out herein. Former  4-9-110 pertained to general improvement districts and derived from the prior Code and Ord. 32, adopted in 2011. 
Sec. 4-9-120. - Application and fee. 
(a)  The organization of a BID shall be initiated by a petition filed in the office of the clerk of the governing body containing information required under 31-25-1201 et seq., C.R.S., as amended. 
(b)  A nonrefundable application processing fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall be submitted at such time as the petition is submitted. In addition to the processing fee, petitioners shall also deposit an additional five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with the city clerk on the date that the proposed operating plan and budget is filed which shall be used by the city to pay its reasonable consultant, legal and other fees and expenses incurred by the city in the process of reviewing and taking action on the operating plan. If at any time, the city's reasonable costs related to review exceed the deposit, then the petitioner will promptly deposit with the city, as additional processing fees, all amounts the city deems necessary to reimburse it for any and all costs associated with review of the operating plan and budget, including the city's internal costs, out-of-pocket costs (such as publication notices), and contracted administrative, legal, financial, and engineering consultants. Failure to make additional deposit(s) upon notification that such deposit(s) are necessary will cause the city to suspend further review and processing and, if the additional deposit is not provided within twenty (20) business days of the notification, will result in the proposed application being deemed withdrawn. Any portion of the deposit not used by the city shall be refunded to the petitioners within ninety (90) days following the date of city council's written determination on the proposed service plan. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  2, 10-16-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 21 ,  2, adopted October 16, 2017, repealed  4-9-120 and enacted a new  4-9-120 as set out herein. Former  4-9-120 pertained to recording notice of impending assessment and derived from the prior Code and Ord. 32, adopted in 2011. 
Sec. 4-9-130. - Governance. 
(a)  Unless a board of directors consisting of no fewer than five (5) eligible electors is established by ordinance, the City Council shall constitute ex officio the board of directors of the BID. 
(b)  If the City Council establishes a board of directors other than itself by ordinance, it may set such conditions, limitations, procedures, duties and powers under which the board may conduct its business. Such conditions and limitations may be in the form of a binding contract on the city and board and may include provisions requiring the dissolution of the board after a specified time or event and replacement of the board for a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  2, 10-16-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 21 ,  2, adopted October 16, 2017, repealed  4-9-130 and enacted a new  4-9-130 as set out herein. Former  4-9-130 pertained to discounts and derived from the prior Code and Ord. 32, adopted in 2011. 
Sec. 4-9-140. - Operating plan and budget. 
(a)  No BID may issue bonds or assess any fees or taxes unless the city council approves an operating plan and budget for the district. In addition to any additional information the city may require, the operating plan or budget shall specifically identify the following: 
(1)  The dollar amount of any anticipated financing, including capitalized interest, costs of issuance, estimated maximum rates and discounts and any expenses related to the issuance of any debt; 
(2)  A detailed repayment plan covering the life of any proposed debt, including the frequency and amounts of all district revenues expected to be collected from all sources; 
(3)  The total maximum authorized debt for the district; 
(4)  A list and written explanation of potential risks of the financing; 
(5)  The estimated operations and maintenance budget for the district; 
(6)  The projected mill levies of the district required to service any debt and to provide the public services and other activities for which the district was formed, and a statement that the BID shall not issue any debt in any amount which exceeds the maximum debt limit set forth below, which shall be the maximum dollar amount of debt which the BID may issue, including reimbursement of advances for district organization, operation, and capital expenditures. 
(b)  The BID's debt service mill levy authorization shall not exceed forty-five (45) mills and shall be subject to the following additional restrictions: 
(1)  The maximum debt service mill levy shall cease when debt issued by the BID is no longer outstanding; 
(2)  The maximum debt service mill levy shall not be imposed for more than forty (40) years after the year of initial imposition, except in the case of refinancing or refunding existing debt at lower rates. 
(c)  The BID's operational mill levy authorization shall not exceed ten (10) mills. 
(d)  The BID's combined maximum debt service mill levy and maximum operational mill levy shall not, combined, exceed a maximum debt limit of fifty-five (55) mills, with allowance for adjustments in future years to reflect changes in the residential assessment ratio. 
(e)  The maximum interest rate on any debt of any type issued by the BID shall not exceed twelve percent (12%). 
(f)  The maximum underwriting discount shall not exceed two percent (2%) . 
(g)  BID operating plans and budgets must be submitted to the city for review by September 30 of each year. All of the business records of the district shall be considered public records, as defined in section 24-72-202 (6), C.R.S., and shall promptly be made available to the city upon request. For the purposes of this section, the business records of the district shall not include the business records of the owners of property in the district. 
(h)  The city council shall approve or disapprove the operating plan and budget within thirty (30) days after receipt of such operating plan and budget and all requested documentation or supplementation relating thereto, but not later than December 5 of the year in which such documents are filed. Thereafter, the services, improvements, and financial arrangements of the district shall conform so far as practicable to the operating plan and the budget. 
(i)  The operating plan and the budget may be amended by the district with the approval of the city council in substantially the same manner as the process for formulating the operating plan and budget for each year. 
(j)  A separate intergovernmental agreement between the city and BID may be required to enforce the terms and conditions of the operating plan. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  2, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-9-150. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complete petition, a public hearing on an ordinance regarding the proposed BID shall be set not less than twenty (20) days nor more than forty (40) days thereafter. 
(b)  Notice of the date and time of the hearing shall be published in the local newspaper along with notice of the petition, the proposed service area boundaries, and proposed improvements and services twenty (20) days prior to the hearing. 
(c)  Notice shall also be mailed by first-class mail to each property owner within the service area and boundaries of the propose district pursuant to the tax records of the county. 
(d)  In addition to time and place of the hearing, the notice shall contain a description of the proposed service area, boundaries, improvements, and services. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  2, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-9-160. - Net effective interest rate. 
    No privately placed debt will be approved by the city unless the BID has obtained the certification of an external financial advisor that the net effective interest rate (as defined by Section 32-1-103, C.R.S.) to be borne by the debt does not exceed a reasonable current tax-exempt or taxable interest rate, as appropriate, using criteria deemed appropriate by such advisor and based upon such advisor's analysis of comparable high yield securities, and that the structure of the debt is reasonable considering the financial circumstances of the district. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  2, 10-16-2017) 
Division 3 - Special Districts 

Sec. 4-9-210. - Purpose. 
(a)  This Article establishes guidelines and criteria under which the City will consider applications for the formation of special districts under Title 32, C.R.S. 
(b)  The City reserves all the powers and authority granted to municipalities by Section 32-1-101, et seq., C.R.S., (the "Special District Act"). The provisions of this Article shall be construed and applied to supplement the applicable provisions of the Special District Act and, to the extent provided herein, supersede conflicting provisions of said statutes pursuant to the home rule powers granted to municipalities by Article XX of the Colorado Constitution. 
(c)  This Article shall govern the processing, review and consideration of service plans for new districts which have not received approval from the City prior to the effective date of this Article. This Article shall also govern the process for any service plan amendments required to be undertaken by any district which has an approved service plan on the effective date of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  3, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-9-220. - Application and fee. 
(a)  The creation of a Title 32, C.R.S. special district requiring the approval of the Greenwood Village City Council shall be initiated by submission of a petition and service plan fulfilling the requirements of 32-1-202(2), C.R.S., as amended. 
(b)  The petition shall be accompanied by a letter of intent which shall include the following: 
(1)  The type of special district being proposed; 
(2)  A detailed summary of the public improvements proposed to be financed by the special district, including estimated construction costs, expected phasing of such public improvements and an overview of operational and maintenance costs for any such public improvements not expected to be dedicated to the city or other governmental entity for ownership and maintenance; 
(3)  A detailed summary of proposed public services to be provided by the special district; 
(4)  A description of the real property proposed to be included within the boundaries of the special district and the current total ad valorem property tax mill levy imposed against such real property on the date the letter of intent is submitted; 
(5)  A detailed financing plan showing how the proposed special district plans on financing the public improvements and public services, including a projection total mill levy of the proposed special district for both debt service and operational requirements for a minimum twenty-year period or as needed to amortize any bonds following the formation of the special district, and an analysis of any fees or charges to be imposed within the special district during this same period; 
(6)  A detailed justification of the reasons petitioners are seeking formation of the special district and an explanation of why other alternative forms of financing may not be available; 
(7)  A detailed analysis of the possibility for inclusion into or consolidation of any proposed relationships with adjoining or overlapping special districts; and 
(8)  A proposed timeline for special district creation. 
(c)  A nonrefundable application fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) processing fee shall be submitted to the city clerk at such time as the service plan is submitted. All checks are to be made payable to the "City of Greenwood Village." In addition to the processing fee, petitioners shall also deposit an additional five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with the city clerk on the date that the proposed service plan is filed which shall be used by the city to pay its reasonable consultant, legal and other fees and expenses incurred by the city in the process of reviewing and taking action on the service plan. If, at any time, the city's reasonable costs related to service plan review exceed the deposit, then the petitioner will promptly deposit with the city additional amounts the city deems necessary to reimburse it for any and all costs associated with review of the service plan and processing, including the city's internal costs, out-of-pocket costs (such as publication notices), and contracted administrative, legal, financial, and engineering consultants. Failure to make additional deposit(s) upon notification that such deposit(s) are necessary will cause the city to suspend further service plan processing and, if the additional deposit is not provided within twenty (20) business days of the notification, will result in the proposed service plan being deemed withdrawn. Any portion of the deposit not used by the city shall be refunded to the petitioners within ninety (90) days following the date of City Council's written determination on the proposed service plan. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  3, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-9-230. - Service plan. 
(a)  The service plan shall comply with the requirements of the Special District Act. 
(b)  In addition to requirements of the Special District Act, the financial plan must include the following: 
(1)  The dollar amount of any anticipated financing, including capitalized interest, costs of issuance, estimated maximum rates and discounts and any expenses related to the organization and initial operation of the district; 
(2)  A detailed repayment plan covering the life of any proposed debt, including the frequency and amounts of all district revenues expected to be collected from all sources; 
(3)  The total maximum authorized debt for the district; 
(4)  A list and written explanation of potential risks of the financing; 
(5)  The estimated operations and maintenance budget for the district in its first budget year, and at full build out of the anticipated residential and commercial development within the boundaries of the district; 
(6)  The projected mill levies of the district required to service any debt and to provide the public services described in the service plan, and a statement that the special district shall not issue any debt in any amount which exceeds the maximum debt limit set forth below, which shall be the maximum dollar amount of debt which the special district may issue, including reimbursement of advances for district organization, operation, and capital expenditures; 
(7)  The current total ad valorem property tax mill levy imposed against the real property within the district on the date the service plan is submitted; and 
(8)  The projected total ad valorem property tax mill levy on the real property within the district during the life of any proposed debt of the district. 
(c)  The special district's debt service mill levy authorization shall not exceed 45 mills and shall be subject to the following additional restrictions: 
(1)  The maximum debt service mill levy shall cease when debt issued by the special district is no longer outstanding; 
(2)  The maximum debt service mill levy shall not be imposed for more than forty (40) years after the year of initial imposition, except in the case of refinancing or refunding existing debt at lower rates when (i) the special district's board of directors comprises entirely residents living within the special district and (ii) the residential board has voted in favor of refinancing or refunding already-outstanding debt which refinancing or refunding extends the term of the already outstanding debt. 
(d)  The special district's operational mill levy authorization shall not exceed ten (10) mills. 
(e)  The special district's combined maximum debt service mill levy and maximum operational mill levy shall not, combined, exceed a maximum debt limit of fifty-five (55) mills, with allowance for adjustments in future years to reflect changes in the residential assessment ratio. 
(f)  The maximum interest rate on any debt of any type issued by the district shall not exceed twelve percent (12%). 
(g)  The maximum underwriting discount shall not exceed two percent (2%). 
(h)  The service plan shall contain language stating that the district shall not exercise the power of eminent domain or dominant eminent domain unless prior written approval is granted by City Council. 
(i)  The service plan shall contain language that the district shall be responsible for submitting an annual report to the City Manager's Office no later than December 1 of each year following the year in which the order and decree creating the special district has been issued. The annual report shall include the following: 
(1)  The adopted annual budget for the next fiscal year. 
(2)  Boundary changes made or proposed to the special district's boundary as of December 31 of the prior year. 
(3)  Intergovernmental agreements with other governmental entities, either entered into or proposed as of December 31 of the prior year. 
(4)  Audited financials from prior year. 
(j)  In the case of a new subdivision, the service plan shall include a form of agreement with any homeowners' association created in connection with the subdivision, delineating any responsibilities and rights of one to the other. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  3, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-9-240. - Public hearing 
(a)  A public hearing shall be scheduled at a regular City Council meeting in order to take formal action on a resolution regarding the proposed service plan. Public notice regarding the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least twenty (20) days prior to the scheduled hearing date. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall also cause notice of the hearing to be mailed at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing to: 
(1)  The owners of record of all property within the Title 32 special district proposed boundary; 
(2)  The Division of Local Government in the Department of Local Affairs; and 
(3)  The governing body of any municipality or special district which has levied an ad valorem tax within the next preceding tax year, and which has boundaries within a radius of three (3) miles of the proposed special district's boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  3, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-9-250. - Net effective interest rate. 
    Prior to the issuance of any privately placed debt, the Title 32 special district shall obtain the certification of an external financial advisor that the net effective interest rate (as defined by Section 32-1-103, C.R.S.) to be borne by the debt does not exceed a reasonable current tax-exempt or taxable interest rate, as appropriate, using criteria deemed appropriate by such advisor and based upon such advisor's analysis of comparable high yield securities, and that the structure of the debt is reasonable considering the financial circumstances of the district. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  3, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-9-260. - Notice to taxpayers. 
    Upon creation of the special district, the petitioner and any developers of or builders on the property located within the special district will provide written notice, via certified mail, return receipt requested, to all persons who purchase or contract to purchase property in the special district from the petitioner or any developer or builder, which notice discloses the maximum mill levy, as well as a description of the special district's authority to impose and collect rates, fees, charges or exactions. The form of notice shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the issuance of debt by the special district. All promotional, marketing, and sales information shall display the notice, equal in size and font to all other pertinent information as to debt, taxes, rates, fees, and exactions, and this information shall further be recorded in the real estate records of the county with the order of the court creating the special district. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  3, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-9-270. - Violation. 
    A violation of any of [the] requirements of this chapter shall be deemed to constitute a material modification to the approved service plan or amendments thereto and the city shall be entitled to all remedies available under state and local law including enjoining such action of the special district. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  3, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 4-9-280. - Intergovernmental agreement. 
    An intergovernmental agreement between the Title 32 special district and the city as provided for in Section 29-1-203, C.R.S., may be required by the city in order to allow for enforcement of the obligations set forth in the service plan. 
(Ord. No. 21 ,  3, 10-16-2017) 
ARTICLE 10 - City and Unclaimed Property 
Division 1 - City Property 

Sec. 4-10-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing procedures for the sale, lease or other disposition of City-owned property, which procedures are intended to protect and safeguard the City's financial resources. 
(Prior code 3.32.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-10-20. - Personal property. 
(a)  City-owned personal property may be sold, traded, exchanged, donated, abandoned or destroyed. The City Manager, in his or her discretion, shall determine what type of disposition of personal property is in the best interests of the City. 
(b)  Personal property which is sold may be sold at either a public or private sale. If personal property is sold at a public sale, notice shall be published of such sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the sale. The notice shall include a description of the items to be sold. The City Manager shall give notice to the City Council of the sale or other disposition of any item of personal property reasonably estimated to exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) in value at the time of such sale or disposition. 
(Prior code 3.32.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-10-30. - Real property. 
(a)  Real property of the City may be sold, leased, donated or otherwise alienated. The City Manager, in his or her discretion, shall determine what type of disposition is in the best interests of the City. 
(b)  Real property may be sold at a public sale, by auction, by sealed bids, through a real estate agent or by any other method which the City Manager determines to be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(c)  If real property is sold at public sale, notice of such sale shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least ten (10) days prior to the date of sale. The notice shall include a legal description of the real property to be sold. 
(d)  The City Council or City Manager may establish a minimum price for the sale of any real property, and the City reserves the right to reject any and all bids or offers for the property. 
(e)  No real property shall be sold without the City first having obtained an appraisal of the value of the property by a member of a nationally recognized appraisal society, such as M.A.I., S.R.A. or A.S.A. 
(f)  The City Manager shall give notice to the City Council of the sale or other disposition of real property reasonably estimated to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in value at the time of such sale or disposition. Leases and sales or donations of less than a fee simple interest in real property, such as easements, shall not require notice to the City Council. 
(Prior code 3.32.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-10-40. - Proceeds of sale or lease. 
    All proceeds from the sale or lease of City-owned personal or real property shall be placed in the General Fund. 
(Prior code 3.32.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-10-50. - City officials and employees. 
    No City official or employee, nor any member of their immediate family, may purchase or otherwise receive real or personal property sold or donated by the City. 
(Prior code 3.32.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 2 - Unclaimed Property 

Sec. 4-10-110. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Owner means a person or entity, including a corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity other than this municipality, or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of same, which owns unclaimed property held by the City. 
    Unclaimed property means any tangible or intangible property, including any income or increment derived therefrom, less any lawful charges, that is held by or under the control of the City, including personal property which has been lost, abandoned or stolen and has come into the possession of the City and which has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more than thirty (30) days after it became payable or distributable. 
(Prior code 3.34.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-10-120. - Procedure for disposition of property. 
(a)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, the City Manager shall send a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address, if any, of any owner of unclaimed property. The last known address of the owner shall be the last address of the owner as shown by the records of the department holding the property. The notice shall include a description of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the City Manager with a written claim for the return of the property within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the City, and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(b)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed property having an estimated value of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or having no last known address of the owner, the City Manager shall cause a notice to be published in the City's legal newspaper. The notice shall include a description of the property, the owner of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the City Manager with a written claim for the return of the property within thirty (30) days of the publication of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the City, and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(c)  Publication expenses incurred by the City shall be deducted from the value of the unclaimed property and divided equally among each unclaimed property listed. 
(d)  If the City Manager does not receive a written claim within the above thirty-day claim period, the property shall become the sole property of the City, and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. In the event property remains unclaimed, the City Manager may return the property to the person who turned it into the Police Department, if said person makes a written request for the return of said property and the property is not a controlled substance, contraband or a weapon. 
(e)  If the City Manager receives a written claim within the thirty-day claim period, the City Manager shall evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within forty-five (45) days thereof that the claim has been accepted or denied in whole or in part. The City Manager may investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to releasing or refusing to release the property. 
(f)  In the event that there is more than one (1) claimant for the same property, the City Manager may, in the City Manager's sole discretion, resolve said claims or may resolve such claims by depositing the disputed property with the registry of the District Court in an interpleader action. 
(g)  In the event that all claims filed are denied, the property shall become the sole property of the City, and any claim of the owner of such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(h)  Any legal action filed challenging a decision of the City Manager shall be filed pursuant to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure within thirty (30) days of such decision or shall be forever barred. If any legal action is timely filed, the property's disposition shall be directed by the City Manager pursuant to the order of the court having jurisdiction over such claim. 
(i)  The City Manager is authorized to establish and administer procedures for the administration and disposition of unclaimed property consistent with this Article. 
(Prior code 3.34.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 4-10-130. - Sale of unclaimed property. 
    The City may dispose of any unclaimed property which has become the sole property of the City by sale, auction or sealed bids as set forth in this Section. The City Manager shall publish a notice in the City's official newspaper setting forth the time, date and place of the sale no less than ten (10) days prior to the sale. All articles described in the published notice left unclaimed by the date of sale shall be sold at a public sale to the highest bidder or shall be retained by the City for the private sale, if there are no bidders. Unclaimed property consisting of jewelry, gems, watches, precious metals, electronic equipment or other property having a unique value may, as the City Manager determines, be sold either by auction or to the highest bidder after a solicitation of sealed bids from at least three (3) regular dealers of that particular type of property. All proceeds from the sale of articles shall be deposited in the General Fund. 
(Prior code 3.34.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
CHAPTER 6 - Business Licenses and Regulations 
ARTICLE 1 - Sales and Use Tax License 

Sec. 6-1-10. - Sales and use tax license required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of selling at retail tangible personal property and services subject to the tax imposed by this Article without first having obtained a license therefor, which license shall be granted and issued by the Finance Director and shall be in full force and effect until revoked. 
(b)  Such license shall be granted only upon the submittal of an application stating the name and address of the person desiring such license, the name and nature of the business, the location, including the street number, of such business, and such other facts as may be reasonably required by the Finance Director. 
(c)  If an application for a license is submitted by an individual or business which previously held a license, the Finance Director may require that any taxes, penalties and interest due under the previous license be paid and a bond posted in an amount set by the Finance Director to ensure payment of taxes under the new license prior to the issuance of such new license. 
(d)  No person shall be eligible for or receive a license for the sale of food from a mobile food unit or a pushcart unless such person provides the Finance Director with an approved application for a food license from the Tri-County Health Department and evidence that the fee for issuance of the food license has been paid. 
(Prior code 3.08.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-1-20. - License not transferable. 
    Each license shall be numbered and shall show the name, mailing address and place of business of the licensee. The holder of a license shall post the license in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. No license shall be transferable. 
(Prior code 3.08.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-1-30. - Charitable organization license. 
(a)  No charitable organization shall purchase tax free in the City or use in the City tangible personal property or taxable services without payment of the tax imposed by this Article unless the organization first obtains a charitable organization license from the Finance Director and presents its license to the retailer before making a purchase, lease or use of the property or services. 
(b)  The application for a charitable organization license shall include the organization's certificate of incorporation and a copy of the institution's federal tax exemption letter, bylaws and financial statements showing sources of funds and expenditures. 
(c)  By obtaining a charitable organization license, the institution agrees to make regular and complete reports of all purchases, both those that are not taxable and those that are taxable, including, without limitation, purchases of property and services resold to members and others and those used for other than the charitable purpose of the organization. 
(d)  A charitable organization license shall expire on the expiration date stated on such license or at such earlier time as the nature of the organization or its activities change so that it no longer qualifies as a charitable organization. The Finance Director shall be entitled to review the status of any such organization at any time. If the Finance Director determines that the exempt status is no longer appropriate, the Finance Director shall notify the organization of the same and the organization shall promptly return the charitable organization license to the Finance Director. 
(e)  All occasional sales by a charitable organization shall be exempt from taxation. For purposes of this Subsection, occasional sales means retail sales of tangible personal property including concessions for fundraising purposes if: 
(1)  The sale of tangible personal property or concessions by the charitable organization takes place no more than twelve (12) days, whether consecutive or not, during any one (1) calendar year; 
(2)  The funds raised by the charitable organization through these sales are retained by the organization to be used in the course of the organization's charitable service; and 
(3)  The funds raised by the charitable organization through these sales do not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) during any calendar year. 
(f)  Sales that benefit a state kindergarten through twelfth grade school or any portion thereof shall be exempt from taxation. For the purposes of this Subsection, sales may include, but are not limited to, fundraiser items such as gift wrap, bake sale goods, silent auction donation items and booster club concession stand food items that are sold by the school or school-related organization if: 
(1)  The sale is made by a public or nonpublic school or a school-approved student organization or by an association or organization of parents and/or school teachers, a booster club or other club, group or organization whose primary purpose is to support a school activity, class or student club, group or organization; and 
(2)  All proceeds of the sales are for the benefit of a school or school organization. 
(Prior code 3.08.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 38 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-1-40. - Revocation of license. 
    The Finance Director may revoke any license issued by him or her, after reasonable notice and a full hearing, which has been found in violation of this Article. 
(Prior code 3.08.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-1-50. - Appeal of revocation. 
    Any finding and order of the Finance Director revoking the license of any person shall be subject to judicial review by the District Court. The procedure for the review shall be in accordance with the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 106. 
(Prior code 3.08.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-1-60. - Recovery of costs. 
    If the City Council finds that any person holding a license or permit has violated any provision of this Code and, based on that violation, the City Council suspends or revokes such license or permit, the City Council may require that the licensee or permittee pay to the City the reasonable costs incurred by the City, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), in investigating and prosecuting the alleged violation. Such costs shall include the reasonable attorney fees of any special counsel appointed to conduct the investigation and present evidence at the hearing, but shall not include any fees of the City Attorney acting as legal advisor to the City. The costs imposed pursuant to this Section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by the City Council or the Municipal Court and shall have no bearing on or relationship to any penalty imposed by the Municipal Court. 
(Ord. 16 1, 2008; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 2 - Alcoholic Beverages 

Sec. 6-2-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article and the adopted regulations is to govern all proceedings before the Local Licensing Authority of the City, and all matters arising under the Colorado Beer Code, the Colorado Liquor Code and the special event permit requirements for liquor, pursuant to Articles 3, 4 and 5 of Title 44, C.R.S. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 07 ,  1, 2018) 
Sec. 6-2-20. - Local Licensing Authority. 
    The beer and liquor licensing authority of the City shall be the City Council or its designee and shall be known as the Local Licensing Authority. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-30. - Regulations adopted. 
    Pursuant to Articles 46, 47 and 48, C.R.S., the procedures for issuance of liquor licenses and the regulations associated therewith are set forth in the Greenwood Village Beer and Liquor Regulations, as amended, which are adopted herein by reference. Such regulations may be amended by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-40. - Copy available. 
    One (1) copy is on file in the office of the City Clerk and is open to public inspection. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-2-50. - Minimum penalties. 
(a)  For premises licensed as a retail liquor store, the following shall be the mandatory minimum penalties imposed by the Local Licensing Authority for violations of the Colorado Liquor Code and the Colorado Beer Code: 
(1)  First offense in three (3) years: Six (6) days' suspension, with two (2) days to be served and four (4) stayed. 
(2)  Second offense in three (3) years: Three (3) days' suspension, all of which to be served. 
(3)  Third offense in three (3) years: Revocation. 
(b)  For all other licensed premises, the following shall be the mandatory minimum penalties imposed by the Local Licensing Authority for sales of alcoholic beverages to underage persons in violation of the Colorado Liquor Code and the Colorado Beer Code: 
(1)  First offense in three (3) years: Seven (7) days' suspension, with three (3) days to be served and four (4) stayed. 
(2)  Second offense in three (3) years: Five (5) days' suspension, all of which to be served. 
(3)  Third offense in three (3) years: Revocation. 
(c)  The penalties in this Section shall be mandatory minimum penalties and shall not be reduced or waived by the Local Licensing Authority for any reason, by agreement or otherwise. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit the Local Licensing Authority from exceeding these mandatory minimum penalties or from assessing fines in addition to the mandatory minimum penalties. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 3 - Residential Solicitations 

Sec. 6-3-10. - Definition. 
    Definition. For purposes of this Section, solicit means to enter or remain on any residential property, not having been requested or invited by the occupant(s) thereof, for the purpose of contacting said occupants to solicit the immediate or future purchase or sale of goods, services or any other thing of value, or to solicit a gift or donation of any kind. 
(Prior code 9.24.080; Ord. 35 1, 2005; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-3-20. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall solicit within the City without a valid solicitation permit, which must be carried on his or her person at all times. 
(b)  A solicitation permit obtained by an organization shall be valid for use by all members or employees of, or volunteers affiliated with, such organization, provided that each person operating under said permit carries a copy of the permit at all times. 
(Prior code 9.24.080; Ord. 35 1, 2005; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-3-30. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a solicitation permit shall be made to the City Manager or designee. There shall be no fee for such application. 
(b)  Each applicant shall provide a valid government-issued identification and current contact information for his or her immediate supervisor and current contact information for his or her employer. The failure to provide valid identification or any of the requested contact information shall result in the denial of the application. 
(c)  Within five (5) days of receipt of the application, the City Manager or designee shall either grant the solicitation permit or deny the application. 
(d)  If the City Manager or designee determines that the applicant has violated any provision of this Code under a prior solicitation permit or that the proposed solicitation would violate any provision of this Code, the City Manager or designee may deny the application for a solicitation permit. Otherwise, the solicitation permit shall be granted. 
(e)  Upon issuance of a solicitation permit, each permittee will be provided a copy of this Code section, free of charge. 
(Prior code 9.24.080; Ord. 35 1, 2005; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-3-40. - Expiration. 
    All permits shall expire not more than thirty (30) days after the date of issuance, unless revoked. The expiration date shall be determined by the City Manager or designee at the time of application, and shall be written on the permit itself. 
(Prior code 9.24.080; Ord. 35 1, 2005; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-3-50. - Revocation. 
(a)  If the City Manager or designee determines that a permittee has violated any provision of this Code while soliciting under a solicitation permit, the City Manager or designee may revoke the solicitation permit immediately upon verbal or written notice to the permittee. 
(b)  The permittee shall be entitled to an informal hearing on the revocation before the City Manager or designee, which hearing shall be held within seventy-two (72) hours of the revocation. At the time of revocation, the permittee shall be provided verbal or written notice of the time and place of said hearing. 
(c)  At such hearing, the permittee shall be provided an opportunity to be heard on the revocation, and, at the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager or designee shall either affirm the revocation or reinstate the permit. If the permittee fails to appear for such hearing, the revocation shall stand. 
(Prior code 9.24.080; Ord. 35 1, 2005; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-3-60. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall solicit at any property where a "No Solicitors" or "No Trespassing" sign is posted at or near the entrance(s) to such property. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly make a false or deceptive representation or statement, by telephone or otherwise, in an attempt to obtain an invitation to visit any property to solicit. 
(c)  No person shall fasten or deposit in any manner any notice, poster or other advertising or promotional material upon any private property, including personal property, without having permission to do so from the owners or occupants of such property. Permission to so fasten or deposit such materials shall be implied from the presence of an improved walkway, including a driveway, connecting such property directly to a public right-of-way unless: 
(1)  Access to such walkway is physically restricted by a fence, gate, or other permanent structure; or 
(2)  A "No Trespassing" or "No Solicitors" sign or a sign prohibiting posting is posted at or near the entrance(s) to such property, in such a manner that said sign is clearly visible to a reasonable person. 
(d)  No person shall return to any property to solicit more than once in any twenty-four (24) hour period, unless such person has been specifically and personally invited to return by the owner or occupant of such property. 
(e)  No person shall remain upon, or in any manner fail or refuse to leave immediately, any property after being asked to leave the same by the owner or occupant of the property. 
(f)  No person shall solicit before 7:00 a.m. or after the later of 7:00 p.m. or sunset, as announced and published by the National Weather Service, daily. 
(Prior code 9.24.080; Ord. 35 1, 2005; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-3-70. - Door hangers notices. 
    Notwithstanding subsection F(3) hereof, the City Manager or designee may approve the use of door hanger notices, when the City Manager determines that the use of such door hanger notices serves the public interest. The purpose of this subsection is not to allow solicitation through door hanger notices, but instead to allow for notification to residents of upcoming activities affecting their property or neighborhood, such as construction. No door hanger notice shall be placed, fastened or deposited without the prior written approval of the City Manager. 
(Prior code 9.24.080; Ord. 35 1, 2005; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-3-80. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be subject to a fine of not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00) for each separate offense. 
(Prior code 9.24.080; Ord. 35 1, 2005; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 4 - Cable Television Systems 

Sec. 6-4-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to ensure that a franchise is obtained for the construction and operation of all cable systems within the City. 
(Prior code 5.04.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-4-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Affiliated entity or affiliate means any entity having ownership or control in common with the applicant, in whole or in part, including, without limitation, the applicant's parent corporations and any subsidiaries or affiliates of such parent corporations. 
    Applicant means an applicant for a cable franchise pursuant to the Competitive Franchise Application Rule ("CFAR") set forth in 47 C.F.R.  76.41, and includes the parent corporation, its subsidiaries and principals. 
    Cable operator means any person or group of persons who: 
a.  Provides cable services over a cable system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or 
b.  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    Cable service means: 
a.  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and 
b.  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable system shall be defined as such term is defined in the Federal Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C.  521, et seq. 
    Construct means and includes: 
a.  The installation of lines, fibers or facilities that are in or cross any of the streets, highways or public rights-of-way within the City for use as part of a cable system; or 
b.  The connection of other facilities directly or indirectly to previously existing lines, fibers or facilities that are in or cross any streets, highways or public rights-of-way within the City for use as part of a cable system. 
    Control is not limited to majority stock ownership, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by a franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. 
    Interest means officers, directors and shareholders owning five percent (5%) or more of the applicant's outstanding stock or any equivalent voting interest of a partnership or joint venture. 
    Multichannel video programming distributor means a person such as, but not limited to, a cable operator, a multichannel multipoint distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service or a television receive-only satellite program distributor, who makes available for purchase, by subscribers or customers, multiple channels of video programming. 
    Other programming service means information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally. 
    Parent corporation includes any entity with ownership or control of the applicant. 
    Principal means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture, affiliates or other entity, who or which owns or controls five percent (5%) or more of the voting stock (or any equivalent voting interest of a partnership or joint venture) of the applicant. 
    Regulatory authority means any governmental or quasi-governmental organization or entity with jurisdiction over all or any portion of the applicant or its operations. 
    Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
(Prior code 5.04.020; Ord. 36 1, 2007; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-4-30. - Construction. 
    No person shall construct a cable system to provide cable services in the City without first obtaining a cable services franchise authorizing the construction of such a system from the City. 
(Prior code 5.04.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-4-40. - Provision of service. 
    No multichannel video programming distributor shall provide cable services to any person in the City unless a franchise from the City authorizing the provision of such services is in full force and effect at all times while such services are being provided. 
(Prior code 5.04.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-4-50. - Competitive cable franchise applications. 
(a)  Application. An application for a cable franchise shall be in writing and shall include: 
(1)  Identification and ownership information. 
a.  The name, address, telephone number and website (if applicable) of the applicant and the proposed franchisee (if different from applicant); and 
b.  The names, addresses, primary telephone numbers and primary e-mail addresses of all individuals authorized to represent the applicant before the City during its consideration of the franchise requested, including the applicant's primary contact and any additional authorized contacts. 
(2)  Business structure. 
a.  If a corporation: 
1.  A list of all officers and members of the board of directors and their addresses; 
2.  A certificate of good standing indicating that the applicant is licensed to do business in the State; and 
3.  A statement indicating whether the applicant is directly or indirectly controlled by another corporation or legal entity. If so, the applicant shall attach an explanatory statement and include the information required by Subparagraphs 1. and 2. hereof for the controlling corporation. 
b.  If a partnership: 
1.  Describe the structure of the partnership and the interests of general and limited partners; and 
2.  State whether it is controlled directly or indirectly by any corporation or other legal entity. If so, the applicant shall attach an explanatory statement and include the information required by Subparagraphs a.1. and a.2. or b.1. hereof for the controlling entity. 
(3)  Experience. 
a.  Current franchises. A list of all cable systems in which the applicant or any affiliate owns five percent (5%) or more of the system, including, for each system, the name of the system, address, communities served, number of subscribers, number of homes passed, date of system award, duration (start and end date) of the franchise, status of construction and percent of penetration of homes passed as of the most recently available date. 
b.  Potential franchises. A list of all communities where the applicant or any affiliate currently has a formal or informal request pending for an initial franchise, the renewal of a franchise or the approval of a transfer of ownership, including the community names, date of application and date of expected action. 
(4)  Management structure. A management/ organizational chart, showing the management structure of the applicant and a similar chart showing the relationship of the applicant to all general partners, parent corporations, subsidiaries, affiliates and all other subsidiaries of parent corporations, including a brief description of each entity's relationship to the applicant. 
(5)  Legal qualifications. 
a.  Media cross-ownership. Section 613 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C.  533(a) and applicable Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") rules prohibit certain forms of media cross-ownership. The applicant shall state whether it or an affiliate directly or indirectly owns, operates, controls or has an interest in any of the following, or whether the applicant holds or operates any company or business operating jointly with any of the following and, if so, shall state the name of the applicant or affiliate, the nature and percentage of ownership or interest and the company that is owned or in which the interest is held: 
1.  A national broadcast television network (such as ABC, CBS or NBC, etc.); 
2.  A television broadcast station whose predicted Grade B contour, computed in accordance with  73.684 of the FCC's rules, overlaps in whole or in part the City's service area or an application for license to operate such a station; or 
3.  A telecommunications or telephone company whose service area includes any portion of the City's service area. 
b.  Franchise violations. The applicant shall state whether it or any affiliate has been found in violation of any franchise ordinance or agreement, contract or regulation governing a cable system. If so, the applicant shall identify the judicial or administrative proceeding, giving the date, name of the tribunal and the result or disposition of that proceeding. 
c.  Other violations. The applicant shall state whether it has been found in violation by a regulatory authority of any other ordinance, agreement, permit, contract or regulation. If so, the applicant shall identify the judicial or administrative proceeding, giving the date, the name of the tribunal and the result or disposition of that proceeding. 
(6)  Financial qualifications. 
a.  Applicants with existing operations shall provide audited financial statements, including statements of income, balance sheets and cash flow statements, together with any notes necessary to the understanding of the financial statements for the last three (3) fiscal years for the applicant and any parent corporation. 
b.  Applicants that are new (start-up) entities shall provide pro forma projections for the next five (5) fiscal years, if available, but at a minimum the next three (3) fiscal years from the date of the application. 
(7)  Technical qualifications, planned services and operations. The application shall describe with particularity: 
a.  The applicant's planned initial and proposed cable services geographic area, including a map of all areas proposed to be served and proposed dates for offering service to each area, including a statement as to whether the applicant proposes to provide cable services to the entire franchise area and, if so, a proposed timetable for meeting that goal; 
b.  If the applicant asserts existing authority to access the public right-of-way in any of the initial or proposed service areas listed in Subparagraph a. hereof, the basis for such authority and the relevant agreements or other documentation of such authority; 
c.  The applicant's planned residential cable services, including basic cable services, other cable programming service tiers and any additional pay-per-view, on-demand or digital services and the projected rates for each category or tier or service; 
d.  The applicant's planned system technical design, upstream and downstream capacity and speed, provision for analog or digital services or packages, distribution of fiber, planned count of households per residential node and any other information necessary to demonstrate that the applicant's technology will be deployed so as to be able to successfully offer cable services in the proposed areas; 
e.  The applicant's planned nonresidential cable services; 
f.  The applicant's planned construction and extension or phase schedule, as applicable, including system extension plans or policies, and the current status of the applicant's existing or proposed arrangements with area utilities, including pole attachments, or vault or conduit sharing agreements as applicable; 
g.  The applicant's plan to ensure that the safety, function and appearance of property and convenience and safety of other persons not be adversely affected by installation or construction of the applicant's facilities and that property owners are justly compensated for any damages caused by the installation, construction, operation or removal of the facilities; and 
h.  The applicant's plan to comply with the subscriber privacy protections set forth in 47 U.S.C.  551 and the privacy protections of the City's local cable customer service standards. 
(8)  Affidavit. Each application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the applicant and accompanied by a notarized affidavit, including the following statement: 
    "This application is submitted by the undersigned who has been duly authorized to make the representations within on behalf of the applicant and certifies that the representations are true and correct. The applicant recognizes that all representations are binding on it, that all application commitments are enforceable and that material misrepresentations or omissions, or failure to adhere to any such representation, may result in a denial of an application by the City. The applicant agrees to comply with all applicable local laws. Consent is hereby given to the City and its representatives to make inquiry into the legal, character, technical, financial and other qualifications of the applicant by contacting any persons or organizations named herein as references, or by any other appropriate means." 
(b)  Upon request, the City shall promptly provide access to documents or information in its control that are necessary for the completion of the application, provided that the applicant does not otherwise have access to such documents or information and that such documents or information are subject to disclosure under state open records laws. 
(c)  Open records and confidentiality. Unless otherwise provided by law, information submitted with an application is open to public inspection and subject to the Colorado Open Records Act, Section 24-72-201, et seq., C.R.S., and it is the applicant's responsibility to be familiar with such Act. The applicant may specifically identify in writing any information it considers proprietary. If the City receives a request from another party to disclose any information which the applicant has identified as proprietary, the City shall tender to the applicant the defense of any request to compel disclosure. By submitting an application, the applicant agrees to defend and hold harmless the City from any claim for disclosure, including but not limited to any expenses, including out-of-pocket costs and attorney fees, as well as any judgment entered against the City for the attorney fees of the party requesting disclosure. 
(d)  Application fee. The City Council shall, by resolution, set an application fee sufficient to cover the reasonable cost of processing applications under this Section. Upon request of the applicant, the City Council may reduce or waive the application fee. In evaluating such a request, the City Council will consider the following factors: 
(1)  The size of the proposed franchise area; 
(2)  The number of potential subscribers in the proposed franchise area; 
(3)  The financial hardship to the applicant (including any parent corporation or affiliate); and 
(4)  Other information relevant to the cost of processing the application or the applicant's ability to pay the fee. 
(e)  Procedure. 
(1)  Submission. Application for a competitive cable franchise shall be made to the City Clerk. 
(2)  Acceptance. 
a.  Within five (5) business days of receipt of an application, the City shall review the application to ensure that all required information is included in the application. 
b.  If the application is not complete, the City shall notify the applicant in writing, listing the requisite information that is required to complete the application and notifying the applicant that the time period for granting or denying the application set forth in 47 C.F.R.  76.41(d) will not begin to run until such information is received. 
c.  When the application is complete, the City will so notify the applicant in writing. 
(3)  Review. The City shall review all completed applications based on the review criteria set forth in this Section. If, during the review of an application, the City reasonably requires additional information from the applicant, City staff will promptly request the information from the applicant, in writing, along with a notification that the time period for granting or denying the application set forth in 47 C.F.R.  76.41(d) will be tolled until such information is received by the City. 
(4)  Negotiations. Within the time period set forth in 47 C.F.R.  76.41(d), the City shall attempt to negotiate a cable franchise agreement with the applicant and, within that time period, schedule the application and any proposed franchise for public hearing. 
(f)  Public hearing. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the application, affording participants a process substantially equivalent to that required by 47 U.S.C.  546(c)(2) governing renewal of cable franchises. 
(g)  Review criteria. The City may deny an application if, based on the information provided in the application, at the public hearing or in the proposed franchise agreement: 
(1)  The applicant does not have the financial, technical or legal qualification to provide cable service in the City; 
(2)  The applicant will not provide adequate public, educational and governmental access channel capacity, facilities or financial support; or 
(3)  The applicant's proposed terms do not comply with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to local customer service standards or relevant existing contractual obligations of the City. 
(h)  Non-CFAR franchise applications. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section, any competitive cable services franchise applicant may elect to submit a cable franchise application to the City or engage in cable franchise negotiations without regard to the application of the CFAR. In such cases, the City will negotiate the terms of a competitive cable franchise without regard to 47 C.F.R.  76.41 and the other provisions of this Section. Agreement by an applicant to negotiate a franchise without regard to 47 C.F.R.  76.41 and the other provisions of this Section shall not be deemed by the City to effect a waiver of an applicant's right under applicable law to trigger application of 47 C.F.R.  76.41 and this Section, where applicable. 
(Ord. 36 1, 2007; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 5 - Contractor Licenses 

Sec. 6-5-10. - Contractor defined. 
    Contractor means a person who supervises himself or herself, his or her firm or one (1) or more trades or subcontractors, and who for any compensation undertakes any landscaping, construction, addition, alteration, repair, demolition, removal or moving of any building, structure or utility. A resident homeowner shall not be required to obtain a contractor's license for any landscaping, construction, addition, alteration or repair of the homeowner's occupied residence, or a building or structure accessory to such residence, provided that the homeowner shall first assume all duties and responsibilities of a contractor as set forth in this Article by executing a form furnished by the Chief Building Official pursuant to which the homeowner agrees to assume all duties and responsibilities. Electrical contractors shall not be required to have a City license, but shall be licensed by the State. 
(Prior code 13.12.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-20. - Application form and contents. 
    An application for a contractor's license shall be on a form to be furnished by the City, shall be filed with the Chief Building Official and shall contain the following information under oath: 
(1)  The residence address of the applicant; or, if the applicant is a partnership, the residence address of each of the partners of such partnership; or, if the applicant is a corporation, the residence address of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and the address of its principal place of business; 
(2)  The business address of each such applicant, together with the telephone number and emergency or mobile telephone number, if available; 
(3)  A statement of the applicant's experience as a contractor, including past contracts and jobs performed during the preceding twelve (12) months, and copies of any licenses held in other municipalities and the years for which issued. 
(Prior code 13.12.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-30. - Duties and responsibilities of licensee. 
    All licensees under this Article shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  All work covered by his or her permit, whether or not such work is done directly by the licensee or his or her employees or subcontractors. Subcontractors are not required to be licensed if they are working under the supervision of a licensed contractor. 
(2)  All funds or property received by him or her for prosecution or completion of a specific contract or for a specific purpose. 
(3)  Obtaining any required permits for himself or herself and any subcontractor under his or her supervision. 
(4)  Safety measures and equipment to protect workers and the public in compliance with applicable federal and state laws. 
(5)  Reporting in writing to the Chief Building Official, within three (3) working days, any accident occurring in any construction, demolition or undertaking which has resulted in any structural damage to any building or structure. 
(6)  Compliance with all applicable City ordinances, codes and regulations. 
(7)  Constructing any building or structure in substantial compliance with the drawings and specifications approved by the Chief Building Official and the permit issued for the same, unless changes are approved by the Chief Building Official. 
(8)  Completing all work authorized by the permit unless there is good cause for the noncompletion of the work. 
(9)  Obtaining inspection services where required by this Chapter and any technical code. 
(10)  Paying any fee assessed under the authority of this Code or any technical code. 
(11)  Obeying any order or notice issued pursuant to this Code or any technical code. 
(12)  Presenting his or her license when requested by the Chief Building Official. 
(13)  Maintaining workers' compensation and liability insurance as required by Section 6-5-100. 
(Prior code 13.12.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-40. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in business as a contractor within the City without having first obtained a contractor's license issued pursuant to this Article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person required to be licensed under this Article to fail to display such license to the Chief Building Official, a City police officer or other official of the City, upon request to do so. 
(Prior code 13.12.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-50. - License generally. 
    A contractor's license shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in business as a contractor within the City and to contract for the building, construction, alteration or repairing of any type or size of structure, regardless of the value thereof. A contractor shall assure that all subcontractors and individual tradesmen who perform trade tasks under his or her general or specific direction are included under his or her liability insurance policy or a separate liability insurance policy, and that workers' compensation insurance for all workers required to be so insured is in force throughout the duration of the project or job. 
(Prior code 13.12.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-60. - License classification and fee. 
    Contractor's licenses shall be issued for a calendar year, or a portion thereof, without proration. The annual license fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council in accordance with the following license classifications: 
(1)  Level A license. The Level A license authorizes work with respect to multi-unit residential buildings, office buildings, commercial buildings, tenant finish and alterations thereto and any work authorized under Level B, C and D licenses. 
(2)  Level B license. The Level B license authorizes work with respect to detached single-family residential buildings and alterations thereto and any work authorized under Level C and D licenses. 
(3)  Level C license. The Level C license authorizes work with respect to swimming pools, tennis courts and solar installations. 
(4)  Level D license. The Level D license authorizes work not included within Levels A, B and C, including but not limited to alterations, moving a building within the City, demolition, house repair, siding application, roofing, plastering, sheetrock installation, framing, excavation, concrete work not in any City right-of-way, fences, signs, retaining walls, sprinkler and irrigation systems, landscaping, plumbing work, mechanical work and any other activities involved in the alteration or improvement of all buildings within the City. The applicant must specify which activity he or she wishes to engage in. If the applicant wishes to engage in more than one (1) activity, a separate license must be procured for each such activity. 
(Prior code 13.12.060; Ord. 03 2, 2008; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-70. - Subcontractor licensing requirements. 
    A subcontractor is not required to be licensed if working under the supervision of a licensed contractor. 
(Prior code 13.12.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-80. - License fees not refundable. 
    Any fee paid under this Article shall not be refunded for any reason after the license has been issued. 
(Prior code 13.12.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-90. - License upgrade. 
    Any upgrading of a license shall require full payment of the fee for such license without credit or proration for previously paid license fees. 
(Prior code 13.12.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-100. - Insurance. 
(a)  Every contractor shall procure workers' compensation coverage as required by state law and general liability coverage with the following minimum limits: 
(1)  General aggregate: two million dollars ($2,000,000.00). 
(2)  Products, completed operations: two million dollars ($2,000,000.00). 
(3)  Personal and advertising injury: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(4)  Each occurrence: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(b)  No contractor's license shall be issued under this Article until the following documents are filed with the Chief Building Official: 
(1)  A statement or certificate signed by an authorized agent of an insurance company licensed to do business in the State, stating that a policy or policies have been issued to the applicant with the coverage amounts set forth in Subsection (a) hereof, and including the effective date and expiration date of the policy or policies; and 
(2)  A copy of an endorsement to the policy requiring at least ten (10) days' prior written notice to the Chief Building Official of cancellation of the policy for any reason. 
(c)  In the event of cancellation of any policy required by this Section, the Chief Building Official shall immediately suspend the contractor's license. The license shall be reinstated when the licensee furnishes the documentation required by Subsection (b) hereof. 
(Prior code 13.12.100; Ord. 12 1, 2009; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-110. - Applicability. 
    This Article shall not apply to the State, municipal and quasi-municipal corporations and public utility companies. 
(Prior code 13.12.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-120. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
    The Chief Building Official may suspend or revoke a license for any of the following: 
(1)  Failure to comply with any of the duties and responsibilities set forth in Section 6-5-30. 
(2)  Knowingly permitting a contractor's license to be used by a person other than the licensee. 
(3)  Violation of this Article. 
(4)  The obtaining of any license by fraud or misrepresentation. 
(Prior code 13.12.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-130. - License duration and renewal. 
    A license issued pursuant to this Article shall expire one (1) year from the date the license was issued. 
(Prior code 13.12.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-5-140. - Appeal. 
    Any applicant or licensee aggrieved by any decision of the Chief Building Official may appeal from such decision to the Board of Adjustments and Appeals in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Prior code 13.12.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 6 - Escort Services 

Sec. 6-6-10. - State statute implemented. 
    All provisions of Section 29-11.8-101, et seq., C.R.S., pertaining to the licensing of escort bureaus, escorts and escort bureau runners, are implemented in the City. 
(Prior code 5.18.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-6-20. - Local Licensing Authority. 
    The City Council is designated as the Local Licensing Authority as defined in Section 29-11.8-101, et seq., C.R.S., for the purpose of implementing and enforcing the provisions of such statute within the City. 
(Prior code 5.18.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-6-30. - License fees and expiration. 
(a)  Every applicant, before being granted a license for the privilege of operating in the City as an escort bureau, escort or escort bureau runner, as defined in Section 29-11.8-103, C.R.S., shall pay an annual license fee to be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Each such license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(Prior code 5.18.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-6-40. - Escort bureaus; notice, posting and hearing. 
    In addition to the requirements contained in Section 29-11.8-101, et seq., C.R.S., the procedures set forth in this Section shall be followed before any license for any escort bureau is issued or renewed: 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application for a new escort bureau license or an application for a renewal of an existing escort bureau license, the City Council shall schedule a public hearing upon the application not less than forty (40) days from the date of receipt of the application. The City Council shall designate the neighborhood to be affected by such application. The designation of the geographical extent and boundaries of such neighborhood shall be within the sole discretion of the City Council. 
(2)  The City Council shall require public notice to be given of all hearings by the posting of a notice of the public hearing, for a period of not less than ten (10) consecutive days, with the first posting to be not less than thirty (30) days in advance of the public hearing, in a conspicuous place on the premises from which the escort bureau is proposed to be operated, legible from the public street or public way nearest to such premises. The public notice shall state that an escort bureau license has been applied for, the name and address of the applicant, and the date, time and place where a public hearing will be held on the application. The posted notice of the public hearing shall be displayed on a sign or signs, in number, size and location as prescribed by the City Council. In addition, the City Council shall require public notice to be given of all hearings by publication in the City's legal newspaper not less than ten (10) days prior to such hearing. 
(3)  At the public hearing specified in the notice evidence may be offered by the applicant and residents of the designated neighborhood concerning the desires of residents of the designated neighborhood and the reasonable requirements of the designated neighborhood. Before granting any license (whether a new license or a renewal of an existing license), the City Council shall also consider the effect the issuance of the license would have on the health or welfare and the morals of the designated neighborhood; the character of the applicant and the applicant's directors, owners, officers, agents and employees; and other pertinent matters affecting the qualifications of the applicant to conduct the business. Petitions may be offered at the public hearing concerning the desires of the residents of the designated neighborhood relating to the application in question. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this Section, the City Council may grant the renewal of an existing escort bureau license without a public hearing. Prior to granting the renewal of an existing license without a public hearing, the City Council shall consider the number of complaints, if any, received by the City Council concerning the licensee. The City Council shall also consider all criminal and traffic charges filed against the licensee or the licensee's directors, owners, officers, agents and employees; provided, however that traffic charges shall only be considered if received in the course or operating the business of the licensee. 
(5)  No application for the issuance of any escort bureau license shall be received or acted upon by the City Council for any applicant if, within the two (2) years next preceding the date of the application, the City Council either denied an application or revoked an escort bureau license for the same applicant, or any of its directors, owners, officers, agents and employees. 
(Prior code 5.18.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-6-50. - Denial of license. 
    Before granting any license for an escort, escort bureau or escort bureau runner, the City Council shall consider all of the provisions of the "Colorado Escort Service Code," Section 29-11.8-101, et seq., C.R.S. The City Council may refuse to grant any license for good cause, in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the community, subject to judicial review. 
(Prior code 5.18.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 7 - Merchant Patrol Services 

Sec. 6-7-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Business guard or industrial guard means an individual who, while uniformed or armed, accepts employment from a single employer for the purpose of watching, guarding or otherwise protecting the persons or property of his or her employer only, or to preserve the peace in the conduct of that employer's business, except any individual so employed by any common carrier engaged in interstate commerce, but shall exclude maintenance men and installers, janitors, repairmen or persons engaged in similar occupations. 
    Company means and includes any person, firm, association or corporation engaged in the business or occupation of merchant patrol, as defined by this Section. 
    Merchant patrol means the business or occupation of providing uniformed or armed protection of persons or property of others, or the furnishing of any uniformed or armed guard, patrol or protection service to others for a valuable consideration, except a business or industrial guard. 
    Patrolman or merchant patrolman means and includes any person employed by or acting at the direction of a company, except clerical and stenographic employees, to perform merchant patrol services. 
(Prior code 5.12.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-20. - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to carry on, engage in or conduct a merchant patrol business in the City without first having obtained a license as provided in this Article. 
(Prior code 5.12.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-30. - Applicability. 
    This Article shall not apply to or regulate activities of: 
(1)  Any peace officer while acting or employed in his or her official capacity; 
(2)  Any private detective not engaged in providing merchant patrol or business or industrial guard service; 
(3)  Any person engaged in the direction, escort or protection of a funeral procession; or 
(4)  Any merchant patrolman or business or industrial guard engaged in the business of providing to others a pickup and delivery service for the purpose of distributing money or other negotiable securities. 
(Prior code 5.12.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-40. - Age requirements and corporate applicants. 
    No person shall be licensed under this Article unless: 
(1)  The applicant is a citizen of the United States of the age of eighteen (18) years or more, except that if the applicant is required to carry a weapon, then of the age of twenty-one (21) years or more; or 
(2)  In the instance of a corporate applicant, the applicant shall be organized or authorized to do business in the State of Colorado. 
(Prior code 5.12.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-50. - Criminal convictions. 
    No person shall be eligible to obtain or hold any license under this Article if the applicant, or any member, partner, officer, director or the holder of more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporate applicant has been convicted of: 
(1)  Any crime of murder, first or second degree sexual assault, kidnapping, burglary, assault with a deadly weapon or armed robbery within the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the application; or 
(2)  Any felony sex offense, felony drug offense or crime involving infliction of violence upon the person of another, within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(Prior code 5.12.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-60. - Application for license. 
    Any person desiring to carry on a merchant patrol business in the City shall make application for a license in writing to the Police Department. The application shall set forth: 
(1)  A description of the nature and type of business to be conducted; 
(2)  The names and addresses of the persons making such application; or the names and addresses of the officers and directors of a corporation making such application, together with the names and addresses of any persons holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of such corporation; 
(3)  The address of the principal office or place of business of the applicant; 
(4)  The names and addresses of not less than three (3) persons as references, of whom inquiry can be made as to the character, standing and reputation of the applicant; 
(5)  A statement of the number of persons to be employed as merchant patrolmen; 
(6)  A statement of the number of vehicles to be used in the conduct of the business and a description thereof; 
(7)  The acceptance by the licensee of the condition, to be expressed in the license, that the license may be revoked by the Chief of Police at any time during the term for which the same was issued, without refunding the license fee or any part thereof, provided for in this Article, upon just cause shown, and after a fair opportunity, upon reasonable notice, has been offered to the licensee to show cause why such license should not be revoked; 
(8)  Such further and additional information as the Chief of Police may require for the investigation of the application and the enforcement of this Article. 
(Prior code 5.12.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-70. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  After the receipt and investigation of an application, and upon being satisfied that the applicant is in good repute and intends to carry on an honest and legitimate business, and that all requirements of this Article have been met, the Chief of Police shall issue a license authorizing the applicant to carry on a merchant patrol business within the City for a period of one (1) year from and after the date of issuance of such license. The license fee shall be established by resolution by the City Council. Such license fee shall be nonrefundable and shall be applied to payment of the license fees provided by this Article if a license is granted. 
(b)  If, after receipt and investigation of an application, the Chief of Police determines that the applicant's character or business responsibility is unsatisfactory, or if the applicant fails to meet any of the requirements of this Article, the Chief of Police shall deny the application and notify the applicant of such denial. 
(c)  It shall be the sole and exclusive responsibility of the licensee to investigate and assure the compliance of each of the licensee's employees with the requirements of this Article. 
(d)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the licensee to provide to the Police Department a bond issued by a corporate surety company, payable to the City and naming the City as obligee, in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each company who shall act as a security or merchant patrol guard within the City. 
(Prior code 5.12.080, 5.12.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-80. - Merchant patrol employees. 
(a)  Individuals employed by any merchant patrol licensee shall be subject to the qualifications and prohibitions set forth in Section 6-7-50. 
(b)  Before a merchant patrol employee is hired by the licensee, the licensee will maintain the employee's fingerprints (Prior code 5.12.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-90. - License renewal. 
    Prior to the expiration of the license, a new application must be processed in accordance with Section 6-7-60. 
(Prior code 5.12.180; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-100. - License not transferable. 
    No license granted under this Article shall be transferable. This Section shall not be construed so as to prevent or prohibit a change by the licensee in the manager, superintendent or other person in charge of the business, provided that a certificate setting forth the change is first filed with the Chief of Police. 
(Prior code 5.12.190; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-110. - Vehicle marking. 
    The vehicles used in a merchant patrol business shall not exhibit colorings, markings, insignia or equipment so similar to marked patrol vehicles of the City that such merchant patrol vehicles might be confused with police vehicles. In addition, the merchant patrol vehicles shall not be equipped with any lights or sirens in violation of the traffic code of the City or the laws of the State. 
(Prior code 5.12.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-120. - Weapons licenses required. 
(a)  Before any merchant guard employed by any licensee shall carry a firearm within the City, the Chief of Police shall require the licensee to demonstrate the need for such weapon and the proficiency in the use, maintenance and care of such weapon. In no event shall any individual be deemed proficient in the use, maintenance and care of a weapon unless the individual receives at least eight (8) hours of annual training in the use, care and maintenance of weapons. Training records shall be maintained by the licensee. The Chief of Police may be provided with a listing of all employees of the licensee who are so qualified by the licensee and who perform merchant guard services within the City. It is a continuing duty of the licensee to comply with this Subsection. 
(b)  All merchant guards employed by the licensee who carry a weapon or firearm within the City shall submit the make, model, caliber and type of weapon, and the serial number of the weapon carried, to the Chief of Police. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize the carrying of a concealed weapon by any employee of the licensee without first complying with all applicable requirements relating to the carrying of such a concealed weapon. 
(d)  Failure of the licensee to comply with, and to ensure that its employees comply with, this Section shall constitute a violation of this Article and shall be grounds for the immediate suspension and/or revocation of the licensee's license. 
(Prior code 5.12.210; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-130. - Identification card. 
(a)  The licensee shall provide to each of its employees who are providing merchant guard services an identification card, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name of the licensee; 
(2)  The name and picture of the employee; and 
(3)  A designation as to whether or not the employee is authorized to carry a firearm. 
(b)  Each employee of the licensee shall wear an identification card containing the above required information in a visible manner on his or her uniform at all times he or she is providing merchant guard services within the City. Failure of any employee of the licensee to possess and display such identification card at all times when providing merchant guard services within the City shall constitute a violation of this Article. 
(Prior code 5.12.220; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-140. - License revocation. 
    In addition to the other acts specifically prohibited by this Article, the occurrence of any of the following acts or events shall constitute grounds for summary suspension or revocation of a merchant patrol license previously issued: 
(1)  Material misrepresentation or concealment in the application for a license. 
(2)  Violation of any state or municipal law or ordinance relating to use or possession of firearms or weapons. 
(3)  Impersonation of a peace officer by any licensee or any employee of the licensee. 
(4)  Conviction of the licensee, any principal owner or officer of the licensee or any employee of the licensee, of any felony offense under the laws of Colorado or the United States; or the conviction of any criminal offense or City ordinance violation, except traffic violations, while acting as a merchant patrolman. 
(5)  Any violation of this Article. 
(Prior code 5.12.230; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-150. - License suspension. 
    Whenever grounds for revocation of a license exist, as provided in Section 6-7-140, such license may be suspended for a specified term. During such suspension: 
(1)  The license shall not be revoked; 
(2)  The applicant shall not act or engage in business in the licensed capacity during the period of suspension; and 
(3)  The suspended license shall not be renewed. 
(Prior code 5.12.240; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-160. - Hearings. 
    Hearings provided by this Article shall be conducted by the Chief of Police in the manner and upon the notice required by Chapter 2, Article 6. The decisions and determinations of the Chief of Police shall be subject to review or appeal as provided by such Article. 
(Prior code 5.12.250; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-170. - Change in personnel, place of business or vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a business or industrial guard or a merchant patrolman is discharged for any reason, his or her employer shall immediately notify the Chief of Police of such fact. 
(b)  Whenever a business or industrial guard or merchant patrolman terminates his or her employment or is discharged, his or her employer shall forthwith surrender to the Chief of Police any and all licenses and permits issued to such person. 
(c)  Any licensee changing place of business shall immediately notify the Chief of Police of such fact, together with the address of the new place of business. A change of the place of business shall not be deemed a transfer of license or require the payment of any additional fees. 
(d)  Whenever a vehicle is acquired by a licensee for use in the conduct of his or her business, the type and description of such vehicle, together with the type and description of any vehicle replaced by it, shall be immediately reported to the Chief of Police. 
(Prior code 5.12.260; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-7-180. - Unlawful acts. 
    In addition to the other acts prohibited by this Article, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any licensee to fail to turn over any person arrested by such licensee pursuant to the laws of the State, immediately to the Police Department or other public law enforcement agency. Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as authorizing any licensee to make an arrest not authorized under the laws of the State to be made by a private citizen. 
(2)  For any licensee or employee of the licensee who fires a firearm within the City, to fail to promptly report such incident to the Police Department. 
(3)  For any licensee to hinder or interfere with any investigation under the jurisdiction of the Police Department. 
(4)  For any licensee to fail to report immediately to the Police Department all violations of City ordinances or to fail to report to the Police Department or other public law enforcement agency all violations of state or federal laws which constitute crimes. 
(5)  For any licensee, while engaged in his or her course of employment, to wear a uniform or insignia similar to that worn by any peace officer. 
(6)  For any licensee under this Article to represent himself or herself to be an officer of the Police Department. 
(7)  For any licensee to carry any firearm not registered as provided by Section 6-7-120 while in the performance of duties as a business or industrial guard or merchant patrolman. 
(8)  For failure of any licensee or employee of the licensee to surrender an identification card or license after discharge. 
(9)  For any person other than a peace officer or member of the Armed Forces of the United States or Colorado National Guard acting in the lawful discharge of his or her duties or a person who has a valid permit and license pursuant to the Federal Code for such weapon to knowingly possess an illegal weapon. As used in this Subsection, the term illegal weapon means a blackjack, bomb, firearm silencer, gas gun, machine gun, short shotgun, short rifle, metallic knuckles, gravity knife or switchblade knife; and as used in this Subsection, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Blackjack means and includes any billy, sand club, sandbag or other hand-operated striking weapon consisting, at the striking end, of an encased piece of lead or other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or springy shaft which increases the force of impact. 
    Bomb means any explosive or incendiary device or Molotov cocktail which is not specifically designed for lawful and legitimate use in the hands of its possessor. 
    Firearm silencer means any instrument, attachment, weapon or appliance for causing the firing of any gun, revolver, pistol or other firearm to be silent or intended to lessen or muffle the noise of the firing of any such weapon. 
    Gas gun means a device designed for projecting gas-filled projectiles which release the contents after having been projected from the device, and includes projectiles for use in such device. 
    Gravity knife means any knife that has a blade released from the handle or sheath thereof by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force that, when released, is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever or other device. 
    Knife means any dagger, dirk, knife or stiletto with a blade over three and one-half (31/2) inches in length, or any other dangerous instrument capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing or tearing wounds, but does not include a hunting or fishing knife carried for sports use. The issue that a knife is a hunting or fishing knife must be raised as an affirmative defense. 
    Machine gun means any firearm, whatever size and usual designation, that shoots automatically more than one (1) shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger. 
    Short rifle means a rifle having a barrel less than sixteen (16) inches long or an overall length of less than twenty-six (26) inches. 
    Short shotgun means a shotgun having a barrel or barrels less than eighteen (18) inches long or an overall length of less than twenty-six (26) inches. 
    Switchblade knife means any knife, the blade of which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to the button, spring or other device in its handle. 
(Prior code 5.12.270; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 8 - Sexually Oriented Businesses 

Sec. 6-8-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating sexually oriented businesses through the establishment of reasonable and uniform regulations to reduce the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the City. This Article is not intended to limit or restrict the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. This Article is not intended to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article II,  10 of the Colorado Constitution, or to deny access of distributors or exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Finally, this Article is not intended to condone or legitimatize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Prior code 5.24.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Adult arcade means any commercial establishment in which the public is permitted or invited where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more motion picture projectors, slide projectors, image or virtual reality-producing machines or similar machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, are used regularly to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, digital images, electronic reproductions or photographs describing, simulating or depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by the exhibition of specified sexual activities. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment which is characterized by the showing, for any form of consideration, of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, compact discs, digital video discs (DVDs), digital images or other visual representations that have an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult store means any commercial establishment which, as one (1) of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rent for any form of consideration one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, compact discs, digital video discs (DVDs), digital images or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
b.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
    Adult theater means a theater, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Convicted means having been found guilty by a judge or a jury or entering a guilty plea or a plea of nolo contendere, and includes deferred judgments, deferred sentences, deferred adjudications and plea bargains, whether or not an appeal of such conviction is pending, excluding any conviction overturned or vacated by appeal or other force of law. 
    Employee means a person who works or performs work or service in or for a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, with or without compensation, regardless of whether such person is designated as an employee, independent contractor, agent, volunteer or any other status, excluding any person on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for delivering or removing tangible personal property to or from the premises. 
    Licensed premises means the building or structure in which a licensed sexually oriented business is operating. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater or adult theater, except an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional licensed by the State of Colorado engages in approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
    Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, which are not completely and opaquely covered. 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified crime means and includes the following crimes committed under the penal or criminal code of any municipality, county, state or country: sex crimes against children; sexual abuse; sexual assault; possession or distribution of child pornography; distribution of an illegal controlled substance; prostitution, promotion of prostitution or pandering; and organized crime if such organized crime is committed within the premises of a sexually oriented business in the City or elsewhere. 
    Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
a.  Fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts. 
b.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation and sodomy. 
c.  Masturbation, actual or simulated. 
d.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
e.  Human excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in Subparagraphs a. through d. hereof. 
(Prior code 5.24.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-30. - License required. 
    All sexually oriented businesses in the City shall be licensed as set forth in this Article, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the City without a valid license issued pursuant to this Article. 
(Prior code 5.24.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-40. - License application. 
(a)  Applicants for a sexually oriented business license shall submit a written application to the City Clerk which includes the following: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and date of birth of the applicant and, if applicable, each of its officers, partners, directors and registered agents. 
(2)  The trade name of the applicant and copies of all documents recording the trade name, including the trade name affidavit. 
(3)  The name of any other sexually oriented business in which any officer, director or partner has a financial interest. 
(4)  The address of the premises to be licensed. 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation, copies of the articles of incorporation, bylaws and last annual report. 
(6)  Copies of documents demonstrating that the applicant has a legal right to possession of the premises to be licensed. 
(7)  A sketch, drawing or diagram drawn to scale and showing the configuration of the premises, including total floor area to be occupied by each sexually oriented business. 
(8)  The type or types of sexually oriented business proposed, such as an adult store, adult cabaret, adult theater and/or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  Each application shall be verified and acknowledged to be true by the applicant or the managing partner, president or other officer having the authority to sign for the applicant. 
(c)  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the City Council, which application fee shall be in addition to any other applicable license fees imposed by this Chapter. 
(Prior code 5.24.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-50. - Background investigation. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk shall perform a background investigation of the applicant and its officers, directors, partners and the information contained in the application. 
(b)  The City Clerk is authorized to investigate any fact related to any of the criterion set forth in this Article that may be relevant to determine the eligibility of the applicant for a sexually oriented business license. 
(c)  The City Clerk may seek and obtain the assistance of law enforcement agencies in conducting the background investigation. 
(d)  The background investigation shall be completed within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the completed application. 
(Prior code 5.24.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-60. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days of the completion of the background investigation, the City Clerk shall either issue the sexually oriented business license or issue a written statement of denial. The license or statement of denial shall be sent via United States mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant at the address provided on the application. The City Clerk shall issue the license unless one (1) or more of the following is true: 
(1)  The applicant has not paid all required fees under this Article. 
(2)  The applicant or any of its officers, directors or partners is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(3)  The applicant is not qualified to conduct business under applicable state or federal law or City ordinances. 
(4)  The applicant has knowingly provided false information to the City on an application for a sexually oriented business license. 
(5)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business does not comply with the location requirements set forth in Chapter 16. 
(6)  The premises in which the sexually oriented business is proposed to be located does not comply with applicable City ordinances, such as the building code, electrical code or fire code. 
(7)  The applicant is delinquent in the payment of any taxes owed to the City. 
(8)  The applicant or any of its directors, officers or partners has been convicted of a specified crime in the two (2) years preceding the date of the application. 
(b)  Within ten (10) days of the date of a written statement of denial, the applicant may submit a written request that the City Clerk schedule a public hearing before the City Council on the application. The hearing shall be held at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting occurring at least ten (10) days after receipt of the written request. 
(c)  At the hearing, the applicant may present additional evidence, either documentary or through witness testimony, which is relevant to the applicant's eligibility for a sexually oriented business license. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing or within ten (10) days thereafter, the City Council shall either order that the City Clerk issue the sexually oriented business license or issue a written order denying the application for the sexually oriented business license. 
(e)  If the City Council denies the application for a sexually oriented business license, the City Council's decision shall be final, subject to judicial review pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Prior code 5.24.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-70. - Annual license fee. 
    The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code 5.24.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-80. - Term of license; renewal. 
(a)  All sexually oriented business licenses issued under this Article shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless revoked or suspended as provided in this Article. 
(b)  Written application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be filed with the City Clerk at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the current license, together with the applicable annual license fee. If no application for renewal is timely filed, the licensee has waived its option to renew the license and must reapply for a new license. 
(c)  Applications for renewal shall include the same information as an original application, except as the City Clerk deems redundant. 
(d)  The procedures for renewal license applications shall be the same as the procedures for new license applications. 
(e)  Each application for a renewal license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the City Council, which application fee shall be in addition to any other applicable license fees imposed by this Chapter. 
(Prior code 5.24.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-90. - License nontransferable. 
    A sexually oriented business license issued under this Article is nontransferable. By way of example, but not limitation, a new sexually oriented business license shall be required upon: the sale, lease or sublease of the sexually oriented business or the licensed premises; the transfer by sale, exchange or similar means of a controlling interest in the sexually oriented business; or the establishment of a trust, gift or similar legal device which transfers ownership or control of the sexually oriented business or the licensed premises, other than transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing ownership or control. 
(Prior code 5.24.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-100. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The City Clerk may suspend or revoke any sexually oriented business license issued under this Article, if the City Clerk receives reliable information to establish that: 
(1)  A nuisance is being maintained on the licensed premises; 
(2)  The licensed premises are unsanitary, as certified by the Tri-County Health Department; 
(3)  The licensed premises are unsafe, as certified by the City's building official, the Fire Marshal or the Fire Chief; 
(4)  The licensee has knowingly permitted on the licensed premises the possession, sale or use of illegal controlled substances, any specified sexual activity or prostitution; 
(5)  The licensee or any of its officers, directors, partners or employees has been convicted of a specified crime during the term of the license; or 
(6)  The licensee knowingly provided false information on an application for a sexually oriented business license or renewal of such a license. 
(b)  At least twenty (20) days before the City Clerk suspends or revokes any sexually oriented business license, the City Clerk shall provide written notice to the licensee, via United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address provided on the most recent application, of the allegations supporting the suspension or revocation. 
(c)  During the twenty-day period, the licensee may file a written request for a stay of the suspension or revocation pending a public hearing before the City Council on the allegations to support the suspension or revocation. 
(d)  The public hearing shall be held at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting at least ten (10) days after receipt of the request. 
(e)  At the hearing, the applicant may present additional evidence, either documentary or through witness testimony, which is relevant to the suspension or revocation. 
(f)  At the conclusion of the hearing or within ten (10) days thereafter, the City Council shall order that the sexually oriented business license be suspended for a period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, that the license be revoked or that no action be taken with respect to the license. 
(g)  If the City Council orders suspension or revocation, the City Council's decision shall be final, subject to judicial review pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Prior code 5.24.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-110. - General regulations. 
(a)  All licensed premises shall comply with all applicable City regulations and ordinances, including but not limited to the building code, fire code, electrical code and zoning regulations. 
(b)  Every sexually oriented business license issued under this Article shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises in a clear cover or frame and shall be available for inspection at all times by the public. 
(c)  All licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. 
(d)  Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate in any licensed premises or on the property outside any licensed premises. 
(e)  All materials, devices and novelties offered by a sexually oriented business which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall be displayed so that they cannot be seen by anyone other than customers who have entered the licensed premises. 
(Prior code 5.24.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-120. - Dance and entertainment requirements. 
(a)  An adult cabaret or adult theater at which employees dance shall have one (1) or more stages or similar structures specially designed for dancing, which shall be constructed in accordance with applicable building code regulations and located inside the licensed premises. Employees shall dance only upon such stage or structure. 
(b)  When an employee dances on a structure which is designed to hold not more than two (2) persons, the structure shall be level, of sturdy construction and securely fastened to the floor or wall during dance performances. Steps and handrails shall be required on all such stages and structures where the platform on which the employee dances is more than eight (8) inches above the surface upon which the structure rests. 
(c)  Any adult cabaret or adult theatre shall have one (1) or more separate areas designated in the diagram submitted as part of the application as a stage for the licensee or employees to perform as entertainers. Entertainers shall perform only upon the stage, and the stage shall be fixed and immovable. 
(d)  No seating for the audience shall be permitted within three (3) feet of the edge of any stage, and no members of the audience shall be permitted upon any stage or within three (3) feet of the edge of any stage. 
(Prior code 5.24.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-130. - Lighting requirements. 
(a)  When the occupant capacity of any licensed premises, as determined by the fire department, is at least fifty (50) persons, such licensed premises shall have electric, battery-operated emergency lights using reliable storage batteries properly maintained and charged. 
(b)  The interior portion of a licensed premise to which patrons are permitted access shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place at an illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(Prior code 5.24.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-140. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for a sexually oriented business to be open for business or for the licensee or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons upon the licensed premises on any Monday through Saturday between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., and on any Sunday between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Prior code 5.24.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-150. - Age restrictions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of any person under eighteen (18) years of age into any sexually oriented business. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter, give or offer for sale, barter or gift to any person under eighteen (18) years of age any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by any adult store or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  Employees of any sexually oriented business shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Prior code 5.24.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-160. - Conduct in sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  No licensee or employee shall encourage or knowingly permit any person on or within the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or breasts of any person. 
(b)  No licensee or employee shall knowingly fail to immediately report to the police department any criminal conduct or violation of any City ordinance or state or federal law, rule or regulation that occurs on or within the licensed premises. 
(c)  No person shall engage in specified sexual activities on or within a licensed premises. 
(d)  No licensee or employee mingling with patrons or serving food or drinks shall be unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any specified anatomical area. 
(e)  No employee shall receive tips from patrons, except as provided herein. A licensee that desires to provide for tips from its patrons shall establish one (1) or more boxes or other containers to receive tips. All tips for employees shall be placed by patrons into the tip box. The licensee shall post one (1) or more signs to be conspicuously visible to patrons in letters at least one (1) inch high to read as follows: 
All tips are to be placed in tip box and not 
handed directly to the entertainer. 
Any physical contact between the patron 
and the entertainer is strictly prohibited. 
(Prior code 5.24.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-170. - Inspection. 
    Every licensee shall permit law enforcement officers and any other federal, state, county or City agency in the performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this Article and normally and regularly conducted by such agency, to inspect the licensed premises for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this Article, at any time the licensed premises is occupied or open for business. 
(Prior code 5.24.170; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-180. - Employee identification. 
    Each licensee shall provide to the City Clerk, in writing, the full name, any aliases, date of birth, and the current address and telephone number of every employee of the licensee within five (5) days of employment. 
(Prior code 5.24.180; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-190. - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Article, the following businesses and activities shall be exempt from the requirements of this Article: 
(1)  Any adult store which derives less than ten percent (10%) of its gross income from the sale of materials depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, if such materials are located in a separate room or booth containing those materials only. 
(2)  Any college, junior college or university supported, in whole or in part, by tax revenue and offering educational programs which, for educational purposes, may include the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Prior code 5.24.190; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-200. - Regulations not exclusive. 
    Nothing contained in this Chapter shall limit the effectiveness or applicability of Chapter 16 to any sexually oriented business. 
(Prior code 5.24.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-8-210. - Penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to violate any provision of this Article, and any such violation shall be subject to punishment in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 1-4-20, provided that no person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall be subject to imprisonment. 
(b)  In the event of violation of any of the terms and regulations set forth herein, the City may obtain equitable relief, including injunctive relief, to require compliance with the provisions hereof. In the event the City is successful in obtaining injunctive or other equitable relief, the costs and attorney fees incurred by the City in such action shall be awarded to the City in addition to any other relief. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall preclude the City from enforcing the suspension and revocation provisions of this Article in addition to simultaneously or subsequently prosecuting alleged violations of this Article under this Section. 
(Prior code 5.24.210; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 9 - Special Event Licenses 

Sec. 6-9-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Business means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, direct or indirect. 
    Sales tax means the tax to be collected and remitted by a licensee on sales pursuant to Chapter 4, Article 3. 
    Special event means an activity that is of rare occurrence which is taking place within the City or near the City and which may reasonably be expected to interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic within the City. 
    Temporary means to be in operation for five (5) consecutive days or less during a special event. 
(Prior code 3.18.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-9-20. - License required. 
    No person shall conduct a temporary business in or upon any public street, park or other public grounds in the City during a special event unless a license to conduct such business has been obtained in compliance with this Article. The requirements of this Article do not exempt a business located on private property from complying with the City's sales tax licensing as provided in Chapter 4, Article 3. 
(Prior code 3.18.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-9-30. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a license under this Article must be filed with the Finance Director not less than fifteen (15) days in advance of and no more than forty-five (45) days prior to the special event. Late applications will not be accepted. 
(b)  The application shall be in writing and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the license; 
(2)  The nature of the business and the merchandise and/or service sold by the business; 
(3)  An approved application from the Tri-County Health Department for those licensees selling food that is not prepackaged; 
(4)  The number and kind of vehicles and equipment which will be used; and 
(5)  The location from which the owner of the business intends to operate. 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by the special events license fee, as set forth in the City Fee Schedule. 
(Prior code 3.18.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-9-40. - Findings required. 
    The Finance Director, upon approval from the Chief of Police, shall issue a license when, based upon consideration of the application and such information as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the business will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic; 
(2)  The conduct of the business will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas where the special event will take place or areas contiguous to such area; and 
(3)  The conduct of the business is in accordance with the City's sales tax regulations set forth in Chapter 4, Article 3. 
(Prior code 3.18.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-9-50. - Conditions to license. 
    The Finance Director and the Chief of Police are authorized to impose such conditions upon issuance of the license as are necessary to ensure that all of the findings set forth in Section 6-9-40 shall exist during the special event. 
(Prior code 3.18.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-9-60. - Notice of issuance or denial. 
    The Finance Director shall act upon the license application within ten (10) days of the filing thereof. If the Finance Director disapproves the application, he or she shall mail to the applicant, within the ten-day period, notice of the denial and the reason for such denial. The applicant may appeal the denial of the special events license to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal within five (5) days after the denial by the Finance Director. The City Manager shall act on the notice of appeal within ten (10) days after receipt of said notice. 
(Prior code 3.18.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-9-70. - Limitations on number of licenses. 
    The Finance Director shall adopt rules and regulations at least forty-five (45) days in advance of the special event limiting the number of licenses to be issued for the special event in order to protect the safety and welfare of the public and the community during the special event. 
(Prior code 3.18.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-9-80. - Duties of licensee. 
(a)  A licensee shall collect and remit the applicable sales tax as provided by this Code. 
(b)  A licensee shall comply with all terms and conditions of said license and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(c)  The written license obtained pursuant to this Article shall be carried by the person conducting the business for which the license was issued. The license must be available for inspection by the Chief of Police at any and all times during the special event. 
(Prior code 3.18.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-9-90. - Revocation of license. 
    The Finance Director and/or the Chief of Police may revoke any license issued hereunder upon the failure of the licensee to comply with the terms and conditions of said license or if the business, because of the manner in which it is being conducted, or for any other reason, is jeopardizing those elements of public safety or welfare set forth in Section 6-9-40. 
(Prior code 3.18.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-9-100. - Designated areas. 
    The Finance Director, upon recommendation from the Chief of Police, shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles and equipment to certain designated areas and to restrict the location of any business operation licensed pursuant to this Article. 
(Prior code 3.18.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 10 - Vending Machines and Amusement Devices 

Sec. 6-10-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Capsule vending machine means a single storage capsule and associated dispensing mechanism through which individual toys or trinkets, or unwrapped pieces of chewing gum, candy or nuts are sold. A series of capsule vending machines attached to one another by means of metal bars or other fasteners shall not be deemed to be a single vending machine, but shall each constitute a separate machine. 
    Cigarette vending machine means any automatic vending machine used for the sale of cigarettes and controlled by the insertion of a coin or coins. 
    Drink means milk, coffee, tea, soft drinks, carbonated water, mineral water, juices, fruit drinks, cocoa or any other beverage. 
    Food means sandwiches, pretzels, nuts, salads, puddings, soups, meat and meat products, cheese and cheese products, fruits and fruit products, crackers, candy, cookies, chewing gum, potato chips, corn chips, popcorn and any snack food. 
    Food or drink vending machine means a machine, other than a capsule vending machine, through which any kind of food or drink is sold. 
    Juke box means any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement. 
    Licensed premises means the place of business or other location where a licensed cigarette vending machine, food or drink vending machine, capsule vending machine, juke box or mechanical, electronic or electric amusement device is displayed for public patronage or operation. 
    Manager means an individual who manages, directs, supervises, oversees or administers the acts and transactions of the agents and servants of any licensed premises as defined in this Article. 
    Mechanical, electronic or electrical amusement devices means any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or upon the payment of compensation to the owner of the machine or to the owner's authorized representative, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, video games and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated, but shall not include fixed-stand coin-operated kiddie rides. 
    Person, as used in this Article, shall include the following: any person, firm, corporation or association which owns any such machine; the person, firm, corporation or association in whose place of business any such machine is placed for use by the public; and the person, firm, corporation or association having control over such machine; provided, however, that the payment of such fee by any person, firm, corporation or association enumerated in this Article shall be deemed in compliance with this Article. 
(Prior code 5.16.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-10-20. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
    Nothing in this Article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices, or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State. 
(Prior code 5.16.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-10-30. - License required. 
    Any person owning any food or drink vending machine, capsule vending machine, jukebox or mechanical, electronic or electrical amusement device which is displayed for public patronage or operation, shall be required to obtain a license from the City and to pay a license fee. If the owner of the machine or device fails to obtain such license, it shall be the responsibility of the owner or other person in possession of the property on which the device is located to obtain such license. Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk on a form to be supplied for that purpose. 
(Prior code 5.16.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-10-40. - License application contents. 
    The application for such license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, date and place of birth of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of its articles of incorporation shall be provided. 
(2)  Location where the machine or device is to be displayed or operated. 
(3)  Description of the machine or device to be licensed, including mechanical features, name of manufacturer and serial number. 
(Prior code 5.16.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-10-50. - Approval or disapproval of license. 
    Application for the license required by Section 6-10-30 shall be reviewed by the City Clerk. No license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the City Clerk. The City Clerk may refuse to issue any license only after furnishing the applicant with written findings of fact stating the reasons for disapproval, which findings shall be based upon any of the following: 
(1)  The applicant or any principal thereof is under the age of twenty-one (21) years; or 
(2)  The applicant or any principal thereof has made false statements on the application. 
(Prior code 5.16.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-10-60. - License fees. 
(a)  Every applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay an annual license fee to be established by resolution of City Council for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each food or drink vending machine, capsule vending machine, juke box or mechanical, electronic or electrical amusement device. 
(b)  Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(Prior code 5.16.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-10-70. - Display of license. 
(a)  The license shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the licensed premises. An adhesive license tag shall be affixed to the machine. 
(b)  Such license may be transferred from one (1) machine or device to another similar machine upon application to the City Clerk to such effect and the giving of a description and the serial number of the new machine or device. 
(c)  If the place of business at which the licensed machine is located is moved to another location within the City, the license may be transferred to such new location upon application to the City Clerk, giving the street and number of the new location. The new location shall be approved by the City Clerk in the same manner as provided in Section 6-10-50. 
(d)  When the business of an owner of a licensed machine or device is sold or transferred, the license of such owner may be transferred to the transferee, with the consent of the City Clerk as provided in Section 6-10-50. 
(Prior code 5.16.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-10-80. - Prohibitions and restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall operate or permit to be operated any cigarette vending machine. 
(b)  No person shall permit the playing of juke boxes between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day. 
(c)  No license provided for by this Article shall be issued to or held by any person who shall own any mechanical, electronic or electrical amusement device which is displayed for public patronage or operation within one thousand (1,000) feet from any land used for school purposes by any public, private or parochial school, vocational school, junior college, college, university or seminary; except that this provision shall not apply to any licensee located within such limit on the effective date of the initial ordinance from which this Article is derived, or effect the renewal or issuance of any license once granted. 
(d)  The distance referred to in Subsection (c) hereof shall be computed by measurement from the nearest property line of the land used for school purposes to the nearest portion of the building, as defined Section 16-1-100, in which a mechanical, electronic or electrical amusement device is displayed for public patronage or kept for operation, using a route of direct pedestrian access, measured as a person would walk safely and properly, without trespassing, with right angles at crossings and with the observance of traffic regulations and lights. Land used for school purposes shall include, but not be limited to, campuses, athletic fields, administrative offices and buildings, transportation and storage facilities and buildings, and the land surrounding any such campus, athletic field, office, building or facility. 
(Prior code 5.16.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-10-90. - License revocation. 
    Every license is subject to the right, which is expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee or the licensee's designated agents, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any vending machine, juke box or mechanical, electronic or electrical amusement device contrary to this Article, the ordinances of the City, or the law of the State. The license may be revoked by the City Council after written notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the violations with which the licensee and/or the licensee's agents are charged, if after the hearing the licensee and/or the licensee's agents are found to be guilty of such violations. Ten (10) days' notice of the hearing shall be given the licensee. At such hearing, the licensee and his or her attorney may be present and submit evidence in his or her defense. In addition to the violation of any other law, the City Council may revoke any license granted pursuant to this Article, upon a finding of any of the following: 
(1)  That any mechanical, electronic or electrical amusement device maintained upon the licensed premises is being used for gambling purposes; 
(2)  That repeated disturbances of the public peace have occurred within the licensed premises or upon any parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, access ways or grounds immediately adjacent to the licensed premises involving patrons, employees or the owner or manager of the licensed premises; 
(3)  That the holder of the license, or any employees or agents thereof, are illegally offering for sale, or illegally allowing to be consumed upon the licensed premises or upon any parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, access ways or grounds immediately adjacent to the licensed premises, narcotics or dangerous drugs; 
(4)  That the holder of the license, or any owner or manager of the licensed premises, is not upon the licensed premises during normal hours of business; 
(5)  Violations of Section 6-10-80; 
(6)  That malt, vinous, or spirituous beverages are being consumed by patrons, employees, the licensee or the owner or manager of the licensed premises, either upon the licensed premises or upon any parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, access ways or grounds immediately adjacent to licensed premises, except those premises licensed under the Colorado Liquor Code; and 
(7)  That a person under the age of eighteen (18) years is being used as a manager of the licensed premises. 
(Prior code 5.16.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 6-10-100. - Seizure and destruction of machines. 
    If the Chief of Police has reason to believe that any mechanical, electronic or electrical amusement device is used as a gambling device, such machine may be seized by the Police Department and impounded; and if, upon trial, the person having control over such machine or device is found guilty of allowing such device to be used for gambling, such machine shall be destroyed by the Police Department. 
(Prior code 5.16.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 11 - Miscellaneous Provisions 

Sec. 6-11-10. - Violation; penalty. 
    It is unlawful to violate this Chapter. Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-4-20. 
(Prior code 5.20.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
CHAPTER 7 - Health, Sanitation and Animals 
ARTICLE 1 - Administration and Abatement of Nuisances 

Sec. 7-1-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Inoperable vehicle means any automobile, truck, tractor, motorcycle or self-propelled vehicle which is in a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to perform the functions or purpose for which it was originally constructed. The existence of any of the following conditions shall raise the presumption that a vehicle is inoperable: 
a.  Absence of an effective registration plate upon such vehicle. 
b.  Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, chains or other supports. 
c.  Absence of one (1) or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation of the vehicle upon the streets and highways, or absence of glazing, lights or indicators, body sheet metal or paint. 
    Litter means the scattering or dropping of rubbish, trash or other matter, organic or mineral. 
    Noxious weed means an alien plant or part of an alien plant that has been designated as such by the State, or has been declared a noxious weed by the City, and meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Aggressively invades or is detrimental to economic crops or native plant communities; 
b.  Is poisonous to livestock; 
c.  Is a carrier of detrimental insects, diseases or parasites; or 
d.  The direct or indirect effect of the presence of such weed is detrimental to the environmentally sound management of natural or agricultural ecosystems. 
    Refuse means and includes any grass clippings, leaves, hay, straw, manure, shavings, excelsior, paper, ashes, rubbish containers, boxes, glass, cans, bottles, garbage, waste and discarded building and construction materials, including but not limited to plaster, broken concrete, bricks, cinder blocks, stones, wood, roofing material, wire or metal binding, sacks or loose discarded or unused material; all rubbish of any kind or nature whatsoever; and any other materials commonly known as rubbish or refuse of any kind or character or by any means known. 
    Rubbish means any type of debris, trash, waste or rejected matter. 
    Trash means any worn out, broken up or used refuse, rubbish, toppings, twigs, leaves of trees or worthless matter or material. 
    Weed means an unsightly, useless, troublesome or injurious growing herbaceous plant, and includes all rank vegetable growth which exhales unpleasant and noxious odors and high and rank vegetable growth that may conceal filthy deposits. 
(Prior code 8.22.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-1-20. - Policy. 
    It shall be the policy of the City that every public nuisance shall be unlawful, and shall be restrained, prevented, abated and enjoined. 
(Prior code 8.02.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-1-30. - Nuisance defined. 
    The following shall be deemed to be a nuisance in the City: 
(1)  The conducting or maintaining of any business, occupation, operation, activity, building, land or premises prohibited by statute or ordinance. 
(2)  Any building, structure or land open to or used by the general public, the condition of which presents a substantial danger or hazard to public health or safety. 
(3)  Any unlawful pollution or contamination of any surface or subsurface waters in this City, of the air or of any water, substance or material intended for human consumption. 
(4)  Any activity, operation or condition which, after being ordered abated, corrected or discontinued by a lawful order of an agency or officer of the City, the Tri-County Health Department, the County or the State, continues to exist or be conducted in violation of any statute, ordinance or regulation. 
(5)  Any activity, operation, condition, building, structure, place, premises or thing which is injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the City, or which is indecent or offensive to the senses of the ordinary person, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. For purposes of this Section, an accumulation of activities, operations, conditions or things that might individually not arise to the level of a nuisance may be deemed a nuisance if, taken together, they would be indecent or offensive to the senses of the ordinary person. 
(6)  Any nuisance defined or declared as such by statute or ordinance. 
(Prior code 8.02.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-1-40. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Whenever an authorized inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a nuisance under this Chapter, the inspector may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to perform any duty imposed on him or her; provided that, if such building or premises is unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or occupant, and, upon locating the owner, occupant, shall present proper credentials and request entry. If entry is refused, the inspector shall give the owner or occupant, or if the owner or occupant cannot be located after a reasonable effort, shall leave at the building or premises a written notice of intention to inspect at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the scheduled inspection. The notice shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that, in the event entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a court having jurisdiction. 
(2)  After the expiration of the twenty-four-hour period, the inspector may appear before the Municipal Court and, upon showing of probable cause, the Municipal Court may issue a search warrant authorizing the inspector to enter the building or the premises. For purposes of this Section, a determination of probable cause shall be based upon reasonableness, and if a valid public interest justifies the intrusion contemplated, then there is probable cause to issue a search warrant. The inspector shall not be required to demonstrate personal knowledge of the condition of the particular structure or premises in issue in order to obtain a search warrant. 
(3)  Upon presentation of the search warrant and proper credentials, or possession of the same in the case of an unoccupied building or premises, the inspector may enter into the building or the premises using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry therein. It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of the building or premises to resist reasonable force used by an inspector acting pursuant to this Section. 
(b)  Emergencies. 
(1)  When an emergency situation exists in relation to the enforcement of this Chapter, an authorized inspector, upon a presentation of proper credentials or identification in the case of an occupied building or premises, may enter into the building or premises. In such an emergency, the inspector may use such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry into the building or premises. 
(2)  For purposes of this Section, an emergency situation includes any situation where there is imminent danger of loss of life, limb, property or health or of pollution to the environment. It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of the building or premises to resist reasonable force used by the inspector acting pursuant to this Section. 
(3)  When an emergency exists that includes an illicit discharge, as defined in Article 2 of this Chapter, the City shall contact the local fire district and request that the district contain the illicit discharge. The local fire district shall thereafter be an authorized inspector pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Prior code 8.02.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-1-50. - Persons liable for nuisance. 
    Any person who makes or causes any nuisance to exist shall be deemed the author thereof. Any person who has possession or control of any private ground or premises, whether or not he or she is the owner thereof, in or upon which any such nuisance exists or may be found, whether such nuisance has been or shall be created, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every period of one (1) day continuation of such nuisance. 
(Prior code 8.02.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-1-60. - Notice of abatement. 
(a)  Upon discovery of any nuisance, the authorized inspector shall issue a notice of abatement to the owner or occupant of the property, unless the owner or occupant has previously received notice for any nuisance described in this chapter within the past twelve (12) months. The notice shall describe the nuisance and order that the nuisance be abated in a specific period of time. The notice shall also state that the owner or occupant of the property may protest the findings of the inspector by filing a written notice of protest with the City Clerk pursuant to Section 7-1-110 of this Article. If an owner or occupant has received notice for any nuisance described in this chapter within the past twelve (12) months, the authorized inspector may proceed directly to the issuance of a summons and complaint under section 7-1-20. 
(b)  Any notice that refers to an illicit discharge may also require the owner, agent or occupant of the property to provide a copy of a certificate of disposal from the federal Environmental Protection Agency or an approved hazardous materials disposal company, a manifest or other proof of proper disposal. 
(c)  Abatement of a nuisance posing an imminent danger of loss of life, limb, property or health or of pollution to the environment shall commence without delay. For other nuisances, the reasonable time for abatement shall not exceed seven (7) days unless it appears from the facts and circumstances that compliance cannot reasonably be made within seven (7) days or that a good faith attempt at compliance is being made. 
(d)  The written notice of abatement shall be served by delivering a copy thereof to an owner or occupant of the property over the age of eighteen (18) years, or, if the property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, then by mailing a notice to his or her last known address as reflected in the County records. If the owner or occupant fails to comply with the notice, the City Manager may have the nuisance removed or abated without delay. 
(e)  In no event shall a notice of abatement be required prior to issuance of a summons and complaint for any violation of this Code. 
(Prior code 8.02.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 25 1, 2012; Ord. 04 ,  1, 2019) 
Sec. 7-1-70. - Abatement after notice. 
    After issuance of a notice as provided in Section 7-1-60: 
(1)  If the owner or occupant of the premises refuses or fails to comply with the directions of the written notice, the City Manager or authorized inspector may enter upon such property for the purposes of abating the nuisance as provided in Section 7-1-90. 
(2)  Upon the filing of a protest as provided in the notice, the proof of notice shall be extended until final disposition of the protest plus ten (10) days. 
(Prior code 8.02.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 04 ,  2, 2019) 
Sec. 7-1-80. - Abatement without notice. 
    Any nuisance found in or upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, highway, public right-of-way, public grounds, park, recreation facility or public property in the City may be abated by the City Manager or authorized inspector without notice. The author of any such nuisance shall be responsible for the actual costs of abatement, plus a five-percent surcharge for inspection. The minimum charge for abatement shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Prior code 8.02.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 04 ,  3, 2019) 
Sec. 7-1-90. - Abatement by court order. 
    The City may bring an action in any court of record, including the Municipal Court, for the prevention, restraint, abatement or enjoining of any nuisance. When judgment is rendered against any person for creating, keeping or maintaining any nuisance, it shall be the duty of the court before which such judgment is had to order, as part of the judgment, that the defendant forthwith abate the nuisance. 
(Prior code 8.02.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-1-100. - Abatement by City. 
(a)  Upon the expiration of the period of notice provided in Section 7-1-60, or at any time thereafter, if the nuisance has not been abated on the property described in such notice, the City may enter upon such property and abate the nuisance pursuant to this Chapter. The actual costs thereof, including five percent (5%) for inspection, a minimum fee assessment of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and other incidental costs in connection therewith, shall be assessed upon the lot or tract of land in the City upon which such nuisance is abated. 
(b)  Every abatement assessment shall be a lien in the several amounts assessed against such lot or tract of land until paid, and shall have priority over all other liens, except general taxes and prior special assessments. If any assessment is not paid within thirty (30) days after notice of such assessment is served upon the person or persons liable for the nuisance pursuant to Section 7-1-50, the City Clerk may certify to the County Treasurer the delinquent assessment, giving the name of the owner as it appears of record, the number of the lot, block and subdivision or other legal descriptions sufficient to identify such property upon the records of the County Treasurer. 
(Prior code 8.02.110; Ord. 37 1, 2007; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-1-110. - Protest. 
    The owner or occupant of any property subject to a notice of abatement, within the period of time set forth in the notice, may protest any matter stated in the notice by filing a written protest with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall forward the notice of protest to the City Manager. The City Manager shall forthwith schedule a hearing on the protest. During the pendency of the protest, the order to abate shall be stayed. 
(Prior code 8.02.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-1-120. - Unlawful acts. 
    It is unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To create, operate, maintain, cause, permit or conduct any nuisance as defined in this Chapter; or 
(2)  To interfere with, prevent or attempt to interfere with or prevent the abatement of any nuisance by an officer of the City pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Prior code 8.02.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-1-130. - Cumulative remedies. 
    All remedies set forth herein are cumulative, and the exercise of one (1) shall not be deemed to prevent the exercise of another, nor to bar or abate any prosecution or petition for injunction hereunder. 
(Prior code 8.02.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-1-140. - Separate offenses. 
    Each and every day during which any nuisance continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Prior code 8.02.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 2 - Nuisances Enumerated 

Sec. 7-2-10. - Posting handbills, posters and placards. 
(a)  Any handbill, poster, placard or painted or printed matter which is glued, stapled, nailed or otherwise fastened to or upon any public or private dwelling, store, other building, fence, power pole, telephone pole, other structure or lawful sign, without the permission of the owner or occupant of such property, shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(b)  Any handbill, poster placard or painted or printed matter which is placed in or upon, or affixed or attached to, any private passenger automobile, without the permission of the owner of such automobile, shall be deemed a nuisance; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to the service of any citation, summons, complaint or parking violation notice. 
(Prior code 8.04.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-20. - Stagnant ponds. 
    Any cellar, vault, drain, sewer, pond of water, swimming pool or other place in this City that is noxious or offensive to others, or injurious to public health, through an accumulation or deposition of noxious, offensive or foul water or other substances, or conducive to the breeding of mosquitoes, shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Prior code 8.04.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-30. - Sewer inlet. 
    It shall be deemed a nuisance to deposit in, throw into or permit to be deposited in or thrown into any sanitary or storm sewer, sewer inlet or privy vault that has a sewer connection any article whatsoever that might cause such sewer, sewer inlet or privy vault, to become noxious or offensive to others or injurious to public health. 
(Prior code 8.04.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-40. - Liquefied fuel products. 
(a)  The leakage of twenty-five (25) gallons or more of liquid fuel products into the environment of the City from any tank, line or delivery vehicle constitutes a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the residents of the City and is therefore deemed a nuisance. 
(b)  The owner, station manager or leaseholder, as operator of each underground liquid fuel installation located in the City, shall cause to be posed in a conspicuous place at such installation a true copy of the Colorado Oil Inspection Regulations Concerning Instruction Requirements for Leak Detection. 
(c)  Such owner, station manager or leaseholder, as operator, shall also maintain and reconcile accurate daily inventory records on all underground and liquid fuel tanks for indication of possible leakage from tanks or piping. The records shall: 
(1)  Be made available for inspection by an authorized agent of the City within five (5) regular business days or one hundred twenty (120) hours after the receipt of a request to produce the records. 
(2)  Include, as a minimum, data showing by product, daily reconciliation between sales, use receipts and inventory on hand. If there is more than one (1) system consisting of a tanks serving separate pumps or dispensers for any product, the reconciliation shall be maintained separately for each tank system. 
(3)  Include daily actual measurements of products by gauge, gauge stick or readout from an automated gauging system. The records shall also include a computation of product gain or loss on each business day. The mere recording of pump meter readings and product delivery receipts shall not constitute adequate inventory records. 
(d)  For the purpose of the enforcement of this Section, the fire prevention officer designated by the Fire Chief, pursuant to Section 10401 of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the City, shall be an officer of the City, and may initiate enforcement proceedings. 
(Prior code 8.04.170; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-50. - Stale matter. 
    It shall be deemed a nuisance to keep, collect or use, cause to be kept, collected or used or permit to be kept or used any stale, putrid or stinking fat or grease or other stale matter, other than in a sealed container. 
(Prior code 8.04.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-60. - Open wells, cisterns or excavations. 
    Excavations shall be deemed public nuisances unless the same are adequately covered with a locked lid or other covering weighing at least sixty (60) pounds, or are securely fenced with solid fence to a height of at least five (5) feet. This Section shall not apply to excavations made during raw construction and exceeding five (5) feet in depth, cisterns and wells, or an excavation used for storage of water. 
(Prior code 8.04.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-70. - Blowing dust. 
(a)  It is deemed a nuisance for the owner or occupant of any vacant lot to maintain such lot in a manner that permits dust, blowing soil or blowing sand to be detrimental to the health of the general public and the residents of the City and the territory adjacent thereto, or to be a source or cause of damage to real and personal property. 
(b)  It is deemed a nuisance for the owner or occupant of any vacant lot within the City to maintain such lot in such a manner that permits dust or blowing soil or blowing sand to be deposited on other property, including any public street, public highway or other public way. 
(Prior code 8.04.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-80. - Transporting garbage, manure. 
    Every vehicle or trailer used to transport manure, garbage, swill or offal in any street in the City shall be fitted with a substantially tight box thereon so that no portion of such filth will be scattered or thrown onto the street. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-90. - Junkyards and dumping grounds. 
(a)  All places used or maintained, or permitted to be used or maintained as junkyards or dumping grounds, for the wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked or junk automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers, boats or machinery of any kind or any of the parts thereof, for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons or for the storage of junk, which places are kept in such manner as to essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others, shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(b)  Nothing in this Section shall prevent the City from acquiring, operating and maintaining a City car pound or other facility for the storage of motor vehicles, vehicles, boats, machinery or equipment pursuant to any ordinance or resolution of the City. 
(Prior code 8.04.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-100. - Slaughterhouses. 
    No slaughterhouse or other place for slaughtering animals shall be kept within the City, and the maintenance of such a house shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Prior code 8.04.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-110. - Rodents and other animals. 
    It is deemed a nuisance to allow any mice, rats, squirrels, skunks, rabbits, prairie dogs, gophers or groundhogs to infest any real property within the City so as to encroach upon or cause damage to the property of another. Any abatement shall conform to applicable state law and Division of Wildlife regulations. 
(Prior code 8.04.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-120. - Inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be deemed a nuisance to permit any inoperable vehicle to remain on public or private property for more than ten (10) consecutive days. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, a vehicle shall be deemed inoperable if: the vehicle does not display current, valid license plates; the vehicle lacks any part necessary for legal operation on a public street; or the vehicle lacks glazing, lights or indicators, flat tires, body sheet metal or paint on any part of the vehicle. 
(c)  This Section shall not apply to any vehicle completely enclosed within a building or structure, and shall not apply to any vehicle on the premises of a lawfully operating motor vehicle repair business. 
(Prior code 8.04.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-130. - Littering. 
(a)  It shall be deemed a nuisance for any person to throw or place any litter on any public or private property or in any water, or for the owner or occupant of any property to allow litter to remain on property owned or occupied by him or her unless: 
(1)  Such property is an area designated by law, ordinance or regulation for the disposal of such material and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use such property; or 
(2)  The litter is placed in a receptacle installed for such purpose. 
(b)  Any litter that becomes suspended in, carried by or mixed with stormwater or an allowed stormwater discharge, as defined in Section 7-2-150, shall be deemed an illicit discharge. 
(c)  It shall be deemed a nuisance to deposit, throw or place any litter, except for salt, sand or gravel used to address icy conditions, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, public buildings or other public property in the City, except in public receptacles and authorized private receptacles. 
(d)  It shall be deemed a nuisance for any person, while an operator of or passenger in a vehicle, to deposit, throw or place any litter in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public property in the City except in public receptacles and authorized private receptacles. 
(e)  It shall be deemed a nuisance to operate any truck, trailer or vehicle in the City in such manner that the load or contents of such vehicle, or any litter, is blown or deposited in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public property. 
(f)  It shall be deemed a nuisance for any person to deposit, throw or place any papers, newspapers, handbills, letters, samples or political literature in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds in the City. 
(g)  It shall be deemed a nuisance for any person, except an authorized public employee or officer, or a person who has first obtained a permit to do so from the City, to post or place any poster, sign or announcement in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public property in the City. 
(h)  It shall be deemed a nuisance for any owner or occupant to keep, store or permit to be kept or stored any building materials, construction materials, paper, trash, waste material, dirt, gravel, rock or litter upon any property in the City in such manner that the same is caused or permitted to be blown or deposited upon any other public or private property or in any event, for longer than fourteen (14) days except as allowed pursuant to the zoning of such property. 
(Prior code 8.04.010, 8.04.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-135. - Unlawful dumping 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put, place or dump garbage, trash, litter, refuse or waste material of any kind in, under, on or around a private, public or commercial garbage refuse dumpster, trash container, solid waste container or recyclable container belonging to another, without prior written permission for such use being granted by the owner, lessee or person in control of the real property upon which the dumpster or other trash container is located. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put, place or dump anything at a location that accepts used items for sale, repurposing or gifting to another after hours of operation or to leave such donation outside a donation bin or box. 
(Ord. No. 11 ,  1, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 7-2-140. - Dilapidated or abandoned buildings and structures. 
(a)  Each of the following shall be deemed a nuisance: 
(1)  Any dilapidated building which is unused by the owner or uninhabited because of deterioration or decay, which condition constitutes a fire hazard or subjects adjoining property to danger of damage by storm, soil erosion or rodent infestation, or which is frequented by trespassers or transients seeking or shelter. 
(2)  Any building which substantially annoys, injures or endangers the public health, safety or welfare, including but not limited to: 
a.  Any vacant, inadequately maintained or boarded building located in or within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residential district, which does not show evidence of current construction activity; or 
b.  Any vacant building, regardless of proximity to a residential zone district, which is not secure and to which entry may be made through opened or unlocked doors, windows or other openings. 
(3)  Any partially or incomplete structure, including but not limited to fences, garages, carports and sheds. 
(4)  Any building which has become unsightly or a detriment or danger to surrounding property or the public, evidence of which shall include but not be limited to: substantial peeling or faded paint; broken or missing shutters or fascia; bent, broken, poorly attached, missing or rusted gutters; damaged or missing roof, shingles or support structures for the roof; broken or missing windows or screens; or broken or damaged fencing. 
(b)  In a residential subdivision where at least ninety percent (90%) of the lots are built on, a nuisance shall be deemed to exist if: 
(1)  The exterior elements of a residence, including roofing, siding, exterior doors, windows and trim, are not completed within twelve (12) months of the issuance of the building permit for a new residence, residential addition or remodel, provided that the City Manager may grant one (1) extension of not more than six (6) months for good cause shown; or 
(2)  Minimum landscaping improvements, including a finished all-weather driveway and ground cover, are not completed within six (6) months of the completion of the exterior elements described in Paragraph (1) hereof, provided that the City Manager may grant one (1) extension of not more than three (3) months for good cause shown. 
(Prior code 8.04.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-150. - Illicit discharge. 
(a)  It shall be deemed a nuisance to discharge out of or from or permit to flow from any structure, vehicle container or place, any liquid or substance of any kind that is not composed entirely of stormwater, into or upon any adjacent ground or lot in the City, whether public or private. 
(b)  For purposes of this Chapter, the following shall be considered allowable nonstormwater discharges and not illicit discharges, unless the discharge is determined to be a source of pollutants: 
(1)  Discharge from a potable water source. 
(2)  Water line flushing. 
(3)  Water that is incidental to street sweeping not associated with construction. 
(4)  Individual residential car washing. 
(5)  Landscape irrigation or lawn watering. 
(6)  Irrigation return flow. 
(7)  De-chlorinated swimming pool discharge. 
(8)  Water from foundation drains, footing drains, crawlspace or sump pump drains. 
(9)  Air-conditioning condensation. 
(10)  Rising groundwater. 
(11)  Groundwater infiltration. 
(12)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, springs or diverted stream flows. 
(13)  Pumped ground water. 
(14)  Emergency firefighting activities. 
(15)  Discharge authorized by separate Colorado Discharge Permit System (CDPS) permit, or in accordance with the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Water Quality Control Division and Environmental Protection Agency guidance or policy. 
(Prior code 8.04.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 25 2, 2012) 
Sec. 7-2-160. - Pollution. 
(a)  It shall be deemed a nuisance to throw, deposit or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited, any offal composed of animal or vegetable substance or both, any dead animal, excrement, garbage or other offensive matter upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or public property. 
(b)  Any offal that becomes suspended in, carried by or mixed with stormwater or an allowed nonstormwater discharge, as defined in Section 7-2-150, shall be deemed an illicit discharge. 
(Prior code 8.04.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-170. - Glare and heat. 
    All operations which produce glare, such as welding and acetylene torch cutting, must be performed in such a manner that the glare cannot be seen from any property line. If heat is a result of an industrial operation, it shall be so insulated as to not raise the temperature at any lot line at any time. 
(Prior code 15.42.450; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-180. - Erosion and sediment. 
    It shall be deemed a nuisance to allow silt, dirt, rocks or other materials to travel or escape from private property by means of erosion, drainage, wind or other movement onto or across any other property. 
(Prior code 8.04.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-190. - Weed and grass control. 
(a)  All owners and occupants of property in the City shall prevent such property from becoming overgrown in weeds and grass. 
(b)  It shall be deemed a nuisance for the owner or occupant of any property to permit weeds or grass to grow on such property to a height of more than eight (8) inches within a distance of one hundred (100) feet from any public street, highway or park, or within a distance of one hundred (100) feet from property lines adjoining any developed property; provided, however, that city-maintained open areas and drainage ways, as well as properties in the rural area of the city as depicted in the comprehensive plan, and other parcels of land where taller growth is consistent and complimentary to neighborhood characteristics shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(c)  Weeds and grass shall be controlled by pulling, cutting and spraying or other suitable method of weed control. 
(Prior code 8.04.180; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. No. 09 ,  1, 2018) 
Sec. 7-2-200. - Trees, shrubs and other vegetation. 
(a)  Trees, shrubs and other vegetation which are dead, broken, diseased or infested by insects so as to endanger the well-being of other trees, shrubs or vegetation or constitute a potential threat or hazard to people or property are declared a nuisance. 
(b)  It is deemed a nuisance for any person to cut, trim, spray remove or plant any tree, vine, shrub, hedge or other woody plants upon access controlled arterials or other public parks and greenbelts within the City, unless authorized or directed by an authorized inspector. 
(c)  It is deemed a nuisance for any person to injure, damage or destroy any tree, shrub, vine, hedge or other vegetation in or upon public rights-of-way or other public property within the City, except for any person who notifies the authorized inspector of such injury, damage or destruction and makes arrangements to repair or replace such vegetation or pay for the cost of such repair or replacement. 
(d)  It is deemed a nuisance for an owner or occupant of private property to allow any branches of trees, shrubs, bushes or any other plant material growing on such property to: 
(1)  Overhang streets or alleys in such a manner that the branches interfere with the safe and unobstructed movement of vehicles on any street or alley; 
(2)  Encroach upon any public sidewalk or overhang the first eight (8) feet of space above any public sidewalk; 
(3)  Overhang public rights-of-way in such a manner as to visually obstruct motorists' views of traffic signs and traffic signals; or 
(4)  Become overgrown and unkempt as to be a nuisance to neighboring property owners. 
(Prior code 8.04.190; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-210. - Refuse. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any building, premises or vacant lot, to maintain the premises at all times in a clean and orderly condition, permitting no deposit, outside storage or accumulation of refuse or materials other than those ordinarily attendant to the use for which such premises are legally intended. 
(b)  All plaster, broken concrete, bricks, cinder blocks, stones, wood, dirt, roofing materials, wire or metal binding, sacks or loose, discarded or unused material of any kind resulting from the wrecking, construction or remodel of any room, basement, wall, fence, sidewalk or buildings shall be promptly removed or discarded so as not to be scattered about by the wind or otherwise. Any refuse that is explosive or inflammable or which may endanger life or property shall be removed immediately. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any building, premises or vacant lot to store fence posts, crates, vehicle tires, vehicle bodies or parts, bed mattresses or springs, water heaters or other household appliances, damaged or stored or discarded furniture and other household goods or items, materials recovered from demolition and other stored or discarded objects outdoors unless such materials are stored in a manner reasonably calculated to prepare them for already scheduled collection. 
(d)  Any refuse that becomes suspended in, carried by or mixed with stormwater or an allowed nonstormwater discharge, as defined in Section 7-2-150, shall be deemed an illicit discharge. 
(e)  Trash and recycling containers must be stored in such a position on the property so as to be reasonably screened from the view of those off the property. 
(f)  Trash and recycling containers may be placed at the curb no more than one (1) day before a scheduled pickup and must be removed from the curb no later than midnight following a scheduled pickup. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any person from keeping building materials on any premises before or during the period of active construction pursuant to a city building permit, nor shall this section prohibit any person from maintaining building or landscaping materials on any premises during the period of active use of those materials for a building or landscaping project that does not require a building permit so long as such materials are secured or contained out of public view during periods when not in use. 
(h)  Failure to comply with this Section shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Prior code 8.04.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 22 ,  1, 2017, eff. 1-5-2018) 
Sec. 7-2-220. - Parking. 
(a)  It shall be deemed a nuisance to park or load motor vehicles on private property in violation of Chapter 16, Article 12 of this Code. 
(b)  It shall be deemed a nuisance for the owner, occupant or resident of a particular residential property to park, store or cause or permit to be parked or stored for a period in excess of fifteen (15) consecutive days, more than four (4) motor vehicles upon such residential property or on the street within three hundred (300) feet of such residential property, whether or not any vehicle is duly licensed and/or operable, unless such vehicles are in a garage or other fully enclosed structure. This Subsection shall be enforced only upon the written complaint of individuals who reside in no less than three (3) separate households located within one thousand (1,000) feet of such residential property. For purposes of this Subsection, consecutive means that the vehicles are parked or stored at least once per day for a period of more than fifteen (15) minutes, for fifteen (15) days in a row. The vehicles need not be the same vehicles each day. 
(Prior code 8.04.210; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-230. - Noncompliance with approvals. 
(a)  It shall be deemed a nuisance to fail to comply with any condition, requirement or limitation imposed upon any zoning or rezoning, final development plan, subdivision plan or plat, planned unit development, special use permit or building permit approved or issued by the City. 
(b)  It shall be deemed a nuisance to fail or neglect to construct any building or other structure in strict compliance with building plans as approved by the City, including any comments or notations on such plans, including but not limited to failure to complete drainage, grading and other construction activities undertaken pursuant to a building permit issued by the City. 
(c)  It shall be deemed a nuisance to fail to timely, fully and properly install, complete, maintain, repair or replace any improvement (including, without limitation, landscaping, traffic and drainage) which requirements are imposed as conditions upon approval of any zoning or rezoning, final development plan, subdivision plan or plat, planned unit development, special use permit or building permit approved or issued by the City. 
(Prior code 8.04.220; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-240. - Smoke. 
(a)  No person shall discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of emission whatsoever, any air contaminant for a period or periods aggregating more than three minutes in any one hour, which is: 
(1)  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 1/2 on the Ringelmann Chart, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines; or 
(2)  Of such capacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke described in subdivision 1 of this Subsection. 
(b)  At no time may smoke emission be darker than Ringelmann No. 1. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-250. - Open fires. 
    No person shall burn any combustible refuse in any open outdoor fire within the district except: 
(1)  When such fire is set by a public officer in the performance of his official duty and such fire is necessary for the prevention of fire hazard or the instruction of public employees in the methods of firefighting; 
(2)  When such fire is set in the course of any agricultural operation in the growing of crops or the raising of fowl or animals. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-260. - Noxious gas. 
    No noxious gases may be produced from any residence or business that are allowed to escape into the atmosphere in concentrations detrimental to either plant or animal life. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-2-270. - Vibration. 
    Vibrations from industrial operations must be controlled to the extent that they cannot be felt past any lot line. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 3 - Tattooing and Body Piercing 

Sec. 7-3-10. - Intent. 
    This Article is intended to protect the public from the risk of infection and health impairment associated with the procedures of tattooing and body piercing. 
(Prior code 8.39.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-3-20. - Applicability. 
    This Article shall apply to all tattooing and body piercing as defined by Section 7-3-30. 
(Prior code 8.39.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-3-30. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Body piercing means any method of penetrating or puncturing the skin of the human body with a needle or any other sharp instrument to facilitate the wearing of rings or other jewelry or ornamentation for cosmetic or aesthetic purposes. Body piercing shall not include the penetration or puncture of any part of the human ear. 
    Licensed physician means a physician with a valid current license from the Colorado Board of Medical Examiners, Department of Regulatory Agencies. 
    Tattoo, tattooed or tattooing means any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin of the human body with indelible ink or any other substance, resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin by the aid of a needle or any other sharp instrument. 
(Prior code 8.39.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-3-40. - Presence of physician required. 
    It is unlawful and a violation of this Article for any person to perform tattooing or body piercing within the City limits unless a licensed physician is physically present throughout the entire tattooing or body piercing procedure. 
(Prior code 8.39.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-3-50. - Fee required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of providing, nor shall any person perform, tattooing or body piercing within the boundaries of the City unless and until a licensing fee has been paid in an amount established by the City Council by resolution. Engaging in the business of tattooing or body piercing, or the performance of any tattooing or body piercing upon any person within the City, without having first paid the fee established herein, shall constitute a violation of the City Code and shall be punishable as specified in Section 1-4-20. 
(Prior code 8.39.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-3-60. - Construction of Article. 
    This Article is not intended to excuse compliance with or otherwise affect regulations regarding tattooing, piercing, communicable diseases or infectious waste which have been or will be enacted by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(Prior code 8.39.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 4 - Weeds 

Sec. 7-4-10. - List of noxious weeds. 
    In addition to any noxious weeds designated by the State or the County, the City declares the following to be noxious weeds in the City: 
TABLE 7-1
Noxious Weeds 
Common Name Scientific Name Canadian Thistle Cirsium arvense Diffuse Knapweed Centaurea diffusa Leafy Spurge Euphorbia esula Musk Thistle Carduus nutans Puncture Vine Tribulus terrestis Purple Loosestrife Lythrium salicaria Russian Knapweed Centaurea repens Sand Bur Cenchurs longispinus Spotted Knapweed Centaurea maculosa Teasel Dipsacus sylvestris Field Bindweed Convolvulus arvensis  
(Prior code 8.22.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-4-20. - Control of noxious weeds. 
    It is the duty of all landowners in the City to manage and control noxious weeds. 
(Prior code 8.22.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-4-30. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    The City declares noxious weeds to be a public nuisance. 
(Prior code 8.22.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-4-40. - Inspection. 
(a)  The City, by its authorized representative, may enter upon any premises, lands or places, whether public or private, during reasonable business hours for the purpose of inspecting for the existence of noxious weeds, when one (1) of the following occurs: 
(1)  The landowner or occupant requests an inspection; 
(2)  A neighboring landowner has requested an inspection; or 
(3)  An authorized agent of the City has made a visual observation of noxious weeds from a public right-of-way. 
(b)  Before entering any premises, lands or places for an inspection, the City shall provide written notice by certified mail to the address of the owner of the property as reflected in the records of the County Assessor. The notice shall state that such inspection is pending. 
(c)  Where possible, the inspection shall be scheduled and conducted with the concurrence of the owner of the property. 
(d)  If, after receiving notice that an inspection is pending, the owner or occupant denies access to the City's authorized representative, the City may seek a search warrant from the Municipal Court. 
(e)  No landowner or occupant shall deny access to such land when presented with a valid search warrant. 
(Prior code 8.22.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-4-50. - Notice to remove. 
(a)  The City may give written notice to the owner of property on which noxious weed growth exists that such noxious weed growth shall be removed within fourteen (14) calendar days of such notice. 
(b)  The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the owner of the property as reflected in the records of the County Assessor. The notice shall advise the owner that, if the noxious weeds are not removed and a written protest is not filed with the City Manager, the City shall cause the weeds to be removed at the expense of the owner, and if unpaid, the expenses of removal shall constitute a lien on the property. 
(c)  If there is no address of the owner reflected in the records of the County Assessor, or if the certified notice is returned as undeliverable or unaccepted, the City shall post the notice in a conspicuous place on the property for fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
(d)  Service shall be deemed complete upon receipt of the notice or upon posting of the property. 
(Prior code 8.22.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-4-60. - Failure to remove noxious weeds; abatement. 
(a)  If the owner of the property on which noxious weed growth exists, within fourteen (14) days of the notice described in Section 7-4-50, fails to remove such weed growth and fails to file a written protest with the City Manager, the City may cause such weeds to be removed at the sole expense of the owner. 
(b)  If a written protest is filed with the City Manager, the City shall proceed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 7-1-100. 
(c)  If the City causes such weeds to be removed, the City Manager shall charge the cost of removal to the owner of the property and shall send a bill for such charge to the owner at the address reflected in the records of the County Assessor. 
(d)  The charge shall be due and payable to the City within thirty (30) days after the date of the charge. 
(e)  If unpaid, the expense of removal shall constitute a lien on the property as set forth in Section 7-4-50. 
(Prior code 8.22.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-4-70. - Procedures and remedies not exclusive. 
    The procedures and remedies set forth in this Article are not exclusive, and the City may utilize the procedures and remedies set forth in the Colorado Noxious Weed Act, Section 35-5.5-101, et seq. , C.R.S., in addition to, or in lieu of, the procedures set forth in this Article. 
(Prior code 8.22.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-4-80. - Local Advisory Board. 
    The Parks and Recreation Commission shall act as the Local Noxious Weed Advisory Board pursuant to Section 35-5.5-107, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 8.22.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 5 - Noise Control 

Sec. 7-5-10. - Purpose. 
(a)  Excessive sound or vibration can be a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, safety or quality of life. 
(b)  A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound or vibration may be substantially abated. 
(c)  The residents of the City have a right to peace and quiet in the use and enjoyment of their residential property. 
(d)  It is the policy of the City to protect and preserve the peace and quiet of residential locations by prohibiting excessive sound or vibration which may jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of its citizens or degrade their quality of life. 
(Prior code 8.24.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 20 1, 2012) 
Sec. 7-5-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Amphitheater means an outdoor venue for the performance of music or concerts, stage performances or other similar performing acts, with a seating capacity of one thousand (1,000) persons or greater. 
    Commercial area means any property zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, LI, MC or TC. 
    Measured at the mix means sound levels measured at a location approximately one hundred (100) feet from the front of the stage, where all of the sound control equipment (typically consisting of mixing boards and amplifiers) is set up. Such sound levels shall be measured through the use of a precisely calibrated microphone that feeds data directly into a computer, with the computer recording sound levels over fifteen-minute legs and providing data on the minimum decibel level over the leg, the maximum decibel level over the leg and the average decibel level over the leg. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land by a motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, go-carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on land, dune buggies or racing vehicles, and including motorcycles, motor scooters and minibikes. 
    Muffler or sound dissipative device means a device for abating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine. 
    Person means any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state. 
    Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
    Residential means an area of single-family or multi-family dwellings. The zone includes areas where multiple-unit dwellings are located. 
    Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, volume and frequency. 
    Vibration means an oscillatory motion of solid bodies of deterministic or random nature described by displacement, velocity or acceleration with respect to a given reference point. 
(Prior code 8.24.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 20 2, 2012) 
Sec. 7-5-30. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Noise disturbances prohibited. No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise or vibration audible at neighboring residences to such an extent that others are or may be unreasonably disturbed, or that endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals. Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right-of-way shall be exempt from the operation of this Section. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. In addition to acts prohibited in Subsection (a) above, the following acts and the causing thereof are declared to be in violation of this Article. 
(1)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound: 
a.  In such a manner that others in the vicinity or area are or may be unreasonably disturbed, except for events open to the public and for which a temporary permit for such specific event has been issued by the appropriate authority; 
b.  In such a manner that the information content of the sound, such as, but not limited to, speech, voices or musical rhythms or melodies, is unambiguously transferred to any person hearing or listening to the sound twenty-five (25) feet from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space; or 
c.  In such a manner as to unreasonably disturb any person other than the operator of the device, when operated by any passenger on a common carrier. 
(2)  Loudspeakers/public address systems: 
a.  Using or operating for any noncommercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system or similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such that the sound therefrom unreasonably disturbs persons in a residential area. 
b.  Using or operating for any commercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system or similar device, such that the sound therefrom unreasonably disturbs persons in a residential area. 
(3)  Street sales. Offering for sale or selling anything by shouting or outcry within any residential area of the City. 
(4)  Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb persons in a residential area. 
(5)  Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or equipment in connection with construction, drilling or demolition work between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays, and between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays or holidays, such that the sound therefrom unreasonably disturbs persons in a residential area, except for emergency work on public service utilities, emergency work by City personnel, or by special variance issued pursuant to Section 7-5-60 of this Article. 
(6)  Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor vehicle or motorboat in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb persons in a residential area. 
(7)  Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of a powered model vehicle so as to create an unreasonable noise disturbance in a residential area or in a public space between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(8)  Emergency signaling devices. 
a.  The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing, as provided below: 
1.  Testing of a stationary emergency signalizing device shall occur at the same time of day each time such a test is performed, but not before 7:00 a.m. or later than 7:00 p.m. Any such testing shall use the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed sixty (60) seconds. 
2.  Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signalizing device and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. The time limit specified in Subparagraph 1. hereof shall not apply to such complete system testing. 
b.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is automatically or manually terminated within fifteen (15) minutes of activation. Violation of this Subparagraph shall be separate and distinct from any violation of Section 10-2-80 of this Code governing false alarms. 
(9)  Internal combustion or electrical equipment. No person shall operate or permit to be operated in any residential area any internal combustion or electrical landscaping maintenance equipment, including but not limited to lawn mowers, leaf blowers, weed trimmers, street sweepers, compressors or pumps driven by electricity or internal combustion engines; but excluding motor vehicles and equipment used in emergency situations, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturdays and 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays and holidays. 
(10)  Live bands and music. Except as otherwise provided in Paragraph (12) below, no person shall play, practice, perform or permit to be played, practiced or performed any live music audible at another residence between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(11)  Commercial heating, ventilation and air-conditioning systems. No person shall operate or permit to be operated in a commercial area any heating, ventilation or air-conditioning system in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb persons in a residential neighborhood. 
(12)  Amphitheaters. 
a.  No person shall operate an amphitheater in such a manner that the sound level, measured at the mix, exceeds one hundred ten (110) decibels. 
b.  This Paragraph shall govern noise levels at amphitheaters and shall supersede any otherwise applicable provision of this Article. Despite any contrary provision in this Article, amphitheaters shall be entitled to operate within the noise levels set forth in this section until 10:45 p.m. Monday through Thursday until 11:15 p.m. Friday through Sunday and holidays. 
c.  Any amphitheater in existence and operating on or before October 1, 2006, on property annexed to the City subsequent to that date, shall maintain all noise-baffling and sound-proofing devices and structures in existence on that date, but shall be allowed to alter, modify, maintain or repair such devices and structures so long as such alteration, modification, maintenance or repair does not increase the noise impacts upon adjoining properties in excess of those in existence on October 1, 2006. It is the intention of this Subparagraph to allow any such amphitheater to continue to operate under noise parameters no less restrictive than those applicable to any such amphitheater on October 1, 2006. 
d.  Every amphitheater shall maintain written records of all sound level measurements for each event at such amphitheater and make such records available to the City for inspection upon request. 
(Prior code 8.24.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 20 3, 2012) 
Sec. 7-5-40. - Motor vehicle sound-pressuring levels. 
(a)  Adequate mufflers or sound dissipative devices. 
(1)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle not equipped with a muffler or other sound dissipative device meeting the vehicle manufacturer's specifications, in good working order and in constant operation. 
(2)  No person shall modify, remove or render inoperative, or cause to be modified, removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement, any muffler or sound dissipative device on a motor vehicle or motorcycle. 
(b)  Refuse collection vehicles. No person shall: 
(1)  Operate or permit the operation of the compacting mechanism of any motor vehicle which compacts refuse between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a residential area; or 
(2)  Collect refuse with a refuse collection vehicle between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within five hundred (500) feet of a residential area. 
(c)  Standing motor vehicle. No person shall operate the engine of or permit the operation of the engine of any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period longer than fifteen (15) minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary for reasons other than traffic congestion, on a public right-of-way or public space within five hundred (500) feet of a residential area between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. This prohibition shall not apply to emergency vehicles. 
(Prior code 8.24.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 20 4, 2012) 
Sec. 7-5-50. - Noise barrier fencing. 
    In enforcing this Article, the City may allow a business or other commercial operation to construct a noise barrier, at its own expense, to alleviate a violation of this Article. Such noise barrier shall be approved prior to construction by the Director of Community Development, and constructed pursuant to City standards. Such noise barrier must be sufficient to reduce the noise to an acceptable level, as set forth in this Article. 
(Prior code 8.24.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-5-60. - Defenses. 
    It is a specific defense to a charge of violating this Article that: 
(1)  The sound was made by any law enforcement or authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency; 
(2)  The sound was made within the terms of a parade, fireworks display or temporary street closure permit issued by the City; 
(3)  The sound was made by the sounding of the horn of any vehicle as a danger warning signal or by the sounding of any warning device as required by law; 
(4)  The sound was made on property belonging to or leased or managed by a federal, state, county, City or special district governmental body and was made by an activity of the governmental body or by another pursuant to a contract, lease or permit granted by such governmental body; or 
(5)  The sound was made within the terms and conditions of a sound level temporary permit granted by the City Manager. A temporary permit shall be granted only after application and following such notice to surrounding properties as the City Manager deems proper and an opportunity for the owners or occupants of such property to protest issuance of the temporary permit. No temporary permits shall exceed forty-eight (48) hours in duration except for good cause shown. No temporary permit shall exceed sixty (60) days. Prior to granting any temporary permit, the City Manager shall consider any protests or objections to the issuance of the permit and shall find that: 
a.  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the activity or operation to comply with this Section; or 
b.  The activity, operation or sound source will be of temporary duration, not to exceed one (1) year, and even with the application of the best available control technology, cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this Section. 
(Prior code 8.24.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-5-70. - Abatement orders. 
    In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the official responsible for enforcement of this Article may issue an order requiring abatement of any source of sound alleged to be in violation of this Article within a reasonable time period and according to the requirements for abatement of a nuisance contained in Article 1 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 8.24.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-5-80. - Other remedies. 
    This Article shall not be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal or equitable remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this Article or from other law or to abate a noise nuisance under the laws of the State. 
(Prior code 8.24.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 6 - Burning Restrictions 

Sec. 7-6-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Barbeque devices means devices that are utilized solely for the cooking of food. 
    Fireplace means a hearth, fire chamber or similar place and a chimney. 
    High pollution day means that period of time declared to be a high pollution day by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
    Sole source of heat means one (1) or more solid fuel-fired heating devices which constitute the only source of heat in a private residence. No solid fuel-fired heating device or devices shall be considered to be the sole source of heat if the private residence is equipped with a permanently installed furnace or heating system which utilizes oil, natural gas, electricity or propane. 
    Solid fuel-fired heating device means a device designed for solid fuel combustion so that usable heat is derived for the interior of a building and includes, without limitation, solid fuel-fired stoves, fireplaces, wood stoves of any nature, solid fuel-fired cooking stoves, combination fuel furnaces or boilers which burn solid fuel or any other device used for the burning of solid combustible material. Solid fuel-fired heating device does not include barbeque devices or natural gas-fired fireplace logs. 
(Prior code 8.32.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-6-20. - High pollution day prohibition. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a solid fuel-fired heating device during a high pollution day, unless that person has an exemption granted pursuant to Section 7-6-30. It shall be the duty of all persons owning or operating a solid fuel-fired heating device to be aware of any declaration of a high pollution day by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(b)  At the time of the declaration of a high pollution day, the Police Department shall allow three (3) hours for the burndown of existing fires in solid fuel-fired heating devices prior to initiating enforcement of this Article. 
(Prior code 8.32.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-6-30. - Exemptions to burning restrictions. 
(a)  A person may operate a solid fuel-fired heating device during a high pollution day if he or she has previously obtained an exemption from the Police Department. An exemption may be granted if the applicant submits a sworn statement that he or she relies on a solid fuel-fired heating device as his sole source of heat and that said device was installed prior to January 1, 1988. 
(b)  An exemption obtained under this Section shall be effective for twelve (12) months from the date it is granted and may be renewed upon compliance with the requirements of Subsection (a) hereof. 
(c)  An exemption to the restriction of Section 7-6-20 is granted to an operator of a fireplace stove or fireplace insert that meets the Phase III combustion standards adopted by the Colorado Air Quality Control Commission pursuant to Section 25-7-106.3, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 8.32.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-6-40. - Non-owner-occupied dwelling units. 
    It is unlawful for a solid fuel-fired heating device to be the sole source of heat in any non-owner-occupied dwelling unit. Any violation of Section 7-6-20 by the tenant of such a dwelling unit shall be considered a violation by the owner of the dwelling unit if a solid fuel-fired heating device is the tenant's sole source of heat. In such case, the owner, not the tenant, shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in Section 7-6-70. 
(Prior code 8.32.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-6-50. - Inspections. 
    For the purpose of determining compliance with this Article, the Chief of Police or a City police officer is authorized to make inspections of solid fuel-fired heating devices which are being operated on high pollution days. If any person refuses or restricts entry or free access to any part of a premises where a solid fuel-fired heating device is being operated on a high pollution day, or refuses inspection or sampling of any such device where inspection is sought, the Chief of Police or City police officer may apply to the Municipal Court for the issuance of a warrant for inspection and an order that the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises must submit to an inspection without interference, restriction or obstruction. If the Municipal Court finds that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the burning restrictions contained in this Article are being or have been violated, it may issue the requested warrant and order. The Municipal Court shall have full jurisdiction, authority and power to issue warrants for entry into any place by the Chief of Police or a City police officer where the Court is presented with reasonable grounds to believe that the burning restrictions contained in this Article are being or have been violated. 
(Prior code 8.32.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-6-60. - Enforcement. 
    The Chief of Police or a City police officer shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this Article. 
(Prior code 8.32.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-6-70. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Where the Chief of Police or a City police officer has reasonable grounds to believe that this Article has been violated, he or she shall issue a written warning to the violator. If the Chief of Police or a City police officer subsequently observes, within the following twelve-month period, another violation of this Article on the same premises, he or she may issue a summons and complaint to the violator. 
(b)  Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Article shall be punished by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense, fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second offense, and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) more than the fine for the preceding offense for the third and any subsequent offense up to a maximum fine of four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). 
(Prior code 8.32.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-6-80. - Penalty assessment notice. 
    At the time any person is issued a summons and complaint for a violation of this Article, the police officer charging such offense is hereby authorized to issue a penalty assessment notice and have said penalty assessment notice processed by the Municipal Court pursuant to Section 1-4-40 of this Code. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 7 - Products Containing Ozone-Depleting Compounds 

Sec. 7-7-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Approved motor vehicle refrigerant recycling equipment means equipment models which have been certified by Underwriters Laboratories to meet the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) standard for the extraction and reclamation of refrigerant from motor vehicle air conditioners (SAE standard J-1991). 
    Food packaging means any bag, sack, wrapping, container, bowl, plate, tray, carton, cup, glass, straw or lid, but shall specifically exclude knives, forks and spoons. 
    Major refrigeration system means refrigerators, freezers, cold storage warehouse refrigeration systems and air conditioners which hold more than one hundred (100) pounds of refrigerant or more than one hundred (100) pounds total if more than one (1) refrigeration unit or system exists at the same location. 
    Ozone-depleting compound means those substances identified by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency as contributing to depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer. Those substances, currently identified are: 
a.  CFC-11 (trichlorofluoromethane). 
b.  CFC-12 (dichlorodifluoromethane). 
c.  CFC-113 (trichlorodifluoroethane). 
d.  CFC-114 (dichlorotetrafluoroethane). 
e.  CFC-115 (monochloropentrafluoroethane). 
f.  Halon-1211 (bromochlorodifluoroethane). 
g.  Halon-1301 (bromotrifluoroethane). 
h.  Halon-2402 (dibromotetrafluoroethane). 
i.  Methyl chloroform. 
j.  Carbon tetrachloride. 
    Refrigerant means CFC-11 (trichlorofluoromethane), CFC-12 (dichlorodifluoromethane, also known as chlorofluorocarbon-12 or R-12) or any substitute refrigerant used in motor vehicle air-conditioning equipment, refrigerators, air conditioners or refrigeration systems, which contains an ozone-depleting compound. 
(Prior code 8.34.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-7-20. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The City Council shall, by resolution, establish such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to enforce this Article. 
(b)  The City Manager shall oversee and be responsible for: 
(1)  The enforcement and administration of this Article. 
(2)  Providing informational assistance to persons seeking to implement a recycling program for ozone-depleting compounds used in air-conditioning and refrigeration systems. 
(3)  Creating and implementing an educational program to provide information to local establishments, industries and residents regarding the dangers and hazards associated with products made from or utilizing ozone-depleting compounds; 
(4)  Consulting and cooperating with other local, state and federal governmental agencies regarding the regulation of ozone-depleting compounds and other matters affecting the environment and the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(5)  Coordinating and consulting with other agencies and departments within the City to facilitate the administration, application and enforcement of this Article. 
(c)  The City Council may establish a committee for the purpose of assisting and providing information concerning the effects of ozone-depleting compounds and other matters regarding this Article. This committee may be jointly established with other cities and counties which have adopted ordinances regulating ozone-depleting compounds. 
(Prior code 8.34.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-7-30. - Motor vehicle air conditioners. 
(a)  No person who owns or operates a facility which installs, services, repairs or disposes of motor vehicle air conditioners shall allow: 
(1)  Any service involving the release or recharge of refrigerant on a motor vehicle air conditioner to be performed without properly using approved motor vehicle refrigerant recycling equipment; or 
(2)  The intentional venting or avoidable release of refrigerants from a motor vehicle air conditioner. 
(b)  No person who owns or operates a facility which accepts motor vehicles for dismantling, scrap metal or permanent disposal shall allow: 
(1)  A motor vehicle to be dismantled, sold as scrap metal or permanently disposed of, unless any air conditioner refrigerant has first been recovered by using approved motor vehicle refrigerant recycling equipment; or 
(2)  The intentional venting or avoidable release of refrigerants from a motor vehicle air conditioner. 
(c)  No person shall sell refrigerant capable of being used to charge a motor vehicle air conditioner, except in containers with a capacity of at least fifteen (15) pounds. 
(Prior code 8.34.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-7-40. - Major refrigeration systems. 
(a)  No person who owns or operates a facility which installs, services, repairs or disposes of major refrigeration systems shall allow: 
(1)  The installation, service, repair or disposal of a major refrigeration system in a manner involving the release or recharge of refrigerant without using refrigerant reuse or recycling equipment; or 
(2)  The intentional venting or avoidable release of refrigerants from a major refrigeration system. 
(b)  No person who owns or operates a retail store, cold-storage warehouse or commercial or industrial building shall allow the intentional venting or avoidable release of any refrigerant from a major refrigeration system without recapturing and recycling such refrigerant. The provisions of this Subsection shall apply to any alteration, renovation or demolition of the building or structure which contains the major refrigeration system. 
(c)  Recovered refrigerant which cannot be reused or recycled shall be destroyed by a method which does not allow the release or escape of an ozone-depleting compound into the atmosphere. 
(Prior code 8.34.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-7-50. - Refrigerators and portable air-conditioning units. 
(a)  Any person who manufactures, repairs, services or maintains a refrigerator or air-conditioning unit shall adopt and implement a recycling system whereby any ozone-depleting compound used as a coolant in such refrigerator or air-conditioning unit shall not be released into the environment, but will be recaptured and reused or recycled. 
(b)  No person who owns or operates a facility which accepts refrigerators or air-conditioning units for dismantling, scrap metal or permanent disposal shall allow: 
(1)  A refrigerator or air-conditioning unit to be dismantled, sold as scrap metal or permanently disposed of, unless any refrigerant has first been recovered by using approved refrigerant recycling equipment; or 
(2)  The intentional venting or avoidable release of refrigerants from a refrigerator or air conditioner. 
(c)  Recovered refrigerant which cannot be reused or recycled shall be destroyed by a method which does not allow the release or escape of any ozone-depleting compound into the atmosphere. 
(Prior code 8.34.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-7-60. - Products using ozone-depleting compound as propellant or energy source; manufacture and sale. 
    No person shall manufacture or sell any aerosol container that uses an ozone-depleting compound as a propellant or source of energy. This Section shall not apply to the manufacture or sale of products used for medical purposes. 
(Prior code 8.34.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-7-70. - Fire-extinguishing systems using Halon. 
(a)  Except as required by statute, rule and regulation, no person shall release Halon from a fire-extinguishing system during the training of personnel or in the testing of such fire-extinguishing system. 
(b)  Any person who owns or operates a facility that repairs, services or performs maintenance on a fire-extinguishing system or unit shall recapture and recycle any Halon used as an extinguishing agent in the system or unit. 
(Prior code 8.34.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-7-80. - Permit required for sale of certain fire extinguishers. 
    All retail sales of fire extinguishers which contain ozone-depleting substances are prohibited, unless, at the time of purchase, the purchaser presents a valid permit for the purchase from the chief of a fire protection district. The chief of the fire protection district shall issue such permits for aviation use, use in protecting electrical equipment and for other uses where the applicant demonstrates that there is no technically feasible, economically sound and environmentally safe substitute or alternative available. 
(Prior code 8.34.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-7-90. - Material for padding or building insulation. 
    No person shall manufacture or install any material for padding or building insulation that contains an ozone-depleting compound or with respect to which an ozone-depleting compound is used as a blowing agent during the manufacturing process. 
(Prior code 8.34.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-7-100. - Food packaging. 
    No person shall sell at retail any food or food product in or on food packaging which contains an ozone-depleting compound or for which an ozone-depleting compound has been used as a blowing agent during the manufacturing process. 
(Prior code 8.34.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-7-110. - Other packaging materials. 
    No person shall manufacture, distribute, sell or use for commercial purposes any material or product which: 
(1)  Is used for packaging, wrapping or containing any nonedible products; and 
(2)  Contains or was manufactured by the use of an ozone-depleting compound. 
(Prior code 8.34.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-7-120. - Enforcement; civil penalties. 
(a)  Whenever the City Manager has reason to believe that any person has violated the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to Section 7-7-20 of this Article, the City Manager may issue a notice of violation or a cease-and-desist order. Such notice or order shall set forth the rule or regulation alleged to have been violated, the facts constituting such violation and any measure which the person is required to take. In addition, if the City Manager finds that a person is in violation of any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to Section 7-7-20, the City Manager may assess a fine of up to the maximum fine allowed under Chapter 1 of this Code for each violation. 
(b)  Any person who has been issued a notice of violation or a cease-and-desist order or who has been ordered to pay a fine may request a hearing before the City Council to contest the notice, order or fine. Such request shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the notice or order has been issued or the fine has been assessed. Upon such request, a hearing shall be held before the City Council in accordance with Section 2-6-90. 
(c)  After a hearing pursuant to Subsection (b) hereof, any person aggrieved by the determination of the City Council may, pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, seek judicial review of the City Council's order within thirty (30) days after entry thereof in district court. 
(Prior code 8.34.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11 5, 2013) 
ARTICLE 8 - Animals 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 7-8-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Abandon means to leave an animal without effective provisions for its proper care for more than twenty-four (24) hours, including leaving an animal on public property or on private property other than that of the owner without prior permission of the property owner. 
    Animal means any living organism, domesticated or wild, other than a human being, including arthropods, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals, but excluding plants, insects and bacteria. 
    Attack means any violent or hostile physical contact with a person or any violent or hostile behavior that confines the movement of a person, including but not limited to chasing, cornering or encircling a person. 
    Bite means any break in the skin caused by any contact with the tooth or mouth of an animal capable of harboring the rabies virus. 
    Bodily injury means any physical injury that results in severe bruising, muscle tears or skin lacerations requiring professional medical treatment requiring corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
    Cat means any member of the felidae family, including the domestic cat. 
    Code enforcement officer has the meaning set forth in Section 2-3-60. 
    Common area means the common area of apartments, condominiums and townhouses, such as yards, grounds, patios, garden areas, play areas, clubhouses, swimming pools, sidewalks, walkways, common garage areas, entry ways, hallways and driveways. 
    Dangerous animal means any animal, other than a wild animal, that: 
a.  Inflicts bodily injury or serious bodily injury upon a person; 
b.  Inflicts injury upon a domestic animal or causes the death of a domestic animal; or 
c.  Engages in or has been trained for animal fighting as described and prohibited in Section 18-9-204, C.R.S. 
    Dog means any domesticated animal of the species Canis familaris . 
    Domestic animal means any animal other than a wild animal. 
    Harbor means the act of keeping or caring for an animal or providing premises to which the animal returns for food or shelter and care or providing refuge to an animal in order to evade the impoundment of the animal by lawful authority. 
    Kennel means any building or structure used for the permanent or temporary boarding or keeping of more than three (3) dogs of more than six (6) months of age, more than one (1) litter of pups, more than three (3) cats of four (4) months of age, more than one (1) litter of kittens or more than a total of six (6) dogs and cats more than three (3) months of age in any combination, or engaging in the commercial business of breeding, buying, selling, trading, training or boarding dogs or cats or both dogs and cats or other pet animals. 
    Leash means a substantial chain, cord, rope or similar device sufficient to hold in restraint the animal to which it is attached. 
    Owner means any person over eighteen (18) years of age who owns, keeps or harbors an animal or has custody of such animal and allows such animal to remain about his or her premises, and the parent, guardian or custodian of any child under the age of eighteen (18) who keeps, harbors or has the custody of an animal, excluding code enforcement officers and police officers while acting in accordance with their official duties under this Article. 
    Rodent means any of various mammals of the order Rodentia , characterized by large incisors adapted for gnawing or nibbling, including mice, rats, prairie dogs and squirrels, but excluding muskrats and beavers. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury which, either at the time of the actual injury or at a later time, involves a substantial risk of death, a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, a substantial risk of protracted loss or impairment of the function of any part or organ of the body or breaks or fractures. 
    Veterinarian means a person licensed by the State to practice veterinary medicine. 
    Wild animal means any undomesticated animal native to the State, but excludes rodents, snakes, fish and any species of amphibians. 
    Wild bird means all undomesticated birds native to North America, undomesticated game birds implanted in North America by governmental agencies and any domestic duck, goose or pigeon released by any private person or recreational authority upon any recreational area within the City. 
(Prior code 6.04.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-20. - Applicability. 
    This Article shall not apply to: 
(1)  A bona fide publicly or privately owned zoological park. 
(2)  A bona fide research institution using animals for scientific research. 
(3)  A circus duly authorized to do business in the City. 
(4)  Personnel of any police, fire or animal control agency or the Colorado Division of Wildlife or Department of Public Health and Environment or other local, state or federal agency when such persons are acting within the scope of their official duties as employees of said agencies and in compliance with applicable law. 
(Prior code 6.04.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-30. - Number of animals. 
    The owner or occupant of a dwelling unit may keep, maintain, possess or harbor within the residential and urbanized areas of the city a total of six (6) dogs and cats more than three (3) months of age in any combination within a single dwelling unit plus one (1) litter of pups up to eight (8) weeks of age or one (1) litter of kittens up to eight (8) weeks of age. 
(Prior code 6.04.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-40. - Cruelty to animals. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or with criminal negligence commit or cause to be committed any act of cruelty or torture or to torment any animal or cause such animal to be needlessly mutilated or inhumanely killed. Cruelty includes every act or omission which causes or unreasonably permits the continuation of unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering or pain. 
(Prior code 6.04.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-50. - Neglect. 
(a)  It is unlawful to knowingly or with criminal negligence neglect any domesticated animal. Neglect includes, but is not limited to, failure to provide adequate food, water, ventilation, protection from the elements and protection from other domestic animals while on the owner's property; failure to provide appropriate veterinary care; failure to provide an opportunity to exercise or other care which is normal, usual and accepted for an animal's health and well-being consistent with the species, breed and type of animal; to overwork or overdrive an animal; to harbor in an unhealthy location or keep in conditions of overcrowding or where conditions are unclean or otherwise unhealthy or likely to cause illness; or to otherwise neglect in such a manner as to endanger the animal's health or cause it to suffer. 
(b)  Any neglect of a domestic animal that results in the death of that animal shall constitute cruelty to animals. 
(Prior code 6.04.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-60. - Abandonment. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully abandon any domestic animal. 
(Prior code 6.04.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-70. - Harassing, killing or injuring wild animals or wild birds. 
(a)  Except as necessary for the protection of real or personal property against harm from wild animals itemized in C.R.S.  33-6-107(9), it is unlawful for any person to willfully shoot, capture, harass, injure or destroy any wild bird or wild animal or to attempt to shoot, capture, harass, injure or destroy any such wild bird or wild animal within the City. 
(b)  No person shall willfully destroy, rob or disturb the nest, nesting place, burrow, eggs or young of any wild bird or wild animal within the City. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to shoot at, wound, kill, take, capture, ensnare, net, trap or in any other way molest or injure any wild bird, in any manner molest or injure the eggs or young of any such bird or have in possession the nest, eggs, young or body of such bird. 
(d)  This Section is not intended to permit the destruction of any animal protected by state or federal law nor to prohibit the use of lawful non-lethal control activities toward geese in which there is no direct contact with geese and that do not result in harm to the geese, goslings, eggs, or nests. 
(e)  This section is not intended to allow the discharge any firearm within or into the City except on property owned or under the control of the person at the time of the discharge, and provided that any and all discharged projectiles do not leave such premises and do not endanger other premises or persons, in accordance with Section 9-20-50. 
(Prior code 6.04.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 05 ,  1, 2018) 
Sec. 7-8-80. - Trapping or poisoning prohibited. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in this Section, it is unlawful for any person to poison, set or cause to be set within the City any trap, snare or mechanical device for the purpose of holding, capturing or killing any animal. 
(b)  Any wild animal causing damage, injury or destruction to private property and any wild animal which, by its actions, demonstrates behavior which threatens the safety of persons, domestic animals or private property may be trapped or poisoned only in compliance with Section 12(b) of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, which prohibits the use of any leghold trap, any instant-kill body-gripping design trap, poison or snare except in specified circumstances. 
(c)  Any person may set traps with the intent to trap rodents by means of a trap, snare or mechanical device specifically designed to trap rodents or use poisons against rodents, if such person has obtained the express consent of the owner or adult occupant of the property on which the trap is set or poison is used. 
(Prior code 6.04.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-90. - Running at large. 
(a)  No person owning or keeping any animal, other than a domesticated cat, shall fail to keep said animal on the premises of the owner or keeper unless the animal is: 
(1)  On a leash held by a person who is physically able to control the animal; or 
(2)  Within a vehicle or similarly physically confined and without access to passers-by. 
(b)  Animals running at large may be taken into custody by code enforcement officers and impounded for a period of not less than five (5) days following the date of impoundment. Any impounded animal which is not claimed within said five-day period may be disposed of by adoption, donation or euthanasia at the discretion of a code enforcement officer. The owner shall be responsible for the payment of impoundment fees and reasonable and necessary medical expenses incurred during impoundment. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any dog used by a peace officer while engaged in the performance of his or her official duties or any dog used by the city to manage or control geese. 
(Prior code 6.04.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 05 ,  2, 2018) 
Sec. 7-8-100. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a)  It is unlawful to harbor any animal which, by frequent, habitual or continued barking, yelping, howling or other audible sound, causes an unreasonable annoyance, inconvenience or disturbance to any person. In addition to being unlawful, the harboring of such an animal is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated pursuant to Article 1 of this Chapter. 
(b)  No summons and complaint shall be issued for a violation of this Section, unless there are two (2) or more complaining witnesses from separate households who have signed complaints and will testify at trial. A code enforcement officer who has personally investigated the complaint of a single complainant, or multiple complainants from a single household, and who has personally observed the problem behavior of the animal may satisfy the requirement for the second complaining witness. 
(Prior code 6.04.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-110. - Confinement during estrus. 
    Any unspayed female dog or cat in the state of estrus (heat) shall be confined during such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure, and such area of enclosure shall be so constructed that no other dog or cat may gain access to the confined animal. 
(Prior code 6.04.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-120. - Possession of a dangerous animal. 
(a)  It is unlawful to possess a dangerous animal in the City. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of violating this Section that: 
(1)  At the time of an attack which caused injury to or the death of a domestic animal, the domestic animal was at large, entered upon the owner's property and the attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such property. 
(2)  At the time of an attack which caused injury to or the death of a domestic animal, said animal was biting or otherwise attacking the allegedly dangerous animal or owner. 
(3)  At the time of an attack which caused bodily injury to a person, the victim was committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense against the allegedly dangerous animal's owner, and the attack did not occur on the owner's property. 
(4)  At the time of an attack which caused bodily injury to a person, the victim of the attack was committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense on the allegedly dangerous animal's owner's property and the attack began, but did not necessarily end, upon such property. 
(5)  The victim of the attack tormented, provoked, abused or inflicted injury upon the allegedly dangerous animal in such an extreme manner that it resulted in the attack. 
(c)  The affirmative defenses set forth in Subsection (b) hereof shall not apply to any animal that has engaged in or been trained for fighting. 
(d)  In addition to any other applicable penalty, the Municipal Court shall order any person convicted of possession of a dangerous animal or who entered into a deferred judgment or deferred prosecution for possession of a dangerous animal to: 
(1)  Pay the impoundment facility for all costs, fees and reasonable and necessary medical expenses incurred during impoundment. 
(2)  Make restitution to the injured or dead domestic animal's owner, in an amount equal to the greater of the fair market value or the replacement cost of the domestic animal on the date, but before the time, the animal was injured or destroyed, plus any reasonable and necessary medical expenses incurred in treating the animal and any actual costs incurred in replacing the injured or destroyed animal, if applicable. 
(3)  Make restitution to the injured person, including medical expenses and property damage, if applicable. 
(4)  In the future, confine such dangerous animal in a building or enclosure designed to be escape-proof and, whenever such animal is outside of such building or enclosure, keep the animal under such owner's control by use of a leash and, if it is such animal's second or subsequent offense, muzzle the animal whenever it is outside of the building or enclosure. 
(e)  In addition to any other applicable penalty, the Municipal Court may order any person convicted of possession of a dangerous animal or who enters into a deferred judgment or deferred prosecution for possession of a dangerous animal to have the dangerous animal euthanized, upon exhaustion of any right to appeal the conviction. The owner may have a professional licensed animal behaviorist evaluate the dog and present the evaluation to the Municipal Court before any final determination is made by the Municipal Court. 
(f)  This Section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any dog used by a peace officer while engaged in the performance of his or her official duties. 
(2)  Any animal that inflicts bodily injury to any veterinary health care worker, animal groomer, humane agency personnel, professional animal handler, trainer or animal show judge acting in the performance of his or her respective duties. 
(3)  Any dog that inflicts injury upon or causes the death of an animal while the dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog or predator control dog on the property of or under the control of the owner, and the injury or death was to an animal naturally associated with the work of such dog. 
(4)  Any conduct which constitutes a felony under state law. 
(Prior code 6.04.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-130. - Impoundment of dangerous animals. 
(a)  Mandatory impoundment. Upon a charge of possession of a dangerous animal, if the victim of the offense is a person who has suffered bodily injury or serious bodily injury or if the animal has been engaged in or been trained for fighting, a code enforcement officer shall impound the animal at the owner's expense pending final disposition of the charge. 
(b)  Discretionary impoundment. Upon a charge of possession of a dangerous animal, if the victim of the offense is a domestic animal or if the dangerous animal has approached any person, without provocation, in a menacing or terrorizing manner, a code enforcement officer may impound the animal at the owner's expense pending final disposition of the charge. 
(c)  The dangerous animal shall remain impounded, unless otherwise ordered released by the Municipal Court. 
(d)  Notwithstanding Subsections (a) through (c) hereof, if the code enforcement officer determines that impoundment cannot be safely made, the dangerous animal may be euthanized. 
(Prior code 6.04.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-140. - Immediate destruction of dangerous animals. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the immediate destruction or euthanasia of any dangerous animal when deemed necessary in the interest of public safety by a code enforcement officer or peace officer. 
(Prior code 6.04.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-150. - Damaging property. 
    It is unlawful for an owner to permit any animal, with or without the direct knowledge of the owner, to destroy, damage or injure any shrubbery, plants, flowers, grass, lawn, fence or structure or anything else whatsoever on any public or private property owned or occupied by any person other than the owner. 
(Prior code 15.42.380; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-160. - Livestock; large animals. 
    The following regulations apply to large livestock (horses, cows, mules, etc.): 
(1)  Minimum building area (if a building is constructed). For each animal, a twelve-foot-by-twelve-foot stall area shall be provided. 
(2)  The use of temporary buildings or trailers for the stabling of animals in excess of thirty (30) days is prohibited. 
(3)  Fencing to contain livestock shall comply with Division 3, Article 21, Chapter 16. 
(4)  Maintenance. The land shall be maintained so as not to be a nuisance, health hazard or produce offensive odor. Any outdoor storage of supplies shall be neat and orderly. 
(5)  Setback. All structures shall conform to the setback requirements for the zone district in which it is located. 
(6)  Acreage requirements. 
No. of Horses Acreage 1 1/3 acre 2 1/2 acre 3 1 acre 4 or more Add 1/2 acre for each horse  
The acreage to be measured shall be the amount of space devoted solely to animal use (i.e., stable, corral). 
(7)  Commercial use. 
a.  Commercial use encompasses renting, stabling and pasturing horses principally as a business. 
b.  Acreage. The commercial use shall comply with the acreage requirements set forth in Paragraph (6) hereof and shall additionally be at least ten (10) acres in size. 
(Prior code 15.42.390; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-170. - Livestock; small animals. 
(a)  The following regulations apply to small-hoofed animals (i.e., sheep, goats): 
(1)  One (1) animal per one-quarter (1/4) acre of land devoted exclusively to animal use. 
(2)  The minimum building area, if applicable, shall be fifty (50) square feet per animal. 
(b)  The following applies to rabbits or fowl: animals shall be kept in a healthy and humane manner. 
(Prior code 6.04.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-180. - Prohibited animals. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to import, offer for sale, keep, possess, release or harbor in the City any skunk, raccoon, jaguar, leopard, lynx, tiger, lion, ocelot, bobcat, cheetah, mountain lion, wildcat, panther, bear, coyote, wolf, fox, badger, porcupine, alligator, caiman, crocodile, poisonous amphibian, poisonous invertebrate, poisonous reptile or nonhuman primate. 
(b)  This Section shall not apply to any person who has been granted a wildlife rehabilitator license by the Colorado State Division of Wildlife and is acting in compliance with said license. 
(Prior code 6.04.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-190. - Wild animals. 
(a)  A code enforcement officer may apprehend any wild animal at large within the City and, in his or her discretion, impound the animal, release the animal in a wild area outside of the City or destroy the animal, subject to applicable law. A code enforcement officer may use tranquilizer guns, firearms or any other suitable devices to subdue or destroy any wild animal that is deemed by the code enforcement officer, in his or her discretion, to be a danger to itself or to the public health and safety. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly feed any wild animal. This prohibition shall not apply to the use of bird feeders for the feeding of wild birds to the extent such feeding does not create a nuisance. 
(Prior code 6.04.170; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-200. - Fighting animals. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to cause, instigate or encourage any animal to fight with another animal or to train or keep any animal for the purpose of such fighting. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to maintain a place where any animal is permitted to fight for exhibition or for wager or for sport. 
(Prior code 6.04.180; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-210. - Endangered species. 
    It is unlawful for any person to import, offer for sale, keep, maintain, harbor or permit in the City any endangered species of animal as defined by the Colorado Division of Wildlife. 
(Prior code 6.04.190; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-220. - Injured or deceased animals. 
(a)  Animals injured or killed in any public right-of-way shall be considered as running at large, and code enforcement officers may impound all such animals. The owner of any such animal shall be liable for the cost of impoundment and necessary medical treatment. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner of any animal that dies to abandon such animal on any public or private property. All dead animals shall be disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours of their death by burial on private property with the permission of the property owner or by transport to a suitable facility for proper disposal. 
(Prior code 6.04.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-230. - Removal of dog and cat feces. 
(a)  When any dog or cat defecates on any property other than the property of the owner, including common areas, it is the duty of the owner to immediately remove and properly dispose of the dog or cat feces. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to allow the accumulation of dog or cat feces on any property owned, occupied or controlled by such person, if such accumulation creates an unsanitary, offensive or unhealthy condition. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to place or leave dog or cat feces on public property or on the property of another or to dispose of such feces in any manner other than by deposit in a toilet or a covered container normally used for refuse. 
(Ord. 16 1, 2009; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-240. - Guard dogs. 
    It is unlawful to possess any dog which has been trained to attack in any area for the protection of persons or property unless the dog is physically contained to a specific area, or is under the complete control of its owner. The area or premises in which the guard dog is confined shall be conspicuously posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two (2) inches high. 
(Ord. 16 1, 2009; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-250. - Penalty assessment notice. 
(a)  A penalty assessment notice may be issued to a person charged with a violation of any of the following Sections of this Article: 
(1)  Section 7-8-90, Running at large. 
(2)  Section 7-8-100, Disturbing the peace. 
(3)  Section 7-8-230, Removal of dog and cat feces. 
(b)  The fine prescribed by such penalty assessment notice shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  First offence within a calendar year: twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  Second offence within a calendar year: thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(3)  Third offense within a calendar year: forty-five dollars ($45.00). 
(4)  Fourth offense and each offense thereafter within a calendar year: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) more than the fine for the preceding offense, up to a maximum of four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). 
(c)  A penalty assessment notice shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the person being charged, if known; 
(2)  The nature of the offense; 
(3)  The amount of the penalty prescribed for such offense; 
(4)  The date of the notice; 
(5)  The time and place when and where such person shall appear in court in the event such penalty is not paid within twenty (20) days thereafter; and 
(6)  A place for such person to execute a signed acknowledgement of guilt and an agreement to pay the prescribed penalty within twenty (20) days of the date of the notice. 
(d)  Acceptance and payment of the prescribed fine shall be deemed complete restitution of the violation. 
(e)  If the person being charged refuses to accept the penalty assessment notice, or if the person being charged accepts the notice but fails to pay the prescribed penalty within twenty (20) days thereafter, the notice shall be construed to be a summons and complaint, except that the maximum penalty which may be imposed shall not exceed the penalty set forth in Subsection (b) of this Section. 
(Ord. 16 1, 2009; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 2 - Rabies Control 

Sec. 7-8-310. - Inoculation required. 
(a)  Every owner of a dog, cat or ferret three (3) months of age or older shall have such animal inoculated against rabies as frequently as recommended by the Compendium of Animal Rabies Control as promulgated by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians. Any person moving into the City from a location outside the City shall comply with this Division within thirty (30) days after having moved into the City, unless there is documented evidence of current vaccination. 
(b)  Upon inoculation, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner a vaccination certificate as furnished by the Tri-County Health Department. 
(c)  Written waiver. When a licensed veterinarian, in his or her professional opinion, determines that rabies inoculation is contraindicated due to an animal's medical condition, he or she may issue the animal's owner a written waiver exempting the animal from rabies vaccination. A written waiver executed pursuant to this Subsection shall exempt an animal owner from complying with Subsection (a) hereof and Section 7-8-320. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any owner to refuse to produce a copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand by any code enforcement officer or peace officer. 
(Prior code 6.08.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-320. - Rabies tags for dogs. 
(a)  The owner of a dog shall cause to be attached to the dog's collar or harness a metal rabies tag, bearing the vaccination certificate number, the year of issuance and the name of the City and State. 
(b)  The rabies tag shall be worn by the dog at all times. 
(c)  In the event of loss or destruction of the original rabies tag, the owner shall obtain a duplicate rabies tag. 
(Prior code 6.08.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-330. - Duty to report animal bites to humans. 
(a)  Any person having knowledge that an animal has bitten a human shall immediately report the incident to a code enforcement officer or the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, giving the name, age, sex and precise location of the person bitten and any other relevant information. 
(b)  A physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person for a bite inflicted by an animal shall report such treatment to the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, giving the names and addresses of the person so treated, within forty-eight (48) hours of the treatment. 
(c)  Bites from rodents, rabbits, birds and reptiles are excluded from the reporting requirements of this Section. 
(Prior code 6.08.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-340. - Duty to report suspected rabid animals. 
    Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any person who suspects rabies in any animal shall immediately report the incident to a code enforcement officer or the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, stating precisely where such animal may be found. 
(Prior code 6.08.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-350. - Confinement. 
(a)  The owner of any animal capable of carrying the rabies virus that has bitten any person shall immediately notify a code enforcement officer who shall require the confinement of the animal for observation for symptoms of rabies. The code enforcement officer shall determine the length of confinement based upon the guidelines and requirements of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. When necessary for public safety, an animal suspected of carrying rabies may be euthanized for testing. 
(b)  Confinement may be on the premises of the owner, if deemed appropriate by the code enforcement officer. If confinement is at a location off the owner's premises, confinement shall be at the expense of the owner. The owner shall also be responsible for all reasonable and necessary medical expenses incurred during confinement. 
(c)  If, at any time during confinement, the animal shows signs of illness compatible with rabies, the animal shall be euthanized and tested for rabies in an approved laboratory as directed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly destroy any animal capable of carrying the rabies virus if that person has knowledge that the animal has bitten any person or that the animal has been exposed to another animal that is believed to have rabies before the animal has completed the confinement or has been authorized for release by a code enforcement officer. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to remove an animal or to permit an animal to wander from the place to which it has been confined for observation until the animal is authorized for release by a code enforcement officer. 
(f)  The owner of any animal that has been reported as having bitten any person shall, upon the demand of a code enforcement officer, produce the animal for confinement and provide proof of rabies inoculation, if applicable. It is unlawful for an owner to willfully or knowingly refuse to produce such an animal. 
(g)  If any animal dies while confined, a code enforcement officer shall immediately take the animal to the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment for testing. If the animal was rabid, the code enforcement officer shall notify the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment of any known human contact with the animal. 
(h)  No veterinarian shall give a rabies inoculation within a ten-day period of the date that any animal bit any person. 
(Prior code 6.08.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-360. - Animals exposed to rabid or suspect rabid animals. 
(a)  A currently vaccinated dog, cat or ferret that is bitten by or otherwise exposed to a rabid or suspect rabid animal shall be revaccinated immediately and placed in isolation for forty-five (45) days or immediately euthanized with the owner's consent. 
(1)  At the end of the isolation period, the animal shall be examined by a veterinarian who shall report the results of the examination to a code enforcement officer. If the animal is free of signs of illness compatible with rabies, it may be released with the approval of the code enforcement officer. 
(2)  If, during the isolation period, the animal shows signs of illness compatible with rabies, a code enforcement officer shall order the immediate euthanasia and testing of the animal in an approved laboratory as directed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(b)  A dog, cat or ferret that is not currently vaccinated against rabies and is bitten by or otherwise exposed to a rabid or suspect rabid animal shall be euthanized immediately with the owner's consent. If the owner does not consent to euthanasia, the animal shall be seized by a code enforcement officer and impounded at the owner's expense for six (6) months in strict isolation. 
(1)  If the animal shows no signs of rabies at the end of five (5) months, it shall be vaccinated against rabies at that time. 
(2)  At the end of the isolation period, the animal shall be examined by a veterinarian who shall report the results of the examination to a code enforcement officer. If the animal is free of signs of illness compatible with rabies, it may be released with the approval of a code enforcement officer. 
(3)  If, during the isolation period, the animal shows signs of illness compatible with rabies, a code enforcement officer shall order the immediate euthanasia and testing of the animal in an approved laboratory as directed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(c)  Currently vaccinated livestock bitten by or otherwise exposed to a rabid or suspect rabid animal shall be revaccinated immediately and isolated under observation for forty-five (45) days or be euthanized. Unvaccinated livestock shall be slaughtered immediately with the owner's consent. If the owner is unwilling to consent to the slaughter, the animal shall be kept in strict isolation for six (6) months. 
(d)  Any animal other than a dog, cat, ferret or livestock that is bitten by or otherwise exposed to a rabid or suspect rabid animal shall be euthanized immediately. Animals in licensed research facilities or zoological parks that are exposed to rabies shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by a code enforcement officer or the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(e)  If a suspect rabid animal is available for testing, an animal that was bitten by or otherwise exposed to the suspect rabid animal shall be isolated pending the rabies test result on the suspect animal. If the results are negative, the animal shall be released with the approval of a code enforcement officer. 
(Prior code 6.08.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 7-8-370. - Penalty. 
    Violations of this Article shall be punishable in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  First offense within a calendar year: one hundred dollars ($100.00); provided that if a person charged with a violation of Section 7-8-310, Inoculation required, or Section 7-8-320, Rabies tags for dogs, provides proof to the Court Clerk that the animal involved was inoculated no later than ten (10) days after the offense, or that rabies tags were obtained for the animal involved no later than ten (10) days after the offense, the summons and complaint shall be dismissed. 
(2)  Additional offenses within a calendar year: mandatory court appearance, with the penalty to be imposed by the Municipal Court. 
(Ord. 16 2, 2009; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
CHAPTER 8 - Vehicles and Traffic 
ARTICLE 1 - Model Traffic Code - External Link To PDF 
Click here to view a PDF version of the Model Traffic Code. 
ARTICLE 1 - Model Traffic Code 

Sec. 8-1-10. - Adoption. 
(a)  The City hereby adopts by reference the 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado, promulgated and published by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700, Denver, CO 80222. 
(b)  The Model Traffic Code shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park and every other public way, public place and public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the City, the use of which the City has the jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of Sections 1401 (reckless driving), 1402 (careless driving) and 1413 (eluding a police officer) of the Model Traffic Code shall apply not only to public areas but also on private property throughout the City. 
(c)  The City shall enforce all traffic and parking regulations on streets which are a part of the state highway system, subject to the State's approval of such regulations. 
(Prior code 10.04.010; Ord. 20 2, 2011; Ord. 31 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-1-20. - Inspection of Model Traffic Code. 
    The Model Traffic Code may be inspected during regular business hours of the City. The 2010 edition of the Model Traffic Code is adopted as if set out at length. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-1-30. - Amendments. 
    The adopted Model Traffic Code is subject to the following additions, modifications and amendments: 
(1)  The following new Part 3 is added to the Model Traffic Code: 
"PART 3
EMISSIONS CONTROL 
    "301. Purpose. The purpose of this Part 3 is to protect, preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare through the reduction, prevention, and control of air pollution. This Part 3 provides for the enforcement of emission regulations to ensure that ambient air is adequately pure and free from smoke, contamination, pollutants, or synergistic agents injurious to humans, plant life, animal life or property, or which interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property or the conduct of business. 
    "302. Definitions. For purposes of this Part 3, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    "(1) 'Air contaminant' means any fume, smoke, particulate matter, vapor, gas or any combination thereof, but not including water vapor or steam condensate. 
    "(2) 'Air pollution' means the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more air contaminants. 
    "(3) 'Ambient air' means the surrounding or outside air. 
    "(4) 'Atmosphere' means the air that envelops or surrounds the earth. 
    "(5) 'Department' means the Greenwood Village Police Department. 
    "(6) 'Emission' or 'emit' means to discharge, release or to cause the discharge or release of one or more air contaminants into the atmosphere. 
    "(7) 'Engine' means any internal combustion machine such as is found in motor vehicles which utilize gas or liquid fuel for combustion energy. 
    "(8) 'Smoke' means small gas-borne particles resulting from incomplete combustion and consisting predominately, but not exclusively, of carbon and other combustible materials. 
    "303. Emission of contaminants prohibited. No person shall cause to be emitted into the atmosphere from any motor vehicle powered by gasoline or any fuel except diesel any visible air contaminant for a period greater than five (5) seconds, excluding emissions that are a direct result of cold-engine startup. 
    "304. Idling prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause or knowingly permit to be operated in any residential district in the City, except on a state highway, any motor of a motor vehicle which weighs twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or more, manufacturer's gross vehicle weight, or any combination of motor vehicles towed by such motor vehicle, which remains stationary for a consecutive period longer than five (5) minutes. 
    "305. Violation. It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person to operate or to permit operation of any motor vehicle in violation of this Part 3. 
    "(1) When a vehicle is found to be in violation of this Part 3, a summons and complaint shall be served on the owner or operator thereof, requiring an appearance in Municipal Court. 
    "(2) If, prior to the court appearance date, the motor vehicle which is the subject of the summons and complaint is repaired and found to be in compliance with this Part 3 after a test conducted by the Department, the summons and complaint shall be dismissed by the Municipal Court without further proceedings. 
    "(3) The Municipal Court may, upon request, extend the compliance period for repair and testing of a motor vehicle for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days from the date of the initial appearance for arraignment. 
    "(4) If the owner of the motor vehicle presents an affidavit that the motor vehicle has been disposed of and will no longer be operated on the streets or highways, together with the registration card and number plates of such vehicle, the summons and complaint shall be dismissed without further proceedings. 
    "(5) In addition to any other remedy provided by this Code, a violation of this Chapter may be abated as a nuisance pursuant to Title 8 of the Greenwood Village Code. 
    "306. Enforcement of State requirements. 
    "(1) It is unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any motor vehicle, which is required by the State to be inspected pursuant to the automobile inspection and readjustment program established pursuant to Sections 42-4-306.5 to 42-4-316, C.R.S., to drive, stop, park, or to cause or knowingly permit such motor vehicle to be driven, stopped or parked, on any street or highway within the City, unless such vehicle has been inspected at an authorized inspection station and, if required, has attached thereto, in proper position, a valid and unexpired certification of emissions control as required by state law. 
    "(2) At the time a person is issued a summons and complaint charging a violation of this Section, the officer so charging may offer to give a penalty assessment notice to the person being charged, if known. Such notice shall contain all of the information required by subsection (4) hereof. If the person accepts the notice, such acceptance shall constitute an acknowledgment of guilt for a violation of this Section and a promise to pay a penalty assessment of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) to the City's Traffic Violations Bureau, either in person or by mail, within twenty (20) days from the date of the violation. Acceptance and payment of the penalty assessment shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the violation. 
    "(3) If an alleged violator refuses to accept the penalty assessment notice or accepts the notice but fails to pay the penalty assessment as required, the penalty assessment notice shall constitute a summons and complaint and shall be processed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
    "(4) A penalty assessment notice shall contain the name and address of the person being charged, if such information is known; the nature of the alleged offense; the amount of the penalty assessment prescribed for such offense; the date of the notice; the time and place when and where such person shall appear in court in the event such penalty assessment is not paid within twenty (20) days thereafter; a place for such person to execute a signed acknowledgment of guilt and an agreement to pay the penalty assessment within twenty (20) days from the date of the violation; and such other information as required by law to constitute such notice as a summons to appear in the Municipal Court, should the penalty assessment not be paid within twenty (20) days from the date of the notice. 
    "(5) Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than thirty-five dollars ($35.00) nor more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). 
    "(6) An officer coming upon an unattended vehicle which is in violation of this Section may place upon the vehicle a penalty assessment notice indicating the offense and directing the owner or operator of the vehicle to remit a penalty assessment of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) to the City's Traffic Violations Bureau within twenty (20) days. If the penalty assessment is not paid within twenty (20) days, the Traffic Violations Bureau shall request the police officer to file a complaint in the Municipal Court, which shall be served upon the registered owner of the vehicle with a summons to appear in Municipal Court. 
    "(7) In any prosecution under this Section, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint or penalty assessment notice was driven, parked, or stopped in violation of this Section, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint or penalty assessment notice was at the time of such driving, stopping or parking, a registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who drove, stopped, parked, or knowingly permitted to be driven, stopped or parked, such vehicle at the place where, and at the time when such violation occurred." 
(2)  Section 510, entitled "Permits for excess size and weight and for manufactured homes," is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
    "510. Excess size and weight permits. 
    "(1) The City may, in its sole discretion, upon a written application and for good cause shown, issue a single-trip, a special or an annual permit authorizing the permittee to operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size, weight or load exceeding the maximum specified in this Code upon any highway under its jurisdiction, except manufactured homes. 
    "(2) The application for any such permit shall specifically describe the vehicle and load to be operated and the highways for which the permit is requested, and shall indicate whether the permit being requested is a single-trip, special or annual permit. 
    "(3) The City may limit the number of permits issued under this Section, or the number of trips, and may establish seasonal or time limitations on the issuance of such permits. 
    "(4) Every permit issued under this Section shall be carried in the vehicle at all times and be produced upon request of a police officer or other agent of the City. 
    "(5) No person shall violate the terms of any permit issued under this Section. In addition to any other penalty, the City may revoke any permit issued under this Section after the permittee has been given notice and an opportunity to be heard on the proposed revocation. 
    "(6) No permit shall be necessary for authorized emergency vehicles, public transportation vehicles, public maintenance or construction equipment, implements of husbandry and farm tractors temporarily operated on a highway. 
    "(7) The fees for such permits shall be established by the City Council." 
(3)  Section 511, entitled "Permit standards - state and local," is deleted in its entirety. 
(4)  Section 614, entitled "Designation of highway maintenance, repair, or construction zones - signs - increase in penalties for speeding violations," is deleted and replaced with the following: 
    "614. Designated construction zones. 
    "(1) If maintenance, repair or construction activities are occurring on any street or highway within the City, the City may designate such street or highway as a construction zone. 
    "(2) Any person convicted of speeding in a designated construction zone shall be punished by twice the amount of the fine which is in effect by virtue of the schedule of fines adopted by the Municipal Court. 
    "(3) Signs indicating that fines will be doubled for speeding violations shall be posted at the beginning of a designated construction zone, and signs indicating that the double fines are no longer in effect shall be posted at the end of a designated construction zone. The failure to post such signs shall not be a defense to the underlying speeding charge, but shall prohibit the imposition of double fines by the Municipal Court." 
(5)  Section 615, entitled "School zones-increase in penalties for moving traffic violations," is deleted and replaced with the following: 
    "615. Designated school zones. 
    "(1) The City may designate certain streets or portions thereof as school zones. Where flashing lights or signs mandate a reduced speed in a school zone, said zone shall always be considered a designated school zone, regardless of whether any such lights are flashing at the time of the violation. 
    "(2) Any person convicted of speeding in a designated school zone shall be penalized by twice the amount of the fine which is in effect by virtue of the fine schedule adopted by the Municipal Court. 
    "(3) Signs indicating that fines will be doubled shall be posted on or in close proximity to the signs establishing the school zone. The failure to post such signs shall not be a defense to the underlying speeding charge, but shall prohibit the imposition of double fines by the Municipal Court. 
    "(4) A designated school zone shall be designated by flashing beacons or signs at the school zone limits, and this Section shall be enforced in such school zones while the beacons are flashing and during the times indicated on the signs." 
(6)  A new Section 1013 is added, to read as follows: 
    "1013. Driving on private property to avoid signal. It is unlawful for any person to drive from a public street or public way of this City over, across or through any private property or driveway to avoid traffic control signals, stop signs, or other traffic control devices, or as a route or shortcut from one public street or public way to another. As in this Section, 'private property' includes, but is not limited to, any property not dedicated as a public street or public way, alley, right-of-way or easement. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of violation of this Section that the person charged is the owner of the property or driveway through or across which the motor vehicle is driven, or of leasehold or easement rights therein, or of the right to the possession or use thereof." 
(7)  A new Section 1014 is added, to read as follows: 
    "1014. Driving over public park to avoid signal. It is unlawful for any person to drive from a public street or public way of this City over, across or through any public park to avoid traffic control signals, stop signs or other traffic control devices, or as a route or shortcut from one public street or public way to another." 
(8)  Section 1101(1) is deleted and replaced with the following: 
    "(1) No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway within the City at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed, any speed in excess of the posted speed at any location shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful." 
(9)  Section 1101(2) is deleted and replaced with the following: 
    "(2) Except when a special hazard exists that requires a lower speed, the following speeds shall be lawful: 
    "(a) Twenty-five (25) miles per hour in any business district, unless otherwise posted. 
    "(b) Twenty-five (25) miles per hour in any residential district, unless otherwise posted. 
    "(c) Fifteen (15) miles per hour upon any aggregate or unpaved street or roadway in any residential district of the City, if signage advising of such speed limit is posted. 
    "(d) Any speed not in excess of a speed limit designated by an official traffic control device." 
(10)  Section 1101(7) is deleted and replaced with the following: 
    "(7) No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway within the City in excess of the maximum lawful speed of sixty-five (65) miles per hour." 
(11)  Section 1101(8) is deleted in its entirety. 
(12)  Section 1204(1) is amended by the addition of the following new subsections (l), (m), (n), (o) and (p): 
    "(l) In any place that would interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic or proper roadway maintenance; 
    "(m) Upon any landscaped area of private property which is not intended for the parking of vehicles, such as a lawn, garden, berm, or private median; 
    "(n) In any area designated by official signs and/or pavement or curb markings as a bike way, bicycle lane, bicycle path or pedestrian walkway or crosswalk, except in those areas where the on-street bikeway or pedestrian walkway is of sufficient width to allow the parking of vehicles and will not interfere with the passage of a bicycle within the designated bikeway or pedestrian walkway; 
    "(o) In any place officially marked as a passenger loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed five (5) minutes for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers; or 
    "(p) In any place officially marked as a loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect; provided, however, that in no case shall a stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes." 
(13)  Section 1204(2)(a) is amended to read as follows: 
    "(a) Within five (5) feet of a public or private driveway, except that United States Postal Service mail carriers and employees may temporarily stop, stand or park within five (5) feet of a public or private driveway while performing their duties;" 
(14)  Part 12 is amended by the addition of the following new Section 1212: 
    "1212. Summons for parking violation. 
    "(1) When any vehicle is found parked, stopped or standing in violation of any provision of this Part 12, the officer discovering such vehicle shall record its registration number and any other information which may identify its owner, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a summons and complaint or notice directing the vehicle owner to respond to the charge at the Municipal Court at the time and date specified on the summons and complaint or notice. 
    "(2) In a prosecution for a violation of any provision of this Part 12, proof that the particular vehicle described in the summons and complaint or notice was parked in violation of any such provision, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such violation the registered owner of such vehicle shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or permitted such vehicle to be parked at the time and place such violation occurred." 
(15)  Section 1412, entitled "Operation of bicycles and other human-powered vehicles," is amended by the addition of the following new subsections (15) and (16): 
    "(15) Whenever a designated bicycle path or trail has been provided adjacent to a street, a bicyclist shall ride on such path or trail and shall not ride within the street, except where such path or trail is impassable. 
    "(16) Whenever a designated bicycle lane has been provided on a street, a bicyclist shall ride within the lane, proceeding in the same direction as motor vehicles and shall not ride in any other portion of the street or adjacent sidewalk, except that this subsection shall not apply to any child under ten (10) years of age." 
(16)  Part 1702, entitled "Counties - traffic offenses classified - schedule of fines," is deleted in its entirety. 
(Prior code 10.04.010; Ord. 13 1, 2009; Ord. 20 2, 2011; Ord. 31 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-1-40. - Application. 
    This Article shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park and every other public way, public place and public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the City, the use of which the City has the jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of Sections 1401, 1402, 1413 and Part 16 of the Model Traffic Code shall apply not only to public areas but also on private property throughout the City. 
(Prior code 10.04.010; Ord. 20 2, 2011; Ord. 31 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-1-50. - Authority over state highways. 
    All traffic and parking restrictions on streets which are a part of the state highway system shall be regulated and enforced by the City, except that pursuant to Section 43-2-135(1)(g), C.R.S., regulations on such streets shall be subject to the approval of the State Department of Highways. 
(Prior code 10.04.010, 10.04.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-1-60. - Traffic Violations Bureau. 
(a)  The Municipal Court may establish a Traffic Violations Bureau. 
(b)  The duties of the Traffic Violations Bureau shall be to: 
(1)  Accept designated fines, issue receipts and present to the Municipal Court written guilty pleas and waivers of appearance of defendants who have requested and are permitted to so plead. 
(2)  Receive and issue receipts for bail, when applicable, and enter the time of appearance on the docket. 
(3)  Forward to the Colorado Department of Revenue a record of the conviction of any person in the Municipal Court of any traffic offense, including default judgments. 
(4)  Keep a public record of all of its proceedings, including all fines collected and the final disposition of all cases handled. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as ordered by the Municipal Court or required by City ordinance or state law. 
(Prior code 10.04.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-1-70. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Article or the Model Traffic Code as adopted herein. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein, every person convicted of a violation of this Article or the Model Traffic Code shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20. 
(c)  The penalty for conviction of the following offenses shall be a fine not to exceed four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00), with no possibility of imprisonment: 
(1)  Any traffic offense for which the points assessed by the State against the person's driver's license is three (3) points or less. 
(2)  Careless driving. 
(3)  Speeding up to nineteen (19) miles per hour in excess of the posted speed limit. 
(4)  Disobedience of traffic control devices. 
(5)  Failure to yield to an emergency vehicle. 
(6)  Following too closely. 
(7)  Failure to yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian. 
(8)  Improper passing. 
(d)  A conviction for a traffic offense for which the penalty may not exceed a fine of four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00) with no possibility of imprisonment does not constitute a crime, and the punishment imposed shall not be deemed for any purpose to be penal or criminal punishment. Any person charged with such an offense shall not have a right to trial by jury. 
(Prior code 10.04.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-1-80. - Overload penalties. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any weight limitation imposed by Part 5 of the Model Traffic Code shall be subject to the following penalties: 
Excess Weight in Pounds Fine 1-3,000 $ 100.00  3,001-4,250 177.00 4,251-4,500 184.00 4,501-4,750 192.00 4,751-5,000 199.00 5,001-5,250 372.00 5,251-5,500 384.00 5,501-5,750 397.00 5,751-6,000 409.00 6,001-6,250 422.00 6,251-6,500 434.00 6,501-6,750 447.00 6,751-7,000 459.00 7,001-7,250 893.00 7,251-7,500 910.00 7,501-7,750 928.00 7,751-8,000 945.00 8,001-8,250 963.00 8,251-8,500 980.00 8,501-8,750 998.00 8,751-9,000 1,015.00 9,001-9,250 1.033.00 9,251-9,500 1,041.00 9,501-9,750 1,059.00 9,750-10,000 1,076.00 10,001-10,250 2,000.00 10,251-10,500 2,100.00 10,501-10,750 2,200.00 10,751-11,000 2,300.00 11,001-11,250 2,400.00 11,251-11,500 2,500.00 11,501-11,750 2,600.00 11,751 and over 2,650.00  
(Ord. 11 6, 2013) 
Sec. 8-1-90. - Standards and specifications for commercial vehicles. 
(a)  The Rules and Regulations Governing the Safety Standards and Specifications of all Commercial Vehicles , as authorized by Section 42-4-235(4), C.R.S., and as promulgated by the Colorado Department of Public Safety, are hereby adopted by reference. One (1) copy of said rules and regulations is on file and available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk. 
(b)  Any violation of any of the rules and regulations hereby adopted shall constitute a traffic offense, punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(c)  A police officer is authorized to immobilize, impound or otherwise direct the disposition of a commercial vehicle when the officer determines that the vehicle or operation thereof is unsafe and when such immobilization, impoundment or disposition is appropriate under the rules and regulations adopted herein. 
(Prior code 10.04.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-1-100. - Permit fees. 
    The City may charge fees for permits issued pursuant to Section 510 of the Model Traffic Code; however, such fees shall not exceed the amounts required in Section 42-4-510(11), C.R.S. Such fees shall be set annually by resolution of the City Council. 
(Prior code 10.04.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-1-110. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  Manual. 
(1)  The 2003 Edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices , published by the U.S. Department of Transportation and Federal Highway Administration, in cooperation with the American Traffic Safety Services Association, the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials and the Institute of Transportation Engineers, is hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  The purpose of the manual is to provide standards for the design and usage of traffic control devices in the City. The manual helps to ensure highway safety by providing for the orderly and predictable movement of traffic, both motorized and nonmotorized, and to provide such guidance and warnings as are necessary to ensure the safety and informed operation of the individual elements of the traffic system. 
(3)  Three (3) copies of the manual shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk for inspection during regular business hours. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, or any provision of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices , the City Council may specify by resolution the location of official traffic control devices. In determining whether a traffic control device should be installed at a particular location, the City Council shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The nature of the land use and development in the surrounding area. 
(2)  The volume of motor vehicle traffic. 
(3)  The volume of pedestrian and equestrian traffic. 
(4)  The proximity to schools. 
(5)  The desires of residents in the area. 
(6)  The provisions of the City's traffic and transportation plan. 
(7)  The number of reported crashes at the location within the past three (3) years. 
(8)  Any other factors related to the safety of motorists and pedestrians. 
(Prior code 10.04.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-1-120. - Red light cameras. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this Section, red-light camera system means cameras, embedded sensors and associated technology and equipment that are installed in a fixed location within the City at a signalized intersection and that are programmed to detect violations of Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code through the generation and transmission of photographic images of the alleged violation. 
(b)  Findings. The City Council hereby finds and determines that: 
(1)  Red-light camera systems have been subjected to peer review and publication and have been thoroughly tested; 
(2)  Red-light camera systems have been demonstrated to reduce traffic crashes, injuries and fatalities; 
(3)  Red-light camera systems have been demonstrated to operate with minimal error throughout the United States; and 
(4)  Red-light camera systems provide relevant, probative and scientifically reliable evidence to detect violations of Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code. 
(c)  Rebuttable presumption. Based on the foregoing findings, in any proceeding under this Section, there shall be an evidentiary presumption that the technology utilized by the red-light camera system is scientifically reliable for providing proof that the driver of a particular vehicle violated Section 603. However, such presumption may be rebutted by the presentation of any probative and competent evidence that the technology used by the red light camera system was not scientifically reliable as to the charged person's alleged violation. 
(d)  Authorization. The City is hereby authorized to install and employ red-light camera systems at signalized intersections within the City to detect violations of Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code. 
(e)  Notice of violation. 
(1)  When a peace officer, based on evidence obtained in whole or part by means of a red-light camera system, has probable cause to believe that a vehicle has been driven in violation of Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code, the peace officer may issue or cause to be issued through a contractor designated by the City, a notice of violation charging the person in whose name the vehicle is registered with a violation of Section 603. If, however, the vehicle is registered in more than one (1) person's name, the notice of violation shall be issued to the registrant who the issuing peace officer determines, under all the facts and circumstances, was the person most likely depicted in the photographs produced by the red-light camera system. 
(2)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The signature, or reasonable facsimile thereof, of the peace officer issuing the notice of violation. 
b.  The photographs produced by the red-light camera system depicting the vehicle's location, license plate and driver. 
c.  The date and approximate time of the violation; and 
d.  The approximate location of the violation. 
(3)  For purposes of this Section, the notice of violation shall be considered a summons and complaint under C.M.C.R. 204. 
(f)  Jurisdiction. 
(1)  For the Municipal Court to obtain personal jurisdiction over the charged person, the notice of violation shall be personally served upon the charged person, or, in lieu of such personal service, by leaving a copy of the notice of violation at the charged person's usual place of abode with some person over the age of eighteen (18) years residing therein, or by mailing a copy to the charged person's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested, within ninety (90) days after the alleged violation occurred and not less than five (5) days prior to the time the charged person is required pursuant to the notice of violation to appear in the Municipal Court. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person charged with a violation of Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code under this Section may waive service of the notice of violation by voluntarily submitting to the Municipal Court's jurisdiction, through payment of a fine or other affirmative act constituting a waiver of service. 
(3)  When a person is served with a notice of violation under this Section, the person shall: 
a.  If admitting the charge, complete the notice of violation form by providing his or her driver's license number and other information requested in the form, and return the completed form, together with payment of the fine assessed, to the Municipal Court on or before the time specified in the notice of violation for the charged person to appear; or 
b.  If contesting the charge, appear on the date and time specified in the notice of violation for arraignment. 
(g)  Prima facie case. 
(1)  The following shall constitute prima facie evidence of the fact that the charged person was the person driving the vehicle depicted in the photographs and thus violated Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code: 
a.  Evidence that the vehicle depicted in the photographs is registered in the charged person's name; 
b.  Evidence that the photographs, video, data, information or other material relating to the alleged violation indicate, directly or indirectly, the physical location of the red-light camera system that photographed the alleged violation; and 
c.  Evidence that the photographs are of sufficient quality to permit identification of the driver of the vehicle. 
(2)  The prima facie evidence may be rebutted by the presentation of any probative and competent evidence that the charged person was not the driver of the vehicle depicted in the photographs generated by the red-light camera system at the time of the alleged violation, or that the red-light camera system was not operating properly at the time of the alleged violation. 
(3)  The City may not require the registered owner of a vehicle to disclose the identity of a driver who was detected through the use of the red-light camera system, but the owner may be required to submit evidence that the owner was not the driver at the time of the alleged violation. 
(h)  Penalties and costs. 
(1)  The maximum penalty for a violation of Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code detected by a red-light camera system, including surcharges, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). No portion of any fine collected for a violation discovered by a red-light camera system may be paid to the manufacturer or vendor of the red-light camera. The compensation paid by the City for such equipment shall be based on the value of such red-light camera system and may not be based upon the number of traffic citations issued or the revenue generated by such red-light camera system. 
(2)  In any proceeding under this Section, the Municipal Court may impose as an additional cost the cost of service of the notice of violation upon the defendant, if such service is effected through either certified mail or personal service. The Municipal Court may impose the actual cost of such service if the cost is reasonable and does not exceed the amount actually charged for service. 
(3)  The City shall not report to the Department of Revenue any conviction, entry of judgment, outstanding judgment, or warrant based on a violation of Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code that was detected exclusively by means of a red-light camera system. 
(Prior code 10.04.080; Ord. 28 1, 2008; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-1-130. - Procedures not exclusive. 
    The procedures set forth in this Chapter shall not be exclusive of any other method prescribed by law for the arrest or prosecution of any person for a violation of any provision of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 10.04.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 2 - Truck Routes 

Sec. 8-2-10. - Definition. 
    For purposes of this Chapter, the term truck means a motor vehicle in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight, which is designed to transport property and is used for commercial purposes. 
(Prior code 10.08.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-2-20. - Truck routes established. 
    The following truck routes are established within the City: 
(1)  South Quebec Street from East Belleview Avenue to East Caley Avenue. 
(2)  East Orchard Road from South Yosemite Street to South Quebec Street. 
(3)  DTC Boulevard from East Belleview Avenue to East Orchard Road. 
(4)  East Belleview Avenue from the western City boundary to DTC Boulevard. 
(5)  South University Boulevard from East Belleview Avenue to Columbine Way (part of Colorado State Highway 177). 
(6)  Interstate 225. 
(7)  South Yosemite Street from East Orchard Road to East Arapahoe Road. 
(8)  East Arapahoe Road from Syracuse Way to South Emporia Street. 
(9)  South Clinton Street from East Arapahoe Road to the southern City boundary. 
(10)  Interstate 25. 
(11)  Boston Street from Arapahoe Road to Caley Avenue. 
(12)  Caley Avenue from Boston Street to Yosemite Street. 
(13)  Peakview Avenue from Dayton Street to Boston Street. 
(Prior code 10.08.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-2-30. - Signs. 
(a)  The City shall cause all truck routes, except highways which are part of the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways and state highways, to be posted with signs identifying them as truck routes. 
(b)  Signs designating a truck route shall comply with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and shall specify the maximum axle weight permitted on the truck route and, with an arrow, the course of the truck route. 
(c)  A street, road or highway is not a truck route, or a part thereof, unless posted as such or unless the highway is a state highway or a part of the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways. State highways and highways which are part of the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways are truck routes, but need not be posted as such. 
(Prior code 10.08.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-2-40. - Use required. 
(a)  Every truck operated within the City shall proceed over a truck route, shall deviate from that route only at the intersection which is nearest to a destination point and shall proceed to the destination point by the shortest available route. Upon leaving a destination point, a truck shall return to a truck route by the shortest available route, unless the shortest available route to the nearest truck route is longer than the shortest available route to the next destination point. Upon leaving its last destination point, a truck shall return to a truck route by the shortest available route. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be subject to the following fines: 
(1)  First offense: one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  Second offense within any twelve (12) consecutive months: two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(3)  Third or subsequent offense within any twelve (12) consecutive months: three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Prior code 10.08.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-2-50. - Permit required. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle within the City which is in excess of the weight or size limitations contained in Part 5 of the Model Traffic Code, unless such person has first obtained a permit from the City for such operation. 
(Prior code 10.08.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-2-60. - Exceptions. 
    This Chapter shall not prohibit: 
(1)  The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the City. 
(2)  The operation of trucks owned or operated by the State, a county or a municipality, a public utility or a contractor engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or utilities upon any street in the City. 
(3)  The operation of a truck on any street which has been designated by the City as a detour from a designated truck route. 
(Prior code 10.08.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-2-70. - Evidence of points of origin and destination. 
    Any person operating a truck upon a street, road, highway or portion thereof which is not a truck route shall have in his or her possession a log book, delivery slip or other evidence of points of origin and destination to justify the presence of the truck upon such street, road or highway. 
(Prior code 10.08.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 3 - Permit Parking Districts 

Sec. 8-3-10. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to: 
(1)  Reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of streets within areas zoned for residential use for the parking of vehicles by persons utilizing adjacent commercial, business, public trail, school or institutional uses. 
(2)  Protect such areas from polluted air, excessive noise, litter and refuse caused by such vehicles. 
(3)  Protect the residents of such areas from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their homes. 
(4)  Preserve the character of such areas as residential neighborhoods. 
(5)  Promote efficiency in the maintenance of residential streets in a clean and safe condition. 
(6)  Preserve the value of property in such areas. 
(7)  Preserve the safety of children, pedestrians and traffic, as well as the peace, good order, comfort, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the City. 
(Prior code 10.12.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 23 1 , 2016) 
Sec. 8-3-20. - Establishment. 
(a)  A permit parking district is a residential district designated by ordinance in which motor vehicle parking is prohibited at certain times, except for vehicles displaying a permit as provided in this Article. 
(b)  Proceedings for the establishment of a permit parking district may be initiated by the City Council if the health, safety and welfare of a designated area is deemed jeopardized, or pursuant to a petition filed with the City Clerk containing the signatures of at least one (1) adult resident of at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the residential dwelling units within a designated contiguous area. 
(c)  Upon the initiation of proceedings for the establishment of a permit parking district, the following procedure shall be employed: 
(1)  The Public Works Department shall make a report and recommendation to the City Council. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the report, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to receive information and comments regarding the proposed permit parking district. 
(3)  After the public hearing, the City Council shall decide whether the proposed permit parking district should be established. In making this decision, the City Council shall consider: 
a.  Whether the residential area included within the proposed district is substantially impacted by motor vehicle parking related to adjacent or nearby business, commercial, public trail, school or institutional uses. 
b.  Whether the motor vehicle parking related to such business, commercial, public trail, school or institutional uses is resulting in traffic conditions which are hazardous to residents of the area included within the proposed district. 
c.  Whether the motor vehicle parking related to such business, commercial, public trail, school or institutional uses is resulting in excessive noise, air pollution or litter in the area included within the proposed district. 
d.  Whether residents of the area within the proposed district or their visitors are having difficulty during certain hours of the day in parking their motor vehicles on the street in front of their properties. 
e.  Whether the designation of a permit parking district will ameliorate difficulties experienced by residents or their visitors in parking in front of their properties, hazardous traffic conditions or noise, air pollution or litter. 
(4)  If the City Council finds that a permit parking district should be designated, it shall adopt an ordinance establishing the district and stating the days and hours when motor vehicle parking within the district shall be prohibited, except for those persons who hold a permit issued pursuant to this Article. 
(d)  Upon the establishment of a permit parking district, the City shall post appropriate signs within the district advising motorists of the days and hours when vehicle parking within the district is prohibited except by permit. 
(Prior code 10.12.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 23 2 , 2016) 
Sec. 8-3-30. - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this Article, vehicles making deliveries or providing services to residential dwelling units within a permit parking district may be parked for a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
(Prior code 10.12.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-3-40. - Permits. 
(a)  The owner, owners, lessee or lessees of each residential dwelling unit within a permit parking district may be issued one (1) or more resident permits which shall allow a motor vehicle to which it is affixed to be parked within the district without regard to the parking restrictions imposed by the applicable permit parking district ordinance. The maximum number of permits for each residential dwelling unit within a particular permit parking district shall be specified in the ordinance establishing the district. A resident permit shall consist of a numbered decal which shall be permanently affixed to the lower left-hand portion of the rear windshield of the motor vehicle. 
(b)  The owner of each residential dwelling unit within a permit parking district may also be issued visitor permits. A visitor permit shall allow the motor vehicle in which it is displayed to be parked within the district without regard to the parking restrictions imposed by the applicable permit parking district ordinance. The maximum number and permitted duration of visitor permits for each residential dwelling unit within a particular permit parking district shall be specified in the ordinance establishing the district. The visitor permit shall hang on the rear-view mirror of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  Permits shall be issued by the Police Department upon presentation of satisfactory evidence of residency within the district and, for resident permits, proof of ownership of the vehicle for which the permit is being obtained. 
(d)  Resident permits shall be numbered and shall not be transferable from one (1) motor vehicle to another. 
(e)  All permits shall remain the property of the City. Where the maximum number of permits have been issued for a residential dwelling unit, a permit must be returned to the City for each new permit issued. 
(Prior code 10.12.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 8-3-50. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person to whom a resident permit has been issued shall allow any person who is not a resident of the residential dwelling unit for which the permit was issued to use or display said resident permit. 
(b)  No person to whom a visitor permit has been issued shall allow any person to use such visitor permit for any purpose other than: 
(1)  Visiting the residential dwelling unit for which the visitor permit was issued; or 
(2)  Visiting the persons residing in such residential dwelling unit at any location. 
(c)  No person to whom a resident or visitor permit has been issued shall allow any student to use such resident or visitor permit for the parking of any vehicle while such student is attending school. 
(Prior code 10.12.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
CHAPTER 9 - General Offenses 
ARTICLE 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 9-1-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Fire Department means South Metro Fire Rescue or Littleton Fire Protection District, as appropriate. 
    Peace officer means a peace officer in uniform or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself or herself by exhibiting his or her credentials as a peace officer. 
    Police Department means the Police Department of the City. 
(Prior code 9.04.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 2 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 3 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 4 - Government 

Sec. 9-4-10. - Resisting arrest. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to intentionally prevent or attempt to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, from effecting an arrest of the actor or another by: 
(1)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace officer or another; or 
(2)  Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the peace officer or another. 
(b)  It is no defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) hereof that the peace officer was attempting to make an arrest which in fact was unlawful, if he or she was acting under color of his or her official authority and, if in attempting to make the arrest, he or she was not resorting to unreasonable or excessive force giving rise to the right of self-defense. 
(c)  A peace officer acts under color of his or her official authority when, in the regular course of his or her assigned duties, he or she is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made by him or her. 
(Prior code 9.04.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-4-20. - Interference with a peace officer or firefighter. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, by the use or threatened use of force, violence or physical obstruction, to intentionally obstruct, impair or hinder a peace officer or firefighter in the discharge or apparent discharge of his or her official duties. 
(b)  It is no defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) hereof that the peace officer or firefighter was acting in an illegal manner, if he or she was acting under color of his or her official authority. 
(c)  Disobedience to lawful or reasonable order of peace officer or firefighter. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly disobey the lawful or reasonable order of any peace officer or firefighter given pursuant to the discharge of the official duties of such peace officer or firefighter. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a small unmanned aircraft system in a manner that obstructs, impairs or hinders a peace officer or firefighter in the discharge or apparent discharge of his or her official duties. For purposes of this section "small unmanned aircraft system" means an aircraft weighing less than fifty-five (55) pounds inclusive of payload and attached systems and components operated without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. 
(Prior code 9.04.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 03 ,  4, 2018) 
Sec. 9-4-30. - Duty to aid police officers. 
    It is the duty of all persons when called upon by the police officer or any other member of the Police Department to promptly aid and assist such officer or member in the discharge of his or her duties. 
(Prior code 9.04.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-4-40. - Impersonating an officer. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person other than an official peace officer of the City to wear the uniform, apparel or any other insignia of office like, similar to or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn by the official peace officers. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to counterfeit, imitate or cause to be counterfeited, imitated or colorably imitated the uniform, apparel or insignia of office used by the Police Department. 
(Prior code 9.04.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-4-50. - False incrimination. 
    It is unlawful for a person to knowingly give false information to any law enforcement officer with the intent to implicate another. 
(Prior code 9.04.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-4-60. - Fictitious reports. 
    It is unlawful for a person to: 
(1)  Report to law enforcement authorities an offense or other incident within their concern knowing that it did not occur; or 
(2)  Pretend to furnish such authorities with information relating to an offense or incident when he or she knows he or she has no information relating to such offense or incident. 
(Prior code 9.04.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-4-70. - False information. 
    It is unlawful for a person to give a false name, address or age to a law enforcement officer with the intent of concealing or hiding his or her own real name, address or age. 
(Prior code 9.04.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-4-80. - Impersonating City officers and employees. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully, unlawfully or fraudulently represent himself or herself to be a City officer or an employee of the City and purport to perform the duties of any such officer or employee of the City when he or she is not an authorized officer or employee of the City. 
(Prior code 9.04.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-4-90. - False alarms. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Alarm means any device which is designed to cause Police Department or Fire Department response and investigation at a location, which is reported: 
a.  By a signal transmitted, telephoned, radioed or otherwise relayed to the Police Department or Fire Department by such device or by any person acting in response to a signal activated by such device; or 
b.  By an audible or visual signal designed to notify persons within audible or visual range of the signal. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm resulting in a response and investigation by the Police Department or Fire Department to the building, place or property on which the alarm is located where criminal activity or a fire is not occurring or has not occurred immediately prior to the activation of the alarm. 
    Owner means the fee owner of the building, place or property where an alarm is located. It is presumed that the fee owner of the building, place or property where an alarm is located is the person whose name is indicated as the owner of the building, place or property in the records of the County Assessor. This presumption may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(b)  More than three (3) false alarms within a calendar year, commencing January 1, at the same building, place or property where an alarm is located, is unlawful, and the owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession or in control of such building, place or property shall be punished with a fine in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Fourth false alarm within a calendar year: fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(2)  Fifth false alarm within a calendar year: seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(3)  Sixth false alarm and each false alarm thereafter within a calendar year: twenty-five dollars ($25.00) more than the fine for the preceding false alarm up to the maximum fine allowed under Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly activate an alarm resulting in a response and investigation by the Police Department or the Fire Department to the building, place or property where the alarm is located where criminal activity or a fire is not occurring or has not occurred immediately prior to the activation of the alarm. Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the maximum fine allowed under Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(d)  At the time any person is issued a summons and complaint for a violation of this Section, the police officer charging such offense is hereby authorized to issue a penalty assessment notice and have said penalty assessment notice processed by the Municipal Court pursuant to Section 1-4-40 of this Code. 
(e)  A corporation charged with a violation of Subsection (b) or (c) above may appear and defend itself in the Municipal Court by an officer or by an authorized employee or agent of the corporation. Such officer, employee or agent need not be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State. A corporation's right to appear and defend by an officer or authorized employee or agent shall include, but shall not be limited to, the right to tender a plea to the offense charged. 
(Prior code 9.04.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11 7, 2013) 
Sec. 9-4-100. - Injuring or killing police dogs. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or wantonly torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the Police Department in the performance of the functions or duties of such department or to interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by the Police Department or any officer or member thereof in the performance of any of the duties or functions of the Police Department or of such officer or member. 
(Prior code 9.04.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 5 - Places of Lodging 

Sec. 9-5-10. - Definition. 
    For purposes of this Article, place of lodging means rooms or accommodations furnished to a person or persons who, for consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room or rooms in a hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, mobile home, auto camp, trailer court or trailer park under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement. 
(Ord. 12 1, 2012) 
Sec. 9-5-20. - Registration required. 
(a)  The keeper of every place of lodging shall keep a register, and every guest shall be required to register therein his or her name and address or place of residence. Such register maintained by the place of lodging shall be subject to inspection by the Police Department in connection with a lawful police investigation, and printed copies provided to the Police Department at any time on demand. 
(b)  The keeper of every place of lodging shall keep and maintain an easily accessible daily record of all automobiles of patrons of such lodging which are parked in facilities maintained or made available exclusively for such patrons of such lodging. The record shall be kept in a uniform manner and shall be subject to inspection by the Police Department in connection with a lawful police investigation and printed copies thereof provided upon demand to the Police Department. The record shall include the name and room number of the guest associated with the automobile stored, parked or kept at said facility, together with the make, body style and year of said automobile and the license number, if any. 
(c)  All such required records shall be preserved for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. 12 1, 2012) 
Sec. 9-5-30. - False name. 
    It shall be unlawful to provide or knowingly permit to be written in any register of any place of lodging, any false name or address. 
(Ord. 12 1, 2012) 
ARTICLE 6 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 7 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 8 - Offenses Against the Person 

Sec. 9-8-10. - Menacing. 
    It is unlawful for any person, by any threat or physical action, to knowingly place or attempt to place another person in fear of imminent serious bodily injury. 
(Prior code 9.08.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-8-20. - Assault. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly cause bodily injury to another person. 
(Prior code 9.08.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-8-30. - Sexual assault. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any actor to knowingly subject a victim to any sexual contact if: 
(1)  The actor knows that the victim does not consent; 
(2)  The actor knows that the victim is incapable of appraising the nature of the victim's conduct; 
(3)  The victim is physically helpless, and the actor knows that the victim is physically helpless, and the victim has not consented; 
(4)  The actor has substantially impaired the victim's power to appraise or control the victim's conduct by employing, without the victim's consent, any drug, intoxicant or other means for the purpose of causing submission; 
(5)  At the time of the commission of the act, the victim is less than eighteen (18) years of age, and the actor is the victim's guardian or is otherwise responsible for the general supervision of the victim's welfare; 
(6)  The victim is in custody of law or detained in a hospital or other institution, and the actor has supervisory or disciplinary authority over the victim and uses this position of authority, unless incident to a legal search, to coerce the victim to submit; or 
(7)  The actor engages in treatment or examination of a victim for other than bona fide medical purposes or in a manner substantially inconsistent with reasonable medical practices. 
(b)  As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Actor means the person accused of sexual assault. 
    Intimate parts means the external genitalia, the perineum, the anus, the pubes of any person or the breast of a female person. 
    Physically helpless means unconscious, asleep or otherwise unable to indicate willingness to act. 
    Sexual contact means the knowing touching of the victim's intimate parts by the actor, or of the actor's intimate parts by the victim, or the knowing touching of the clothing covering the immediate area of the victim's or actor's intimate parts if that sexual contact can reasonably be construed as being for the purposes of sexual arousal, gratification or abuse. 
    Victim means the person alleging to have been subjected to a criminal assault. 
(Prior code 9.08.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-8-40. - Harassment. 
(a)  A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he or she: 
(1)  Strikes, shoves, kicks or otherwise touches a person or subjects him to physical contact; 
(2)  In a public place directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; 
(3)  Follows a person about in a public place; 
(4)  Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise by telephone, computer, computer network or computer system in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal by telephone, computer, computer network or computer system which is obscene; 
(5)  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; 
(6)  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another's home or private residence or other private property; 
(7)  Repeatedly insults, taunts, challenges or makes communications in offensively coarse language to another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response; or 
(8)  Flies, uses, launches, lands, employs or navigates a small unmanned aircraft system in a manner meant to harass, annoy or alarm the animals or human occupants of public or private property, or to observe, photograph, or visually record an individual or individuals on private property without permission or lawful authorization. For purposes of this Section, small unmanned aircraft system means an aircraft weighing less than fifty-five (55) pounds inclusive of payload and attached systems and components operated without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. 
(b)  As used in this Section, obscene means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus or excretory functions. 
(c)  Any act prohibited by Paragraph (a)(4) hereof may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place at which the telephone call, electronic mail or other electronic communication was either made or received. 
(Prior code 9.08.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 03 ,  3, 2018) 
Sec. 9-8-50. - Invasion of privacy by small unmanned aircraft systems. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to knowingly and intentionally use a small unmanned aircraft system to observe another person, or to capture or transmit an image, sound, or other physical impression or digital record of another person under circumstances where the other person has a reasonable expectation of privacy. For purposes of this Section, small unmanned aircraft system means an aircraft weighing less than fifty-five (55) pounds inclusive of payload and attached systems and components operated without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. 
(b)  This section does not prohibit conduct by a peace officer or an employee or agent of a federal, state, or local government agency acting in his or her official capacity and pursuant to lawful authorization. 
( Ord. 03 ,  1, 2018) 
ARTICLE 9 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 10 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 11 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 12 - Public Peace and Decency 

Sec. 9-12-10. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to disturb or to tend to disturb the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, by loud or unusual noises, by unseemly, profane, obscene or offensive language, calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, by assaulting, striking or fighting another or for any person to permit any such conduct in any house or upon any premises owned or possessed by him or her or under his or her management or control, when within his or her power to prevent such conduct, so that others in the vicinity or area are or may be disturbed thereby. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to use or operate, or permit the use or operation of, any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, tape player, compact disc player or other sound-amplifying or sound-emitting device or equipment in or on a motor vehicle, or any portable sound-emitting device which is being carried by any person in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from either the motor vehicle or the sound-amplifying or sound-emitting portable device or equipment. 
(c)  The provisions of Subsection (b) hereof shall not apply to sound made or controlled by the City or any branch, subdivision, institution or agency of the federal government or the government of the State or any political subdivision thereof, or when the sound amplification is made pursuant to a valid license, permit or contract issued by the City, any branch, subdivision, institution or agency of the federal government or the government of the State or any political subdivision thereof. 
(d)  For the purposes of this Section, the term plainly audible means that the information content of the sound, such as, but not limited to, speech, voices or musical rhythms or melodies is unambiguously transferred to any person hearing or listening to the sound. 
(Prior code 9.12.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-20. - Pandering. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly arrange or offer to arrange, without using menacing or criminal intimidation, a situation in which a person may practice prostitution. 
(Prior code 9.12.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-30. - Prostitution. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to perform, or offer or agree to perform, any act of sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation or anal intercourse with any person not his or her spouse in exchange for money or other thing of value. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Anal intercourse means contact between human beings of the genital organs of one (1) and the anus of another. 
    Cunnilingus means any act of oral stimulation of the vulva or clitoris. 
    Fellatio means any act of oral stimulation of the penis. 
    Masturbation means stimulation of the genital organs by manual or other bodily contact exclusive of sexual intercourse. 
(Prior code 9.12.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-40. - Soliciting for prostitution. 
    It is unlawful for any person to solicit another for the purpose of prostitution, to arrange or offer to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of prostitution or to direct another to a place knowing such direction is for the purpose of prostitution. 
(Prior code 9.12.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-50. - Keeping a place of prostitution. 
    It is unlawful for any person to have, or exercise control over the use of, any place which offers seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution and to perform any one (1) or more of the following acts: 
(1)  Knowingly granting or permitting the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution; or 
(2)  Permitting the continued use of such place for the purpose of prostitution after becoming aware of facts or circumstances from which he or she could reasonably know that the place is being used for purposes of prostitution. 
(Prior code 9.12.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-60. - Patronizing a prostitute. 
    It is unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts with a person not his or her spouse: 
(1)  Engage in an act of sexual intercourse or of deviate sexual conduct with a prostitute; or 
(2)  Enter or remain in a place of prostitution with intent to engage in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct. 
(Prior code 9.12.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-70. - Promoting sexual immorality. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, for pecuniary gain, to furnish or make available to another person any facility knowing that the same is to be used for, or in aid of, sexual intercourse between persons who are not husband and wife, or for, or in aid of, deviate sexual intercourse, or to advertise in any manner that he or she furnishes or is willing to furnish or make available any such facility for such purposes. 
(b)  As used in this Section, facility means any place or thing which provides seclusion, privacy, opportunity, protection, comfort or assistance to or for a person or persons engaging or intending to engage in sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse. 
(Prior code 9.12.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-80. - Public indecency. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, in a public place, to knowingly or intentionally: 
(1)  Engage in an act of sexual intercourse. 
(2)  Engage in an act of deviate sexual intercourse. 
(3)  Fondle the genitals of himself, herself or another person. 
(4)  Appear in a state of nudity. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitalia, pubic hair or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples or areola. 
(c)  For purposes of this Section, public place means all outdoor places owned by or open to the general public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not an admission charge is levied. 
(d)  The prohibition set forth in Paragraph (a)(4) hereof shall not apply to any child under ten (10) years of age or to any individual exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an infant under two (2) years of age. 
(Prior code 9.12.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-90. - Gambling. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in gambling within the City. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, gambling means risking any money, credit, deposit or other thing of value for gain, contingent in whole or in part upon lot, chance, the operation of a gambling device or the happening or outcome of an event, including a sporting event, over which the person taking a risk has no control, but does not include: 
(1)  Bona fide contests of skill, speed, strength or endurance in which awards are made only to entrants or the owner of entries. 
(2)  Bona fide business transactions which are valid under the law of contracts. 
(3)  Other acts or transactions expressly authorized by laws at or after the effective date of the initial ordinance from which this Section derives. 
(4)  Any game, wager or transaction which is incidental to a bona fide social relationship, is participated in by natural persons only and in which no person is participating, directly or indirectly, in professional gambling as defined in Section 18-10-102(8), C.R.S. 
(Prior code 9.12.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-100. - Fighting by agreement. 
    It is unlawful for two (2) or more persons, without deadly weapons, to fight by agreement in a public place, except in a sporting event authorized by law. 
(Prior code 9.12.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-105. - Hours of operation of licensed premises. 
(a)  The words and phrases used in this Section and in Sections 9-12-110 and 9-12-120 shall have the meanings set forth in the Colorado statutes regulating the sale of liquor and fermented malt beverages, Title 44, Articles 3, 4 and 5, C.R.S., or if not otherwise defined by law, are used in their common, ordinary and accepted sense and meaning. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person who holds a tavern license for the sale of malt, vinous and spirituous liquors to permit any person, other than the owner, manager or employees of the licensed premises or the members of any law enforcement agency, to be on the licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day. 
(Prior code 9.12.105; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 07 ,  2, 2018) 
Sec. 9-12-110. - Alcoholic beverages in certain places. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to drink any malt, vinous or spirituous liquors upon any streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public place in the City, in any automobile or on the grounds or in the facilities of any public or private school, college or university except where authorized by the governing authority of such institution. 
(b)  No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages in or on any of the above enumerated places. 
(c)  The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to any place duly licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Prior code 9.12.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-120. - Open container. 
    It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume by open container any alcoholic beverage, whether such possession is actual or constructive, within the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle or while seated on a motorcycle, while such vehicle is parked or traveling on a public street or public parking lot or while such vehicle is in motion. This Section shall not apply to any person transporting not more than one (1) opened and resealed container of partially consumed vinous liquor in accordance with Section 44-3-423, C.R.S. 
(Prior code 9.12.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 07 ,  3, 2018) 
Sec. 9-12-122. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate: any provision of Article 4, Colorado Beer Code, Article 3, Colorado Liquor Code, or Article 5, Special Event Liquor Permits, of Title 44, C.R.S.; any rule or regulation of the Colorado Department of Revenue promulgated pursuant to such statutes; or any regulation contained in the City beer and liquor regulations, as amended. 
(b)  Violations of this Section shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not more than two thousand six hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) or by imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  This Section shall not apply to any underage person who is expressly authorized by the Police Department to attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain alcoholic beverages as part of a police investigation or other police operation. 
(d)  The penalties contained in this Section are distinct from, and may be imposed in addition to, any proceedings or penalties relating to the suspension or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license. 
(Prior code 9.12.122; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 8, 2013; Ord. 07 ,  4, 2018) 
Sec. 9-12-125. - Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. 
(a)  For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Establishment means a business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal organization, club, institution, entity, group or residence, and any real property, including buildings and improvements connected therewith, and shall also include any members, employees and occupants associated therewith. 
    Ethyl alcohol means any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol. 
    Possession of ethyl alcohol means that a person has or holds any amount of ethyl alcohol anywhere on his or her person or that a person owns or has custody of ethyl alcohol or has ethyl alcohol within his or her immediate presence and control. 
    Private property means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person for habitation and which is not open to the public, and privately owned real property which is not open to the public. Private property shall not include: 
a.  Any establishment which has or is required to have a license pursuant to Articles 3, 4 and 5 of Title 44, C.R.S. 
b.  Any establishment which sells alcoholic beverages or upon which alcoholic beverages are sold; or 
c.  Any establishment which leases, rents or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. 
(b)  Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age who possesses or consumes ethyl alcohol commits illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
(c)  Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol (alcoholic beverages) by an underage person shall be punished by a fine of not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). The Court, upon sentencing a defendant pursuant to this Subsection, may, in addition to any fine, order that the defendant perform useful public service and may further order that the defendant submit to and complete an alcohol evaluation or assessment, an alcohol education program or an alcohol treatment program, at such defendant's own expense. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in Subsections (b) and (c) hereof that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age under the following circumstances: 
(1)  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property, and the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed with the consent of his or her parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; or 
(2)  When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed by Section 25-5-410 (i)(I)(II), C.R.S., or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of ethyl alcohol by weight. 
(e)  The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol shall not constitute a violation of this Section, if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(f)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of Subsections (a) and (b) hereof shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol anywhere in the City; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment. 
(g)  During any trial for a violation of Subsections (b) and (c) hereof, any bottle, can or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol" or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can or other container was composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. 
(h)  A parent or legal guardian of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age or any natural person who has the permission of such parent or legal guardian, may give, or permit the possession and consumption of, ethyl alcohol to or by a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years under the conditions described in Paragraph (d)(1) hereof. This Subsection shall not be construed to permit any establishment which is or is required to be licensed pursuant to Articles 3, 4 or 5 of Title 44, C.R.S., or any members, employees or occupants of any such establishment to give, provide, make available or sell ethyl alcohol to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(i)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit or preclude prosecution for any offense pursuant to Article 3, 4 or 5 of Title 44, C.R.S., except as provided in such Articles. 
(j)  The qualitative result of an alcohol test or tests shall be admissible at the trial of any person charged with a violation of Subsection (b) or (c) hereof upon a showing that the device or devices used to conduct such test or tests have been approved as accurate in detecting alcohol by the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(k)  Official records of the Department of Public Health and Environment relating to the certification of breath test instruments, certification of operators and operator instructors of breath test instruments, certification of standard solutions and certification of laboratories shall be official records of the City or State. Copies of such records, attested by the Executive Director of the Department of Public Health and Environment or his or her deputy and accompanied by a certificate bearing the official seal for said department, which state that the Executive Director of the Department has custody of such records, shall be admissible in court and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the information contained in such records. The official seal of the Department described in this Subsection may consist of a rubber stamp producing a facsimile of the seal stamped upon the document. 
(l)  In any judicial proceeding in the Municipal Court concerning a charge under Subsection (c) hereof, the court shall take judicial notice of methods of testing a person's blood, breath, saliva or urine for the presence of alcohol and of the design and operation of devices certified by the Department of Public Health and Environment for testing a person's blood, breath, saliva or urine for the presence of alcohol. This Subsection shall not prevent the necessity of establishing, during a trial, that the testing devices were working properly and that such testing devices were properly operated. Nothing in this Subsection shall preclude a defendant from offering evidence concerning the accuracy of testing devices. 
(Prior code 9.12.125; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 07 ,  5, 2018) 
Sec. 9-12-130. - Possession of marijuana, marijuana products and marijuana accessories. 
(a)  The following terms have the following meanings for purposes of this Code: 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. Marijuana does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or other product. 
    Marijuana accessories means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
    Marijuana product means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments and tinctures. 
    Openly and publicly means in a manner perceptible by or in a place accessible to the members of the community. 
    Public area or building means an area or buildings and facilities owned or under the control of the City and includes, but is not limited to, public buildings, streets, roads, highways, parks, playgrounds, trails and open space areas. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess, transfer, transport or purchase marijuana products, marijuana accessories or less than one (1) ounce of marijuana. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older to possess, transfer, transport or purchase less than one (1) ounce of marijuana, marijuana products or marijuana accessories for any reason other than personal use unless the person has obtained a current, valid license to operate a marijuana product manufacturing facility, testing facility, cultivation facility or retail marijuana store or is acting in his or her capacity as an owner, employee or agent of a licensed manufacturing, testing, cultivation or retail marijuana facility. 
(d)  It is unlawful for a person of any age to consume marijuana openly and publicly or in a manner that endangers others. 
(e)  It is unlawful to make marijuana grown for personal use available for sale in any manner. 
(f)  It is unlawful to possess, use, display, transfer, sell, transport, grow or purchase marijuana products, marijuana accessories or less than one (1) ounce of marijuana in any public area or building, except that marijuana or marijuana products may be transported on public streets, roads and highways if the person has obtained a current, valid license to operate a marijuana product manufacturing facility, testing facility, cultivation facility or retail marijuana store or is acting in his or her capacity as an owner, employee or agent of a licensed manufacturing, testing, cultivation or retail marijuana facility. 
(Prior code 9.12.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 43 1, 2012) 
Sec. 9-12-140. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  As used in this Section, the term drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the laws of the State. Drug paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances under the circumstances in violation of the laws of the State. 
(2)  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
(3)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana. 
(4)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
(5)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
(6)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
(7)  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls. 
b.  Water pipes. 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials. 
g.  Chamber pipes. 
h.  Carburetor pipes. 
i.  Electric pipes. 
j.  Air-driven pipes. 
k.  Chillums. 
l.  Bongs. 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(b)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a Court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
(2)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
(3)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
(4)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, or evidence that such person reasonably should know that it will be delivered to persons who he or she knows or reasonably should know, could use the object to facilitate a violation of this Division. 
(5)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 
(6)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use. 
(7)  National or local advertising concerning its use. 
(8)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
(9)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a supplier of like or related items to the community for legal purposes, such as an authorized distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
(10)  The existence and scope of legal uses for the object in the community. 
(11)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
In the event a case brought pursuant to this Section is tried before a jury, the Court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on issues raised pursuant to this Section. Such hearing shall be conducted in camera . 
(c)  A person commits possession of drug paraphernalia if the person possesses drug paraphernalia and knows or reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation of the laws of the State. 
(Prior code 9.12.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-150. - Loitering in school areas. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, with intent to interfere with or disrupt the school program or with intent to interfere with or endanger school children, to loiter in a school building or on school grounds or within one hundred (100) feet of school grounds when persons under the age of eighteen (18) are present in the building or on the grounds, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of, or responsibility for, a pupil or any other specific, legitimate reason for being there, and having been asked to leave by a school administrator or his or her representative or by a police officer. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, the word loiter means to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay or wander about, or to remain, abide or tarry. 
(Prior code 9.12.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-160. - Disturbing religious worship. 
    It is unlawful for any person to disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly for religious worship by making a noise, by rude or indecent behavior or by profane discourse within their place of worship, or so near the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the congregation or assembly. 
(Prior code 9.12.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-170. - Urination and defecation in public. 
    It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate within public view, whether in or on public or private property, except in a room or area designated and equipped for such purposes. 
(Prior code 9.12.170; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-180. - Throwing objects at vehicles. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw or otherwise to propel any missile or other object at or against any vehicle or equipment designed for the transportation of persons or property. 
(Prior code 9.12.180; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-12-200. - Drug- and tobacco-free zones. 
(a)  All property, including without limitation park lands, streets, sidewalks and other rights-of-way, owned or controlled by the City or County and located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public elementary school property, middle school property or high school property within the City is declared to be a drug- and tobacco-free zone. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to use any cigarette, tobacco products, as that term is defined by Section 39-28.5-101(5), C.R.S., or controlled substance, as that term is defined by Section 18-18-102(5), C.R.S., within any drug- and tobacco-free zone. 
(c)  Violations of this Section shall be punishable by a mandatory minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00), together with a mandatory minimum sentence of twenty-four (24) hours of useful community service; provided, however, that the twenty-four (24) hours of useful community service shall be reduced by two (2) hours for every one (1) hour spent in attendance at a City-approved drug or tobacco addiction or abuse program. 
(Prior code 9.12.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 13 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 14 - Smoking in Public Places 

Sec. 9-14-10. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this Article to protect the public health, safety and welfare by prohibiting smoking and the use of e-cigarettes and personal vaporizers in most indoor and outdoor areas open to the public, public meetings, food service establishments and places of employment within the City. 
(Prior code 8.28.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 01 1 , 2016) 
Sec. 9-14-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Auditorium means the part of a public building where an audience gathers to attend a performance, and includes any corridors, hallways or lobbies adjacent thereto. 
    Bar means any indoor area that is operated and licensed under Title 44, Article 3, C.R.S., primarily for the sale and service of alcohol beverages for on-premises consumption and where the service of food is secondary to the consumption of such beverages. 
    Cigar-tobacco bar means a bar that, in the calendar year ending December 31, 2005, generated at least five percent (5%) or more of its total annual gross income or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in annual sales from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors, not including any sales from vending machines. 
Electronic smoking device means any electronic oral device such as one (1) composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit which provides a vapor of nicotine, vapor of a solution including nicotine, or aerosol of a solution including nicotine, or any other substance, including marijuana, for inhalation. This term shall include every variation and type of such devices whether they are manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pen, an electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, vape mod or any other product name or descriptor for such devices. The term "electronic smoking device" does not include any device specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for any medical purpose, when such a device is being marketed and sold solely for such approved purpose. 
    Employee means any person who performs any type of work for benefit of another in consideration of direct or indirect wages or profit or provides uncompensated work or services to a business or nonprofit entity, and includes every person described in this definition, regardless of whether such person is referred to as an employee, contractor, independent contractor, volunteer or by any other designation or title. 
    Employer means any person, partnership, association, corporation or nonprofit entity that employs one (1) or more persons, and includes without limitation the legislative, executive and judicial branches of state government; any county, City and county, City, town or instrumentality thereof or any other political subdivision of the State, special district, authority, commission or agency; or any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of state or local government. 
    Entryway means the outside of the front or main doorway leading into a building or facility that is not exempted under Section 9-14-40, including the area of public or private property within a fifteen-foot radius outside of the doorway. 
    Environmental smoke or secondhand smoke means the complex mixture formed from the escaping smoke of a burning tobacco or marijuana product, also known as side stream smoke, and smoke exhaled by the smoker and includes ultrafine particles and potentially carcinogenic hydrocarbons released into the air from electronic smoking devices. 
    Food service establishment means any indoor area or portion thereof in which the principal business is the sale of food for on-premises consumption, including without limitation restaurants, cafeterias, coffee shops, diners, sandwich shops and short-order cafes. 
    Indoor area means any enclosed area or portion thereof, provided that the opening of windows or doors, or the temporary removal of wall panels, does not convert an indoor area into an outdoor area. 
    Local authority means the City or any instrumentality thereof. 
    Place of employment means any indoor area or portion thereof under the control of an employer in which employees of the employer perform services for, or on behalf of, the employer. 
    Proprietor means the owner, operator or person in charge of any place regulated by this Article. 
    Public building means any building owned or operated by the State, the City or any instrumentality thereof or any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of state or local government. 
    Public meeting means any meeting open to the public, pursuant to Section 24-6-401, et seq., C.R.S., or any other law of this State. 
    Smoke-free work area means an indoor area in a place of employment where smoking is prohibited. 
    Smoking means the burning of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or any other matter or substance that contains tobacco, nicotine or marijuana and includes the use of electronic smoking devices or electronic nicotine delivery systems. 
    Tobacco means cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies and periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff and snuff flour; Cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobacco; shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or for smoking in a cigarette, pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking; and cloves and any other plant matter or product that is packaged for smoking. 
    Tobacco business means a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership or other enterprise engaged primarily in the sale, manufacture or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco smoking devices or accessories, either at wholesale or retail, and in which the sale, manufacture or promotion of other products is merely incidental. 
    Work area means an area in a place of employment where one (1) or more employees are routinely assigned and perform services for or on behalf of their employer. 
(Prior code 8.28.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 01  2 , 2016; Ord. 07 ,  6, 2018) 
Sec. 9-14-30. - General smoking restrictions. 
(a)  Except as provided in Section 9-14-40, to reduce the levels of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, smoking shall not be permitted, and no person shall smoke in any indoor or outdoor area, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Public meeting places. 
(2)  Elevators. 
(3)  Government-owned or -operated means of mass transportation, including but not limited to buses, vans and trains. 
(4)  Taxicabs and limousines, and vehicles when used for public transportation of children or adults for day care or health care. 
(5)  Grocery stores. 
(6)  Gymnasiums. 
(7)  Jury waiting and deliberation rooms. 
(8)  Courtrooms. 
(9)  Child day care facilities. 
(10)  Health care facilities, including hospitals, health care clinics, doctor's offices and other health care-related facilities. 
(11)  Any place of employment that is not exempted, provided that in the case of employers who own facilities otherwise exempted, each such employer shall provide a smoke-free work area for each employee requesting not to have to breathe environmental tobacco smoke, and every employee shall have a right to work in an area free of environmental tobacco smoke. 
(12)  Food service establishments. 
(13)  Bars. 
(14)  Indoor sports arenas. 
(15)  Restrooms, lobbies, hallways and other common areas in public and private buildings, condominiums and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(16)  Restrooms, lobbies, hallways and other common areas in hotels and motels and in at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel or motel that are rented to guests. 
(17)  Bowling alleys. 
(18)  Billiard or pool halls. 
(19)  Facilities in which games of chance are conducted. 
(20)  The common areas of retirement facilities, publicly owned housing facilities and nursing homes, not including any resident's private residential quarters. 
(21)  Public buildings, public outdoor plazas, public transit waiting areas, public parks and public trails. 
(22)  Auditoria, including outdoor entertainment venues and amphitheaters. 
(23)  Theaters. 
(24)  Museums. 
(25)  Libraries. 
(26)  To the extent not otherwise provided in Section 25-14-103.5, C.R.S., public and nonpublic schools. 
(27)  Other educational and vocational institutions. 
(28)  Within fifteen (15) feet of the entryways of all buildings and facilities listed in Subsections (1) through (27) hereof. 
(b)  A cigar-tobacco bar shall not expand its size or change its location from the size and location in which it existed as of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein. A cigar-tobacco bar shall display signage in at least one (1) conspicuous place and at least four (4) inches by six (6) inches in size stating: 
SMOKING AND VAPING ALLOWED. 
CHILDREN UNDER EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE MUST BE ACCOMPANIED BY A 
PARENT OR GUARDIAN. 
(Prior code 8.28.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 01 3 , 2016) 
Sec. 9-14-40. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from Section 9-14-30: 
(1)  Private homes, private residences and private automobiles, except that this exception shall not apply if any such home, residence or vehicle is being used for child care or day care or if a private vehicle is being used for the public transportation of children or as part of health care or day care transportation. 
(2)  Limousines under private hire. 
(3)  A hotel or motel room, if the total percentage of such hotel or motel rooms in such hotel or motel does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%). 
(4)  Any retail tobacco business. 
(5)  A cigar-tobacco bar. 
(6)  The outdoor area of any business unless otherwise prohibited. 
(7)  A place of employment that is not open to the public and is under the control of an employer that employs three (3) or fewer employees. 
(8)  A private, nonresidential building on a farm or ranch, as defined in Section 39-1-102, C.R.S., that has an annual gross income of less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(Prior code 8.28.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 01 4 , 2016) 
Sec. 9-14-50. - Signage. 
(a)  The owner or manager of any place not specifically listed in Section 9-14-30, including a place otherwise exempted under Section 9-14-40, may post signs prohibiting smoking or providing smoking and nonsmoking areas. Such posting shall have the effect of including such place, or the designated nonsmoking portion thereof, in the places where smoking is prohibited or restricted pursuant to Section 9-14-30. 
(b)  If the owner or manager of a place not specifically listed in Section 9-14-30, including a place otherwise exempted under Section 9-14-40, is an employer and receives a request from an employee to create a smoke-free work area as contemplated by Section 9-14-30, the owner or manager shall post a sign or signs in the smoke-free work area as provided in Subsection (a) hereof. 
(Prior code 8.28.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-14-60. - Complaints. 
    Any person may register a complaint with the Police Department regarding smoking in areas in which smoking is prohibited under this Article. 
(Prior code 8.28.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-14-70. - Possession of tobacco products and electronic smoking devices. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor to possess any tobacco product or electronic smoking device at any place, public or private, within the City. 
(b)  Any minor convicted of having violated this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each separate offense. 
( Ord. 01  5 , 2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. 01,  5 , adopted in 2016, amended  9-14-70 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former  9-14-70 pertained to possession of tobacco products, and derived from prior code 8.28.070 and Ord. 32  1, adopted in 2011. 
Sec. 9-14-80. - Unlawful acts; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this Article. 
(b)  Other than as provided in Section 9-14-70, violations of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). In determining the sentence to be imposed, the Municipal Judge shall consider the frequency and duration of the violation, the size of the establishment, whether the violation was knowingly made and any other relevant factor. Each day of continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Prior code 8.28.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 15 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 16 - Property 

Sec. 9-16-10. - Injuring or destroying public property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or wantonly injure or destroy real property or improvements thereto, or moveable or personal property, belonging to the City or any other public entity. 
(Prior code 9.16.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-16-20. - Injuring or destroying private property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or wantonly injure or destroy real property or improvements thereto, or moveable or personal property, belonging to any person, persons, corporation, partnership or association. 
(Prior code 9.16.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-16-30. - Trespassing. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to enter in or upon or remain upon the premises of another which are fenced or otherwise enclosed in a manner designated to exclude intruders. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in or upon the premises of another without the consent of the person lawfully in possession of the property or his or her agent. 
(c)  It shall be prima facie evidence that the owner, occupant or person in charge of the property has not consented to entry upon or presence upon said property if the premises are enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders, or fenced, or posted with signs indicating that trespassing is not allowed. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon any property to which limited access has been granted, unless for such purpose for which access is permitted by the owner, occupant or person in charge of the property. Access may be limited for the purpose of trading at or visiting a place of business of the owner or occupant, access for the purpose of visiting a resident on the property or access to certain hours of the day. Limited access may be designated by posting of signs or by oral or written notice. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to operate, launch, or land a small unmanned aircraft system on or from private property without the prior consent of the person lawfully in possession of the property or his or her agent. For purposes of this Section, small unmanned aircraft system means an aircraft weighing less than fifty-five (55) pounds inclusive of payload and attached systems and components operated without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. 
(Prior code 9.16.030; Ord. 28 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 03 ,  2, 2018) 
Sec. 9-16-70. - Injury or removal of street signs. 
    It is unlawful for any person, without proper authorization, to remove, deface, injure or destroy any street sign or sign erected or placed in or adjacent to any street indicating the name of such street. 
(Prior code 9.16.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-16-80. - Destroying posters or signs. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or wantonly tear down, deface or cover up any posted advertisement or sign when it is posted in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Prior code 9.16.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-16-100. - Throwing handbills and posters upon public streets or grounds. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw any posters, dodgers, circulars, bills, letters, envelopes, samples or devices upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or public grounds of the City. 
(Prior code 9.16.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-16-110. - Arson. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly set fire to, burn, cause to be burned, or by the use of an explosive damage or destroy or cause to be damaged or destroyed any property of another without his or her consent, where the value of the property involved is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Prior code 9.16.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-16-120. - Theft. 
    It is unlawful for any person knowingly to obtain or exercise control over anything of a value of less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) of another person without authorization, or by threat or deception, or knowing such thing of such value to have been stolen, when the person who so obtains or exercises control over such things of such value: 
(1)  Intends to deprive such other person permanently of the use or benefit of such thing of value; 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons such thing of value in such a manner as to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the same; 
(3)  Uses, conceals or abandons such thing of value, intending that the use, concealment or abandonment will deprive such other person permanently of the use or benefit of the same; or 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which such person is not legally entitled, as a condition of restoring such thing of value to the other person. 
(Prior code 9.16.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 1, 2013) 
Sec. 9-16-130. - Shoplifting. 
    It is unlawful for any person to intentionally conceal or otherwise carry away, or knowingly aid another to conceal or otherwise carry away, unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment with the intent to avoid payment therefor and to permanently deprive the store or mercantile establishment of the benefit of the unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise; provided, however, that the aggregate value of such unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise shall be less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Prior code 9.16.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 2, 2013) 
Sec. 9-16-140. - Price switching. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully alter, remove or switch the indicated price of any unpurchased goods, wares or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or other mercantile establishment; provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to goods, wares or merchandise of a value of more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Prior code 9.16.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 3, 2013) 
Sec. 9-16-150. - Receiving stolen property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to receive, retain, loan money by pawn or pledge on or dispose of anything of value of another, knowing or believing that such thing of value has been stolen and when such person intends to deprive the lawful owner permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value, where the value of the thing involved is less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Prior code 9.16.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 4, 2013) 
Sec. 9-16-160. - Theft of personal rental property. 
    It is unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To obtain the temporary use of personal property of another, which is available only for hire and which has a value of less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), by means of threat or deception, or knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the personal property; or 
(2)  Having lawfully obtained possession for temporary use of the personal property of another, which property is available only for hire and which property has a value of less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), to knowingly fail to reveal the whereabouts of or to return such property to the owner thereof or his or her representative or to the person from whom he or she has received it within seventy-two (72) hours after the time at which he or she agreed to return it. 
(Prior code 9.16.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 5, 2013) 
Sec. 9-16-170. - Damaging real or personal property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly damage the real or personal property of one (1) or more persons in the course of a single criminal episode where such aggregate damage to the real or personal property is less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Prior code 9.16.170; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 6, 2013) 
Sec. 9-16-180. - Fraudulent checks. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, knowing he or she has insufficient funds with the drawee, and with intent to defraud, to issue a check for a sum less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for the payment of services, wages, salary, commission, labor, rent, money, property or other thing of value. 
(b)  For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Check means a written, unconditional order to pay a sum certain in money, drawn on a bank or other financial institution, payable on demand and signed by the drawer and also includes a negotiable order of withdrawal and a share draft. 
    Drawee means the bank upon which a check is drawn, or a bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or credit union on which a negotiable order of withdrawal or a share draft is drawn. 
    Drawer means a person, either real or fictitious, whose name appears on a check as the primary obligor, whether the actual signature is that of himself, herself or of a person authorized to draw the check on himself or herself. 
    Insufficient funds means a drawer has insufficient funds with the drawee to pay a check when the drawer has no checking account, negotiable order of withdrawal account or share draft account with the drawee, or has funds in such an account with the drawee in an amount less than the amount of the check plus the amount of all other checks outstanding at the time of issuance; and a check dishonored for no account shall also be deemed to be dishonored for insufficient funds. 
    Issue means making, drawing, delivering or passing a check or causing it to be made, drawn, delivered or passed. 
    Negotiable order of withdrawal and share draft mean negotiable or transferable instruments drawn on a negotiable order of withdrawal account or a share draft account, as the case may be, for the purpose of making payment to third persons or otherwise. 
    Negotiable order of withdrawal account means an account in a bank, savings and loan association or industrial bank. 
    Share draft account means an account in a credit union on which payment of interest or dividends may be made on a deposit with respect to which the bank, savings and loan association, industrial bank or the credit union, as the case may be, may require the depositor to give notice of an intended withdrawal not less than thirty (30) days before the withdrawal is made, even though in practice such notice is not required, and the depositor is allowed to make withdrawal by negotiable order of withdrawal or share draft. 
(c)  Any person having acquired rights with respect to a check which is not paid because the drawer has insufficient funds shall have standing to file a complaint under this Section, whether or not he or she is the payee, holder or bearer of the check. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to open a checking account, negotiable order of withdrawal account or share draft account using false identification or an assumed name for the purpose of issuing fraudulent checks. 
(e)  If deferred prosecution is ordered for a violation under this Section, the Court, as a condition of supervision, may require the defendant to make restitution on all checks issued by the defendant which are unpaid as of the date of commencement of the supervision, in addition to other terms and conditions appropriate for the treatment or rehabilitation of the defendant. 
(f)  A bank, a savings and loan association, an industrial bank or a credit union shall not be civilly or criminally liable for releasing information relating to the drawer's account to a police officer or authorized investigator for the Police Department investigating or prosecuting a charge under this Section. 
(g)  This Section does not relieve the prosecution from the necessity of establishing the required culpable mental state. However, for purposes of this Section, the issuer's knowledge of insufficient funds is presumed, except in the case of a postdated check or order, if: 
(1)  He or she has no account upon which the check or order is drawn with the bank or other drawee at the time he or she issues the check or order; or 
(2)  He or she has insufficient funds upon deposit with the bank or other drawee to pay the check or order, on presentation within thirty (30) days after issue. 
(Prior code 9.16.180; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 7, 2013) 
Sec. 9-16-190. - Obstructing traffic. 
    It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, in any manner, any sidewalk, public highway, street or alley in the City or, for the purpose of annoyance or mischief, to place in any doorway or driveway or on any sidewalk, public highway, street or alley in the City any box, barrel, cask or other things. 
(Prior code 9.16.190; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-16-200. - Interfering with use of streets or sidewalks. 
    It is unlawful for any person, alone or in a group or assemblage of persons, whose standing, remaining or congregation on any public highway, street, alley or sidewalk in the City shall obstruct, interfere with or prevent the free and unobstructed and reasonable use of that public highway, street, alley or sidewalk by any other person, to fail or refuse to yield to the reasonable use or passage of any other person on that public highway, street, alley or sidewalk, or to fail or refuse to move on, disperse or cease such obstruction or interference immediately upon being so ordered by any peace officer. 
(Prior code 9.16.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-16-210. - Joyriding. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly obtain or exercise control over the motor vehicle of another without authorization or by threat or deception and to retain possession or control of such motor vehicle of another for a period of less than seventy-two (72) hours. 
(b)  This Section shall not apply in situations where a person knowingly obtains or exercises control over the motor vehicle of another without authorization and such person: 
(1)  Attempts to alter or disguise or alters or disguises the appearance of the motor vehicle; 
(2)  Attempts to alter or remove or alters or removes the vehicle identification number; 
(3)  Uses the motor vehicle in the commission of a crime other than a traffic offense; 
(4)  Causes five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more property damage in the exercise of control of the motor vehicle; 
(5)  Causes bodily injury to another person while he or she is in the exercise of control of the motor vehicle; 
(6)  Removes the motor vehicle from the State for a period of time in excess of forty-eight (48) hours; 
(7)  Unlawfully attaches, or otherwise displays in or upon the motor vehicle, license plates other than those officially issued for the motor vehicle; or 
(8)  Has been twice previously convicted of charges separately brought or tried either in the State or elsewhere of an offense involving theft of a motor vehicle under the laws of the State, any other state, the United States or any territory subject to the jurisdiction of the United States. 
(c)  As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Motor vehicle means all vehicles of whatever description propelled by any power other than muscular, except vehicles running on rails. 
    Vehicle identification number means the serial number placed upon the motor vehicle by the manufacturer thereof or assigned to the motor vehicle by the Department of Revenue. 
(Prior code 9.16.210; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-16-220. - Solicitation on streets and highways. 
(a)  The purpose of this Section is to prevent dangers to persons and property, to prevent delays and to avoid interference with the traffic flow on streets, roadways and highways within the City. Roadways that have center medians often are designed to deal with specific traffic flow problems. Any delay or distraction may interfere with traffic planning. Sometimes persons stand near intersections and near traffic lights to contact drivers or passengers in cars or other vehicles that are passing or that are stopped temporarily due to traffic lights or other traffic stoppages. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to solicit either employment, business, contributions or sales of any kind, or to collect moneys for the same or any one of the same, from the driver or any occupant of any vehicle travelling upon any street, roadway or highway within the City when such solicitation or collection: 
(1)  Causes the person performing the solicitation, sale or collection activity to enter onto the traveled portion of a street, roadway or highway; 
(2)  Involves the person performing the solicitation, sale or collection activity to be located upon any median area which separates traffic lanes for vehicular travel in opposite directions; or 
(3)  The person performing the solicitation, sale or collection activity is located such that vehicles cannot move into a legal parking area to safely conduct the transaction. 
(c)  For purposes of the section, the traveled portion of the street, roadway or highway shall mean that portion of the street, roadway or highway surface normally used by moving motor vehicle traffic. 
(Prior code 12.30.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 17 - Targeted Residential Picketing 

Sec. 9-17-10. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The City finds and determines that: 
(1)  The practice of targeted residential picketing has the potential to incite breaches of the peace and may negatively affect the safety of the residents of those areas in which the targeted residential picketing occurs. 
(2)  Many opportunities exist for individuals to exercise their important free speech rights in the City and to communicate their message without resorting to targeted residential picketing, such as picketing in front of City Hall and other government buildings, picketing on sidewalks in commercial areas, picketing in public parks and open space, residential solicitation, canvassing and proselytizing. 
(3)  Targeted residential picketing harasses and intimidates the residents of the targeted homes, their neighbors and their guests, rendering them captive audiences, causing them emotional distress and making them fearful of going outside and enjoying the neighborhood. 
(4)  Targeted residential picketing is inherently and unreasonably offensive to and intrusive upon residents' right to privacy in their homes. 
(5)  Targeted residential picketing is especially harmful and unreasonable because it forces the residents of the targeted home and their neighbors into the role of a captive audience for the message of the picketers while the residents and neighbors are in their private homes, a location in which the residents and their neighbors have the highest constitutional interest in being free from unwanted intrusions. 
(6)  The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the particularly harmful effects of targeted residential picketing on captive audiences and the Colorado Supreme Court has recognized the particularly intrusive nature of speech to captive audiences. 
(7)  Targeted residential picketing that occurs after dark or early in the morning increases the intrusion on the privacy and sanctity of the home, is particularly harassing and intimidating and increases the potential for breaches of the peace. 
(8)  Picketers' interests in conducting targeted residential picketing after dark is greatly reduced because the signs held by picketers are less visible, the picketers themselves are less visible and the communicative value of the picketing activity is significantly diminished. 
(9)  Unlike residential solicitation, in which individuals use the sidewalks, streets and public rights-of-way temporarily to access private residences, individuals conducting targeted picketing remain on the sidewalks, streets and public rights-of-way, which after dark results in a substantially heightened risk of traffic conflicts between picketers and vehicles on the streets. 
(10)  The carrying of signs of a certain size on sidewalks, streets and public rights-of-way in residential areas would block or inhibit the free movement of individuals on such sidewalks, streets and public rights-of-way. 
(11)  This Article, which imposes reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on the practice of targeted residential picketing, is the least intrusive method for the City to prevent the substantial negative effects of targeted residential picketing. 
(b)  Based on the foregoing findings, the purpose of this Article is to protect and preserve the sanctity of the home and residents' privacy rights in their homes, including allowing citizens to enjoy a feeling of well-being, tranquility and privacy in their homes and neighborhoods, without suppressing free speech rights or any particular viewpoint. 
(Ord. 39 1, 2007; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-17-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    One (1) block of a street means six hundred sixty (660) linear feet, one (1) way, of a street or combination of streets, including the adjacent sidewalks, and shall be measured by reference to the centerline of the streets along the route being marched. 
    Residence means any single-family or multi-family dwelling unit that is not being used as any occupant's sole place of business or as a place for public meeting. 
    Residential area means any area in which residential uses are permitted under Chapter 16 of this Code. 
    Targeted residential picketing means picketing, with or without signs, that is specifically directed towards a residence or one (1) or more occupants of the residence and which takes place on that portion of a sidewalk, street or public right-of-way in front of the residence, in front of an adjoining residence or on either side of the residence. 
(Ord. 39 1, 2007; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-17-30. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in targeted residential picketing before 7:00 a.m. or after the earlier of 7:00 p.m. or sunset, as announced and published daily by the National Weather Service. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in targeted residential picketing, except when such person is engaging in targeted residential picketing while marching, without stopping in front of a residence, over a route that proceeds along the entire one-way length of at least one (1) block of a street. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to hold, carry or otherwise display on his or her person a sign, while on a street, sidewalk or public right-of-way in a residential area, that does not comply with the following restrictions, except that such restrictions shall not apply to a person carrying a sign temporarily while transporting it between such person's residence or business and a vehicle: 
(1)  The sign shall not exceed two (2) feet in width and three (3) square feet in total area; and 
(2)  No person shall carry, hold or otherwise display more than one (1) sign. 
(Ord. 39 1, 2007; Ord. 04 2, 2008; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-17-40. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Before a person may be charged with a first offense of a violation of this Article, the person shall have been ordered by a law enforcement official, on at least one (1) occasion prior thereto, to move or disperse or to take other appropriate action to comply with this Article and shall have failed to promptly comply with the warning. 
(b)  To ensure that proper warning has been given, the Police Department shall maintain a written record indicating the name of each warned individual, the address of each targeted residence and the date and time of each warning. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of this Article shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 1-4-20. 
(Ord. 39 1, 2007; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 18 - Fireworks 

Sec. 9-18-10. - Compliance required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell, explode or have in his or her possession with intent to offer for sale, sell, use or explode any fireworks within the City, except as provided in this Article. 
(Prior code 8.08.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-18-20. - Fireworks defined. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Fireworks means any article, device or substance prepared for the primary purpose of producing a visual or auditory sensation by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, including without limitation the following articles and devices commonly known and used as fireworks: toy cannons or toy canes in which explosives are used, blank cartridges, the type of balloon which requires fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, rockets, Roman candles, Day-Glo bombs and torches or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance. 
    Fireworks does not include: 
a.  Toy caps which do not contain more than twenty-five hundredths (0.025) of a grain of explosive compound per cap. 
b.  Sparklers, trick matches, cigarette loads, trick noisemakers, toy smoke devices and novelty auto alarms. 
c.  Highway flares, railway fuses, ship distress signals, smoke candles and other emergency signal devices. 
(Prior code 8.08.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-18-30. - Public display of fireworks. 
    No person shall conduct a public display of fireworks within the City without having first obtained a permit to do so from South Metro Fire Rescue or Littleton Fire Protection District as appropriate. A copy of the permit shall be filed with the Police Department prior to the commencement of the fireworks display. 
(Prior code 8.08.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-18-40. - Sale of display fireworks; license required. 
    No person shall sell or offer to sell at retail within the City any fireworks which are to be used for display purposes within the State, until said person first obtains a license to do so from the Secretary of State and a sales tax license from the City. 
(Prior code 8.08.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-18-50. - Seizure of fireworks for violations. 
    The Police Department shall seize, take and remove, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this Article. 
(Prior code 8.08.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-18-60. - Violation; penalty. 
    It is unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this Article. Any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Article shall be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum fine allowed under Chapter 1 of this Code or by imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code 8.08.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11 8, 2013) 
ARTICLE 19 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 20 - Weapons 

Sec. 9-20-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Ballistic knife means any knife that has a blade which is forcefully projected from the handle by means of a spring-loaded device or explosive charge. 
    Blackjack means any billy, sand club, sandbag or other hand-operated striking weapon consisting, at the striking end, of an encased piece of lead or other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or springy shaft which increases the force of the impact. 
    Concealed means worn underneath clothing or on or about a person in a manner intended to prevent discovery or fully or partially obscured from ordinary observation. 
    Concealed handgun permit means a permit to carry a concealed handgun issued by a sheriff under state law, and includes temporary permits. 
    Dangerous weapon means a firearm silencer, machine gun, short shotgun, short rifle or ballistic knife. 
    Deadly weapon means any of the following, which in the manner it is used or intended to be used, is capable of producing death or serious bodily injury: a firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, whether capable or incapable of being fired; a knife; a bludgeon; a nunchaku; a throwing star; or any other weapon, device, instrument, material or substance, whether animate or inanimate. 
    Firearm means any handgun, automatic, revolver, pistol, rifle, shotgun or other instrument or device capable of or intended to be capable of discharging bullets, cartridges or other explosive charges, excluding gas guns. 
    Firearm silencer means any instrument, attachment, weapon or appliance for causing the firing of any gun, revolver, pistol or other firearm to be silent or intended to lessen or muffle the noise of the firing of any such weapon. 
    Gas gun means a device designed for projecting gas-filled projectiles which release their contents after having been projected from the device, and includes projectiles designed for use in such a device. 
    Gravity knife means any knife that has a blade released from the handle or sheath thereof by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force, that when released is locked in place by means of a button, spring, lever or other device. 
    Handgun means a pistol, revolver or other firearm of any description, loaded or unloaded, from which any shot, bullet or other missile can be discharged, the length of the barrel of which, not including any revolving, detachable or magazine breech does not exceed twelve (12) inches. 
    Illegal weapon means a blackjack, gas gun, metallic or nonmetallic knuckles, gravity knife or switchblade knife. 
    Juvenile means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
    Knife means any dagger, dirk, knife or stiletto with a blade over three and one-half (31/2) inches in length regardless of the manner in which it is used or intended to be used, or any other dangerous instrument capable of inflicting cutting, stabbing or tearing wounds and which, in the manner it is used, is intended to produce bodily injury, but does not include a hunting or fishing knife carried for sports use, if such issue is raised as an affirmative defense. 
    Machine gun means any firearm, whatever its size and usual designation, which shoots automatically more than one (1) shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger. 
    Nunchaku means an instrument consisting of two (2) sticks, clubs, bars or rods to be used as handles, connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain, which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
    Peace officer has the meaning set forth in Section 16-2.5-101, C.R.S. 
    Public area or building means an area or building to which the public or a substantial number of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, roads, highways, transportation facilities, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds, trails, open space and the common areas of public and private buildings and facilities. 
    Sheriff means the sheriff of a county within the State or his or her designee, or the official who has the duties of a sheriff in a city and county within the State or his or her designee. 
    Shooting range means a place designed or constructed to permit the safe discharge of firearms or other deadly weapons in such a manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any ground or space outside the limits of such range, where provisions have been made for the safety of all persons in or about such place, and when the operation of such range has been authorized by the City. 
    Short rifle means a rifle having a barrel less than sixteen (16) inches long or an overall length of less than twenty-six (26) inches. 
    Short shotgun means a shotgun having a barrel or barrels less than eighteen (18) inches long or an overall length of less than twenty-six (26) inches. 
    Switchblade knife means any knife, the blade of which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in its handle. 
    Throwing star means a disk having sharp radiating points or any disk-shaped bladed object which is handheld and thrown and which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
    Unloaded means that there is no cartridge in the chamber of a handgun or that there is no cartridge in the cylinder of a revolver, or that a firearm and the ammunition therefor are not carried on the person or in such close proximity to the person that such person could readily gain access to the firearm and the ammunition and load the firearm. 
(Prior code 9.20.010; Ord. 07 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-20-20. - Possession of illegal or dangerous weapons. 
    It is unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an illegal weapon or a dangerous weapon in the City. 
(Prior code 9.20.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-20-30. - Possession of deadly weapons. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to possess any deadly weapon except as authorized by this Article, the State Constitution or the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(b)  It shall not be a violation of this Section if the person is: 
(1)  In his or her own dwelling or place of business or on property owned or under his or her control at the time of possession; 
(2)  In possession of a deadly weapon in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance for hunting or for the purpose of lawful protection of his or her person or property or another's person or property; 
(3)  In possession of a nunchaku or throwing star for the purpose of a public demonstration or exhibition or for a school or class which is transported in a closed container; or 
(4)  In possession of a valid written permit to carry the deadly weapon and carrying the deadly weapon in compliance with such permit. 
(Prior code 9.20.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-20-40. - Unlawful display. 
    It is unlawful for any person to display any deadly weapon in a boisterous or threatening manner, or in a public area or a place open to public view in a manner calculated to alarm, or to brandish or to aim any deadly weapon at any person. 
(Prior code 9.20.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-20-50. - Unlawful discharge. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within or into the City, except: 
(1)  At a shooting range. 
(2)  In a person's own dwelling or place of business. 
(3)  On property owned or under the control of the person at the time of the discharge. 
(4)  Provided that any and all discharged projectiles do not leave such premises and do not endanger other premises or persons. 
(b)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit the discharge of any firearm in such a manner as to disturb the peace. 
(Prior code 9.20.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-20-60. - Possession of handguns, pellet guns and BB guns by juveniles. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any juvenile to knowingly possess any handgun, pellet gun or BB gun in the City. 
(b)  This Section shall not apply to any juvenile who is, at the time of possession, in the company of an adult and: 
(1)  In attendance at a hunter's safety course or firearms safety course; 
(2)  At a shooting range or any other area where the discharge of a firearm is not prohibited; 
(3)  Engaging in an organized competition involving the use of a firearm, pellet gun or BB gun or participating in or practicing for a performance by an organized nonprofit group which uses firearms, pellet guns or BB guns as a part of such performance; 
(4)  Hunting or trapping pursuant to a valid hunting or trapping license; 
(5)  Traveling to or from any of the foregoing activities with any handgun, pellet gun or BB gun which is unloaded; or 
(6)  On real property under the control of such juvenile's parent, legal guardian or grandparent and who has the permission of such parent, legal guardian or grandparent to possess a handgun, pellet gun or BB gun. 
(c)  This Section shall not apply to any juvenile in possession of a handgun at such juvenile's residence and who, with the permission of such juvenile's parent or legal guardian, possesses the handgun for the purpose of exercising the rights recognized in Sections 18-1-704 or 18-1-704.5, C.R.S. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly provide a handgun, pellet gun or BB gun to a juvenile in violation of this Section, or for any person who knows of such juvenile's violation of this Section to fail to make reasonable efforts to prevent such violation. 
(Prior code 9.20.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-20-70. - Open carrying of firearms. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to openly carry any firearm in any public area or building in the City where there is posted at every public entrance to that public area or building a sign indicating that the open carrying of firearms is prohibited. 
(b)  Each sign shall contain a notice in substantially the following form with type that is at least one (1) inch in height: 
OPEN CARRYING OF FIREARMS IS 
PROHIBITED IN THIS PUBLIC (AREA OR 
BUILDING). VIOLATORS ARE SUBJECT TO A 
FINE OF UP TO THE MAXIMUM FINE 
ALLOWED UNDER CHAPTER 1 OF THE 
GREENWOOD VILLAGE MUNICIPAL CODE AND 
UP TO 180 DAYS IN JAIL. 
(c)  The City Manager shall determine which public areas and buildings where the open carrying of firearms will be prohibited. 
(Prior code 9.20.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11 9, 2013) 
Sec. 9-20-80. - Concealed deadly weapons. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to carry a concealed deadly weapon, except as expressly provided in this Article. 
(b)  It shall not be a violation of this Section if the person is: 
(1)  In his or her own dwelling or place of business, or on property owned or under his or her control at the time of the act of carrying. 
(2)  In a private automobile or other private means of conveyance and carrying a weapon for the purpose of hunting or for the lawful protection of his or her person or property or another's person or property while traveling. 
(3)  A United States probation officer or a United States pretrial services officer while on duty and serving in the State under the authority of rules and regulations promulgated by the judicial conference of the United States. 
(Prior code 9.20.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-20-90. - Concealed handguns. 
(a)  A person may carry a concealed handgun, if the person has a valid concealed handgun permit and the carrying of such concealed handgun is within the terms of such permit. 
(b)  A person who lawfully possesses a handgun may carry a handgun without a concealed handgun permit, and the handgun shall not be considered concealed, if: 
(1)  The person is in his or her own dwelling or place of business or on property owned or under his or her control at the time of carrying the concealed handgun; 
(2)  The person is in a private automobile or other means of conveyance carrying the handgun for lawful protection of such person's or another's person or property; or 
(3)  The person is legally engaged in hunting activities within the State. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the possession of a concealed handgun permit, no person shall carry a concealed handgun in any of the following places: 
(1)  In any place where the carrying of handguns is prohibited by federal law. 
(2)  Onto the real property of a public elementary, middle, junior high or high school, or into any improvements erected thereon, except if: 
a.  The handgun remains in the permittee's vehicle, and if the permittee is not in the vehicle, the handgun is located in a compartment within the vehicle and the vehicle is locked; 
b.  The handgun is carried by a permittee who is employed or retained by contract by a school district as a school security officer, while on duty; or 
c.  The property is owned by a school district but undeveloped and lawfully used for hunting or other shooting sports. 
(3)  Into any public building at which: security personnel and electronic weapons-screening devices are permanently installed at each entrance to the building; security personnel electronically screen each person who enters the building for any type of weapon; and security personnel require each person carrying any type of weapon to leave the weapon in possession of the security personnel while the person is in the building. 
(d)  Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit the existing rights of any private property owner, private tenant, private employer or private business entity. 
(e)  This Section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer from jurisdictions outside this State, if the foreign jurisdiction exempts Colorado peace officers from any concealed weapons laws in effect in the foreign jurisdiction. 
(f)  A peace officer may temporarily disarm a permittee incident to a lawful stop of such person, but the peace officer shall return the handgun to the permittee prior to discharging the permittee from the scene. 
(Prior code 9.20.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-20-100. - Intoxicated persons. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance to possess a firearm. 
(b)  Possession of a concealed handgun permit shall not be a defense to this Section. 
(Prior code 9.20.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-20-110. - Exemptions and affirmative defense. 
(a)  No provision of this Article shall apply to any peace officer or a member of the armed forces of the United States or the Colorado National Guard acting in the lawful discharge of his or her duties. 
(b)  Nothing in this Article shall be construed to abrogate the right of each individual to possess or use deadly weapons for defense of home, person or property in compliance with applicable law. 
(c)  Nothing in this Article shall be construed to abrogate the right of a person in possession of a valid permit or license for possession of a weapon to possess such weapon in compliance with such permit or license. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of violating Sections 9-20-30 through 9-20-50 or Section 9-20-90 that the accused was acting in defense of home, person or property in compliance with applicable law. 
(Prior code 9.20.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-20-120. - Forfeiture. 
    In addition to any other penalty imposed, any person convicted of a violation of this Article shall forfeit to the City the deadly weapon involved in the offense. 
(Prior code 9.20.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 21 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 22 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 23 - Reserved 
ARTICLE 24 - Miscellaneous Offenses 

Sec. 9-24-10. - Aiding and abetting unlawful acts; conspiracy. 
(a)  It is unlawful to attempt to commit, conspire to commit, or aid or abet the commission of any act within the City declared in this Code to be in violation of the ordinances of this municipality, whether individually or in connection with one (1) or more persons as a principal, agent or accessory. A person conspires with another person or persons to commit a crime if he or she either expresses or implies agreement with such other person or persons that they or one (1) or more of them will engage in conduct which constitutes such crime or an attempt to commit such crime. 
(b)  If a person knows that a person with whom he or she conspires to commit a crime has conspired with another person or persons to commit the same crime, he or she is guilty of conspiring with such other person or persons, whether or not he or she knows their identity, to commit such crime. 
(c)  No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit a crime unless an overt act in pursuance of such conspiracy is proved to have been done by him or her or by a person with whom he or she conspired. It is also a defense that the actor, after conspiring to commit a crime, thwarted the success of the conspiracy, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose. 
(d)  Two (2) or more persons charged with conspiracy may be prosecuted jointly if: 
(1)  They are charged with conspiring with one another; or 
(2)  They are charged with being involved in conspiracies that are so related as to constitute different aspects of a scheme of organized illegal conduct. In such case it is immaterial that the persons charged are not parties to the same conspiracy. 
(e)  In any joint prosecution under subsection (d) of this Section: 
(1)  Neither the liability of any defendant nor the admissibility against such defendant of evidence of acts or declarations of another shall be enlarged by this joinder; and 
(2)  The judge shall order a severance or take a special verdict as to any defendant who so requests, if the judge deems it necessary or appropriate to promote the fair determination of the defendant's guilt or innocence. 
(Prior code 9.24.010; Ord. 09 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-24-20. - Towing business solicitation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or persons to drive or cause any tow truck or vehicle equipped to provide towing service to be driven, to stop or park any such vehicle or cause the same to be stopped or parked at or near the scene of a fire, explosion, traffic accident or other disaster, with the intent to solicit towing or wrecker business, when such tow truck or vehicle has not been called to the scene by the owner or operator of the damaged vehicle, the owner of property required to be towed from the scene, by his or her duly authorized agent or insurance carrier, by an officer or agent of the Police Department or by a firefighter or other peace officer attending the scene. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to solicit any other person at or near the scene of any fire, explosion, traffic accident or other disaster for the purpose of procuring towing business; that is, for the purpose of securing authorization or agreement from any person or persons at or near such scene to tow or haul away any vehicle or other personal property from such scene, for hire. 
(Prior code 9.24.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-24-30. - Towing without authorization when damages exceed fifty dollars. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or persons to move or tow, or caused to be moved or towed, with any tow truck or vehicle equipped to provide towing service, any motor vehicle involved in any accident, collision or disablement within the City wherein there is personal injury or property damage exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00), until such time as specifically directed and authorized by a City law enforcement official. 
(b)  For the purposes of this Section, motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled. 
(Prior code 9.24.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-24-40. - Abandoned refrigerators and other containers. 
    It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his or her control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or other container which has a door or lid, snap lock or other locking device, which may not be released from the inside, without first removing such door or lid, snap lock or other locking device. 
(Prior code 9.24.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-24-70. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain on any street, alley, public place or establishment open to the public after the hour of 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, or after the hour of 12:00 midnight on any Friday, Saturday or legal holiday, or before the hour of 5:00 a.m. on any day, except: 
(1)  When accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person twenty-one (21) years of age or older having the permission of the minor's parent or guardian to have care or custody of the minor; 
(2)  When engaged in lawful employment; 
(3)  When traveling to or from: the minor's place of employment; a religious service, meeting or activity; or a school-sponsored meeting or activity; or 
(4)  When upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, guardian or other person twenty-one (21) years of age or older having the care or custody of the minor. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having care or custody of a minor to knowingly allow or permit such minor to violate any provision of Subsection (b) hereof. 
(c)  Any minor served with a citation under this Section shall appear in Municipal Court accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the maximum fine allowed under Chapter 1 of this Code. The Municipal Court shall not accept the payment of any fine imposed under this Section by mail. 
(Prior code 9.24.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11 10, 2013) 
Sec. 9-24-90. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Definition. For purposes of this Section, graffiti means the defacing of public or private property without the consent of the property owner by means of any method of defacement, including but not limited to painting, drawing, writing, etching, carving or otherwise marring the surface of the property by use of paint, spray paint, ink or any other substance or object. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to deface public or private property with graffiti. 
(c)  The City may order the occupant or owner of any property on which graffiti is found to remove the graffiti, at the occupant or owner's sole expense, within twenty-four (24) hours, or such additional time as determined by the City. It is unlawful for any occupant or owner of property on which graffiti is found to fail to remove or cause to be removed graffiti as directed by the City. 
(d)  Upon conviction of a violation of this Section, in addition to any other penalty allowed by law, the Municipal Court may order the defendant to personally make repairs to the damaged property or may enter an order authorizing the City to enter upon the property and remove the graffiti, assessing the cost of removal against the defendant. 
(Prior code 9.24.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-24-100. - Sale and possession of prohibited graffiti materials. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Prohibited graffiti material means and includes spray paint, spray paint nozzles, glass-cutting tools and glass-etching tools or instruments. 
    Spray paint means any aerosol container that is made or adapted for the purpose of applying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. 
    Spray paint nozzle means a nozzle designed to deliver a spray of paint of a particular width or flow from a can of spray paint. 
(b)  Possession. It is unlawful for any minor, except under the direct supervision of such minor's parent, legal guardian, school teacher, tutor, counselor, art instructor or a law enforcement officer, to purchase, obtain, possess or attempt to purchase, obtain or possess any prohibited graffiti materials. 
(c)  Contributing to unlawful possession. It is unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer in the performance of official duty, to knowingly allow a minor to possess prohibited graffiti materials upon any real property unaccompanied by such minor's parent, legal guardian, school teacher, tutor, counselor, art instructor or a law enforcement officer. 
(d)  Sale. It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, school teacher, tutor, counselor, art instructor or law enforcement officer, to sell, exchange, give, deliver, loan or otherwise furnish or cause or permit to be sold, exchanged, delivered, loaned or otherwise furnished any prohibited graffiti material to any minor, unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, school teacher, tutor, counselor, art instructor or a law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Signs required. Any person who sells or offers for sale any prohibited graffiti material shall display a warning sign in a prominent place in the building at all times. Such warning sign shall have a minimum height of fourteen (14) inches and a minimum width of eleven (11) inches, shall use capital lettering of at least one-half (1/2) inch in height and shall read as follows: 
WARNING: 
IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER 
EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE TO 
PURCHASE OR POSSESS ANY SPRAY PAINT, 
SPRAY PAINT NOZZLE, GLASS-CUTTING 
TOOL OR GLASS-ETCHING TOOL OR 
INSTRUMENT, UNLESS ACCOMPANIED 
BY HIS OR HER PARENT, LEGAL 
GUARDIAN, SCHOOL TEACHER, TUTOR, 
COUNSELOR, ART INSTRUCTOR OR A LAW 
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, AND UPON 
CONVICTION, A FINE OF UP TO FOUR 
HUNDRED NINETY-NINE DOLLARS 
($499.00) MAY BE IMPOSED. 
(f)  Affirmative defenses. 
(1)  It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of Subsections (b) or (c) hereof that the minor possessing the prohibited graffiti materials was: 
a.  Within his or her residence; 
b.  At his or her place of employment; or 
c.  Upon real property with permission from the owner, occupant or person having lawful control of such property to possess such materials. 
(2)  It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of Subsection (d) hereof that the person charged is an employer and: 
a.  Has adopted and enforces a written policy against selling prohibited graffiti materials to minors. 
b.  Has informed employees of the applicable laws regarding sales of prohibited graffiti materials to minors. 
c.  Requires employees to verify the age of purchasers of prohibited graffiti materials by way of photo identification. 
d.  Has established and imposes sanctions for noncompliance. 
(g)  Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). 
(Prior code 9.24.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-24-110. - Residency of sex offenders. 
(a)  Findings and intent. 
(1)  The City Council hereby finds that repeat sex offenders, sex offenders who use physical violence and sex offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sex offenders have a high rate of recidivism, making the cost of sex offender victimization to society at large extremely high. Removing such offenders from regular proximity to places where children are located and limiting the frequency of contact between sex offenders and children is likely to reduce the risk of an offense. 
(2)  This Section is intended to serve the City's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the public health, safety and welfare by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers where certain sex offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Permanent residence means a place where a person abides, lodges or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
    Temporary residence means a place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent residence, or a place where a person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
    Walk-to-school route means a route officially designated by the City for use by children walking to or from a public or private school, and shown on maps maintained by the City's Police Department and available for public inspection. 
(c)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person who is required to register under the Colorado Sex Offender Registration Act, Section 16-22-101, et seq., C.R.S., to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of any park, playground or school, or within five hundred (500) feet of any day care center, recreation center or swimming pool (other than pools located at private, single-family residences), or at properties located adjacent to any designated public or private school bus stop, walk-to-school route or recreational trail. 
(2)  It is unlawful to let or rent any portion of any place, structure, trailer or other conveyance with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent or temporary residence pursuant to this Section. 
(d)  Exceptions. A person is not guilty of a violation of this Section if: 
(1)  The person established the permanent or temporary residence prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein; provided, however, that this exception shall not apply if the individual committed the offense for which registration under the Colorado Sex Offender Registration Act is required after the effective date of the initial ordinance codified herein; 
(2)  The person is placed in the residence pursuant to a State of Colorado foster care program; or 
(3)  The school, designated public or private school bus stop, walk-to-school route, day care center, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational trail or recreation center was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence, and is not replacing an existing school, designated public or private school bus stop, walk-to-school route, day care center, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational trail or recreation center. 
(e)  Measurement. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation required herein, the measurement shall be made by following a straight line from the outer property line of the property on which the permanent or temporary residence is located to the nearest outer property line of the property on which the school, park, day care center, playground or recreation center is located. 
(Prior code 9.24.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 9-24-120. - Resale of tickets prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell, within the City, any ticket of admission to any lawful exhibition, athletic event, theatrical entertainment, motion picture theater, concert, sporting event or any other show, amusement or performance to which the general public may gain admission by the payment of a fee or charge therefor to any person other than the original purchaser of such ticket, in exchange for any amount of compensation greater than the face value of such ticket. 
(b)  Any violation of this Section shall be punishable in accordance with Section 1-4-20. 
(Prior code 9.24.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
CHAPTER 11 - Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
ARTICLE 1 - Snow Removal 

Sec. 11-1-10. - Responsibility for abutting sidewalks. 
(a)  Except as provided for in Section 11-1-20, the owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession or in control of any premises or property located in a B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, L-I, M-C or T-C zone district shall maintain those sidewalks adjoining such premises or property in a condition free from snow or ice and shall remove any accumulation of snow or ice from such sidewalks within twenty-four (24) hours after its accumulation. 
(b)  Except as provided for in Section 11-1-20, the owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession or control of any single-family residential property having a sidewalk abutting the front or, in the case of a corner lot, the front and side of a residence shall maintain the sidewalk in a condition free from snow or ice and shall remove any accumulation of snow or ice from such sidewalks within forty-eight (48) hours after its accumulation. This responsibility does not extend to driveways or walkways leading from the sidewalk to the residence nor to sidewalks or trails abutting the rear property of a residence. 
(c)  The penalty for conviction may not exceed a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with no possibility of imprisonment. The punishment imposed shall not be deemed for any purpose to be penal or criminal punishment, and no person charged with such an offense shall have a right to trial by jury. Violation of this Section by residential property owners does not create any civil liability upon a residential property owner not otherwise imposed by Colorado law. 
(Prior code 12.24.010; Ord. 11 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-1-20. - Permit. 
(a)  The owner of any property subject to Section 11-1-10 may obtain from the City Manager a permit exempting his or her sidewalk from the provisions of Section 11-1-10, if the owner demonstrates to the City Manager that one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  It is impossible or impracticable to remove the accumulation of snow or ice from the sidewalk. 
(2)  The sidewalk is not generally accessible and usable by pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  The sidewalk is not connected at either end to another sidewalk. 
(b)  Such permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(c)  The possession of a permit issued under this Section shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of Section 11-1-10. 
(Prior code 12.24.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-1-30. - Depositing snow or ice prohibited. 
    The owner, occupant, lessee or person in possession or in control of any premises or property located in an R-.05 B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-C, T-C or any industrial zone district shall not cause or permit the deposit of snow or ice from such premises or property onto any sidewalk, street or highway. 
(Prior code 12.24.025; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-1-40. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior code 12.24.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 2 - Streetlights 

Sec. 11-2-10. - Purpose. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to ensure that street lighting in the City is designed to complement the surrounding area while promoting and protecting the public health, safety and welfare by assisting motorists and pedestrians with the detection of obstacles. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This Article shall apply throughout the City. 
(2)  If street lighting is governed by any agreement executed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified herein, this Article shall apply only where it is not in conflict with such agreement. 
(3)  This Article shall not apply to streetlights existing on the effective date of the initial ordinance codified herein, provided that, if any existing streetlight is to be replaced, it shall be replaced by a street light in compliance with this Article. 
(c)  Exemption. If the City Council deems the installation of streetlights that would increase the allowable street illumination levels beyond what are allowed by this Article to be in the best interest of the public, the City Council may direct that such streetlights be installed despite any provisions of this Article to the contrary. 
(Prior code 12.12.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11, 1, 2015 ) 
Sec. 11-2-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Foot-candle means the unit of measure expressing the quantity of light received on a surface. 
    Full-cutoff luminaire means a luminaire having a light distribution in which zero (0) candela intensity occurs at or above an angle of ninety (90) degrees above nadir, and the candela per one thousand (1,000) lamp lumens does not numerically exceed one hundred (100) (ten percent (10%)) at or above a vertical angle of eighty (80) degrees above nadir. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. 
    Light standard means a structure constructed for or serving as an upright supporting base for a streetlight. 
    Lumen means the unit of measure used to quantify the amount of light produced by a lamp or emitted from a luminaire. 
    Luminaire means a complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps and the parts designed to distribute the light to position and protect the lamps and to connect the lamps to the power supply. Luminaires may be attached, via a mast arm, to a light standard or to a traffic signal. 
    Mast arm means the part of a streetlight which projects from the light standard to which the luminaire is attached. 
    Streetlight means a structure consisting of a light standard, mast arm and luminaire, which is located adjacent to a public roadway. A luminaire attached to a traffic signal is considered a streetlight. 
(Prior code 12.12.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11, 2, 2015 ) 
Sec. 11-2-30. - Height. 
(a)  A streetlight shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height in residential zone districts and forty (40) feet in all other zone districts unless a greater height is approved for the inclusion of telecommunications equipment as provided in article 23 of chapter 16 of this Code. 
(b)  In residential zone districts, luminaires on traffic signals may exceed eighteen (18) feet in height but shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height. 
(Prior code 12.12.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 03  14, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 11-2-40. - Location. 
(a)  A streetlight shall not project into any roadway so as to obstruct traffic. 
(b)  A streetlight located on a sidewalk shall not obstruct the passage of pedestrians and shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended. 
(Prior code 12.12.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-2-50. - Luminaires. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Article, every luminaire other than a luminaire on a residential neighborhood entrance light shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The luminaire shall be a full-cutoff type. 
(2)  The luminaire shall be designed to direct light downward and to minimize up-light, spill light, glare and unnecessary diffusion on adjacent property. 
(3)  The lamp shall be recessed within the luminaire and shall not be visible below the luminaire. 
(4)  No lamp in a luminaire shall exceed the limits set forth in this Article. 
(Prior code 12.12.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11, 3, 2015 ) 
Sec. 11-2-60. - Positioning at intersections. 
(a)  Generally, the nighttime visibility of a pedestrian or hazardous object within an intersection is enhanced by increased contrast between the object and the surrounding street area. The optimum contrast (safety) is achieved when the streetlights are situated to silhouette (backlight) objects in the intersection. Therefore, streetlights at intersections shall be placed on the downstream side of the intersecting street, as viewed by a motorist approaching the intersection. 
(b)  If streetlights cannot be located on the downstream side of the intersection, a variance may be granted by the City Manager to allow for the upstream location of streetlights. In reviewing a request for such a variance, the City Manager shall consider safety and impact to the surrounding area. 
(c)  At signalized intersections, luminaires on traffic signals shall be mounted to be perpendicular to the flowline. 
(Prior code 12.12.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-2-70. - Underpass and tunnel lighting. 
(a)  Underpasses, undercrossings and tunnels where vehicles, pedestrians, bicyclists and equestrians may be present shall be lighted at levels approved by the City Manager. 
(b)  The objectives for lighting these facilities are to improve public safety, security and nighttime visibility and function. Design and placement shall take into consideration the aesthetics of the neighborhood and environmental sensitivity. 
(Prior code 12.12.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11, 4, 2015 ) 
Sec. 11-2-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,  5, adopted May 18, 2015, repealed  11-2-80 in its entirety. Section 11-2-80 pertained to landscaping and derived from Prior code 12.12.080; and Ord. 32 1, 2011 . 
Sec. 11-2-90. - Underground electric service. 
    On new public roadways, all streetlights shall be installed with underground electric service. 
(Prior code 12.12.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-2-100. - Residential neighborhoods. 
(a)  Policy. Other than neighborhood entrance lighting, the City discourages the placement of streetlights in residential neighborhoods. However, the City Council may permit the installation of streetlights in residential neighborhoods as provided in this Section. 
(b)  Entrance lights. Each entrance into a residential neighborhood may be lighted with up to two (2) lantern-style streetlights, one (1) on each side of the street. The luminaires shall be the City's standard lantern style, constructed of cast aluminum, painted verde green with a white cap, fifteen (15) feet in height and shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) lumens. The correlated color temperature shall be in a range to produce a warm white emission of light, in the range of 2500K to 3500K conducive to the aesthetic character of the neighborhood environment. 
(c)  Design standards for other streetlights. In addition to other applicable provisions of this Article, streetlights other than entrance lights in residential neighborhoods shall meet the following design standards: 
(1)  Style. The style shall be consistent throughout the neighborhood. Poles shall be anodized, painted or otherwise coated. 
(2)  Luminaire. On residential streets, lamps shall not exceed illumination levels set forth in this Article. 
(d)  Existing residential neighborhoods. 
(1)  A request to install streetlights in an existing residential neighborhood shall be made in writing, be submitted to the City Clerk and include the following: 
a.  The signature of the president or other chair of the homeowners' association, which shall be deemed conclusive evidence that the neighborhood as a whole supports the installation of streetlights as described in the request. 
b.  A statement from the homeowners' association accepting responsibility for the installation, operation and maintenance of the streetlights. 
c.  A plan showing the location of the proposed streetlights. 
d.  A detail sheet showing the proposed streetlights. 
(2)  The request shall be reviewed by City staff for compliance with this Section and, thereafter, submitted to City Council for final approval. 
(e)  New residential neighborhoods. The location and design of street lighting for new residential neighborhoods shall be determined during the planning process for the development and shall be established in the final development plan for the neighborhood. 
(f)  Streetlights incorporating telecommunications equipment. Entrance lights and street lights in residential neighborhoods incorporating wireless telecommunications equipment shall meet design standards adopted by City Council and referenced in article 23 of chapter 16 of this Code. 
(Prior code 12.12.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11, 6, 2015 ; Ord. 03  15, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 11-2-110. - New commercial and industrial development. 
(a)  Policy. Developers of new industrial and commercial developments shall install streetlights along public streets. 
(b)  Design standards. In addition to other applicable provisions of this Article, streetlights in new commercial and industrial developments shall meet the following design standards: 
(1)  Style. The style shall be consistent throughout the development and consistent with surrounding streetlights and the master plan of the metropolitan district, if applicable. Poles shall be painted or otherwise coated. 
(2)  Luminaire. Lamps shall not exceed levels set forth in this Article. 
(3)  Location. The location of streetlights shall be determined in the planning process and shall be established in the final development plan for the development. 
(Prior code 12.12.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11, 7, 2015 ) 
Sec. 11-2-120. - Street illumination levels. 
    Street illumination levels shall comply with the following table unless the City Manager determines that different lighting levels are appropriate, based on the lighting levels and other features of the surrounding area. 
Road Classification Area Classification Minimum Illuminance (foot- candles) Uniformity Ratio (Average/ minimum) Arterial Commercial & Industrial 0.9 3:1 Arterial Residential 0.6 3:1 Collector Commercial & Industrial 0.7 4:1 Collector Residential 0.4 4:1 Local Commercial & Industrial 0.6 4:1 Local Residential 0.2 6:1  
(Prior code 12.12.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-2-130. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Traffic and pedestrian hazards. Streetlights shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular travel or conflict with traffic signals. Neither the direct or reflected light from any streetlight shall create a traffic hazard for motor vehicles traveling on public roadways. 
(b)  Colored lights. No colored lights may be used in such a way as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
(Prior code 12.12.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 3 - Public Rights-of-Way 
Division 1 - Permits 

Sec. 11-3-10. - Purpose. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to establish principles, standards and procedures for the placement of facilities, construction, excavation, encroachments and work activities within, under or upon any public right-of-way and to protect the integrity of the City's street system. 
(b)  Objectives. In the interests of the general welfare, public and private uses of public rights-of-way should be accommodated; however, the City must ensure that the primary purpose of the public right-of-way, passage of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, is protected. The use of the public rights-of-way by private users is secondary to these public objectives. This Article's objectives are to: 
(1)  Minimize public inconvenience. 
(2)  Protect the City's infrastructure investment by establishing repair standards for the pavement, facilities and property in the public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Standardize regulations and thereby facilitate work within the rights-of-way. 
(4)  Maintain an efficient permit process. 
(5)  Conserve and fairly apportion the limited physical capacity of public rights-of-way held in public trust by the City. 
(6)  Establish a public policy for enabling the City to discharge its public trust consistent with the rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development. 
(7)  Promote cooperation among permittees and the City in the occupation of the public rights-of-way, and work therein, in order to eliminate duplication of facilities that is wasteful, unnecessary or unsightly; lower the permittees' and the City's costs of providing services to the public; and minimize street cuts. 
(8)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Prior code 12.04.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Access structure means any structure providing access to facilities in the public right-of-way. 
    Approved alignment means the designed horizontal and vertical alignment of facilities to be installed in the public right-of-way which is approved by the City at the time the permit is issued, plus any alignment variance tolerances set forth in the Construction and Excavation Standards and any alignment variances approved by the City in accordance with the Construction and Excavation Standards. 
    Construction and Excavation Standards means the document entitled Construction and Excavation Standards for Work in Public Rights-of-Way , as adopted by resolution of the City Council and amended from time to time. 
    Contractor means a person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity which undertakes to construct, install, alter, move, remove, trim, demolish, repair, replace, excavate or add to any improvements or facilities in the public right-of-way, or that requires work, workers or equipment to be in the public right-of-way in the process of performing the above-named activities. 
    Developer means the person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity improving a parcel of land within the City and being legally responsible to the City for the construction of infrastructure within a subdivision or as a condition of a building permit. 
    Emergency means any event which may threaten public health or safety, or that results in an interruption in the provision of service, including but not limited to damaged or leaking water or gas conduit systems, damaged, obstructed or leaking sewer or storm drain conduit systems and damaged electrical and communications facilities. 
    Excavate or excavation means to dig into or in any way remove or penetrate any part of a public right-of-way, including trenchless excavation such as boring, tunneling and jacking. 
    Facilities means any pipe, conduit, wire, cable, amplifier, transformer, fiber optic cable, antenna, pole, streetlight, duct, fixture, appurtenance or other like equipment used in connection with transmitting, receiving, distributing, offering and providing utility and other services, whether above or below ground. 
    Infrastructure means any public facility, system or improvement, including water and sewer mains and appurtenances, storm drains and structures, streets, alleys, traffic signal poles and appurtenances, conduits, signs, landscape improvements, sidewalks and public safety equipment. 
    Landscaping means grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees and nonliving natural materials commonly used in landscape development, as well as attendant irrigation systems. 
    Major installation means work in the public right-of-way involving an excavation exceeding five hundred (500) feet in length. 
    Permit means an authorization for use of the public rights-of-way granted pursuant to this Division. 
    Permittee means the holder of a valid permit issued pursuant to this Division. 
    Public right-of-way means any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, easement, park, square, median, parkway, boulevard or plaza that is dedicated to public use. 
    Routine maintenance means maintenance of facilities or landscaping in the public right-of-way which does not involve excavation, installation of new facilities, lane closures, sidewalk closures or damage to any portion of the public right-of-way. 
    Work means any labor performed within a public right-of-way or any use or storage of equipment or materials within a public right-of-way, including but not limited to excavation; construction of streets, fixtures, improvements, sidewalks, driveway openings, bus shelters, bus loading pads, streetlights and traffic signal devices; construction, maintenance and repair of all underground facilities, such as pipes, conduit, ducts, tunnels, manholes, vaults, cable, wire or any other similar structure; maintenance of facilities and installation of overhead poles used for any purpose. Notwithstanding the foregoing, work shall not include routine maintenance. 
(Prior code 12.04.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-30. - Authority. 
(a)  A permittee's rights hereunder shall at all times be subject to the authority of the City, which includes the power to adopt and enforce ordinances, including amendments to this Division, necessary for the safety, health and welfare of the public. 
(b)  The City reserves the right to exercise its authority, notwithstanding any provision in this Division or any permit to the contrary. Any conflict between the provisions of any permit and any other present or future lawful exercise of the City's police power shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(Prior code 12.04.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-40. - Developer ownership of infrastructure. 
    The construction of infrastructure in new developments is the responsibility of the developer. Once a public right-of-way has been dedicated to the City, all work in that public right-of-way, including the installation of new infrastructure by a developer, shall be subject to this Chapter. 
(Prior code 12.04.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-50. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person except an employee or official of the City or a person exempted by contract with the City shall undertake or permit to be undertaken any work in a public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the City as set forth in this Division. Copies of the permit and associated documents shall be maintained on the work site and available for inspection upon request by any officer or employee of the City. 
(b)  No permittee shall perform work in an area larger or at a location different, or for a longer period of time than that specified in the permit. If, after work is commenced under an approved permit, it becomes necessary to perform work in a larger or different area or for a longer period of time than what the permit specifies, the permittee shall notify the City immediately and shall file a supplementary application for the additional work within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(c)  Permits shall not be transferable or assignable without the prior written approval of the City. 
(d)  Any person conducting any work within the public right-of-way without having first obtained the required permit shall immediately cease all activity and obtain a permit before work may be resumed, except for emergency operations performed pursuant to Section 11-3-260. 
(Prior code 12.04.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-60. - Permit application. 
(a)  An applicant for a public right-of-way permit shall file a written application on a form furnished by the City, which includes the following information: 
(1)  The date of application. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and any contractor or subcontractor which will perform any of the work. 
(3)  A plan showing the work site, the public right-of-way boundaries, all infrastructure in the area and all landscaping in the area. 
(4)  The purpose of the proposed work. 
(5)  A traffic control plan in accordance with the Construction and Excavation Standards. 
(6)  The dates for beginning and ending the proposed work, proposed hours of work and the number of actual work days required to complete the project. 
(7)  A copy of each contractor's license required by Chapter 6, Article 5. 
(8)  If applicable, documentation of the approval required by Subsection 11-3-180(c). 
(b)  The applicable permit fees as set by the Construction and Excavation Standards shall accompany the application when submitted. 
(c)  For any work in the public right-of-way which includes excavation, in addition to the information required by Subsection (a) hereof, the application shall include the following information: 
(1)  An itemization of the total cost of construction, including labor and materials but excluding the cost of any facilities being installed. 
(2)  Copies of all permits and licenses (including required insurance, deposits, bonds and warranties) required to do the proposed work, whether required by federal or state law or City resolution, ordinance or regulation. 
(d)  In addition to the information required by Subsections (a) and (c) hereof, an applicant for a public right-of-way permit for a major installation shall submit the following information: 
(1)  Field-verified locates of all existing facilities required to be located by the Construction and Excavation Standards, which locates shall be compiled and submitted according to the Construction and Excavation Standards and Section 11-3-170. 
(2)  Engineering construction drawings or site plans for the proposed work in a format acceptable to the City and signed by a professional engineer licensed in the State, except that an applicant expressly exempt from the signature requirement pursuant to Section 12-25-103, C.R.S., need not include the signature of a licensed professional engineer. 
(e)  An applicant shall update a permit application within ten (10) days after any material change occurs. 
(f)  Applicants may apply jointly for permits to work in public rights-of-way at the same time and place. Applicants who apply jointly for permits may share in the payment of the permit fees. Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each shall pay, and if no agreement is reached, payment in full shall be required of all applicants. 
(g)  The applicant for a public right-of-way permit and the eventual permittee shall be the owner of the facilities to be installed, maintained or repaired, rather than the contractor performing the work, except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the facilities being installed, maintained or repaired are service lines which provide water or sewer service to private property adjacent to the public right-of-way; in which case, the contractor or other person performing the work may be the applicant for the public right-of-way permit. 
(2)  When the work being performed in the public right-of-way is the installation, maintenance or repair of privately-owned landscaping or driveways; in which case, the contractor or other person performing the work may be the applicant for the public right-of-way permit. 
(h)  By signing an application, the applicant is certifying to the City that the applicant is in compliance with all other permits issued by the City and that the applicant is not delinquent in any payment due to the City for prior work. This certification shall not apply to outstanding claims which are honestly and reasonably disputed by the applicant, if the applicant and the City are negotiating in good faith to resolve the dispute. 
(Prior code 12.04.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-70. - Blanket maintenance permits. 
(a)  A public right-of-way permit shall not be required for routine maintenance in the public right-of-way, as the term routine maintenance is defined in Section 11-3-20. However, other maintenance operations within the public right-of-way which involve traffic lane closures or sidewalk closures shall require a public right-of-way permit. To expedite the process for ongoing maintenance operations, owners of facilities within the public right-of-way may, at their sole option and in the alternative to obtaining individual public right-of-way permits, obtain a blanket maintenance permit pursuant to this Section. 
(b)  A blanket maintenance permit shall be valid from the date of issuance of the permit through December 31 of the same year. Under no circumstances shall a blanket maintenance permit be valid for more than one (1) year. 
(c)  A blanket maintenance permit shall not, under any circumstances, authorize any pavement disturbance or installation of new facilities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, existing facilities may be removed and replaced with new facilities, if no excavation or pavement disturbance is required. 
(d)  Any person seeking a blanket maintenance permit shall file an application on a form provided by the City which includes the following information: 
(1)  The date of application. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  A general description of the maintenance operations. 
(4)  Any location of maintenance operations known at the time of application. 
(5)  Traffic control plans as required by this Section and the Construction and Excavation Standards. 
(6)  If applicable, documentation of the approval required by Subsection 11-3-180(c). 
(e)  The applicable permit fee as set by the Construction and Excavation Standards shall accompany the application when submitted. 
(f)  Blanket maintenance permits shall be subject to applicable provisions of the Construction and Excavation Standards. 
(g)  A blanket maintenance permit shall not require a performance bond, letter of credit or warranty. Work performed pursuant to a blanket maintenance permit shall not be subject to the specific inspections set forth in Section 11-3-140, but may be subject to random inspection by the City to ensure compliance with the terms of the blanket maintenance permit and applicable provisions of the Construction and Excavation Standards. 
(Prior code 12.04.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-80. - City review and approval. 
(a)  An application for a public right-of-way permit shall be reviewed by the City for completeness within five (5) working days of submission. If the application is not complete, the City shall notify the applicant of all missing information within the five-day time period. 
(b)  Once an application is deemed complete by the City, the City shall review the application to determine whether the application complies with this Division and the Construction and Excavation Standards. The time for such review shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a public right-of-way permit which does not include excavation, within five (5) working days. 
(2)  For a public right-of-way permit which includes excavation but is not a major installation, within ten (10) working days. 
(3)  For a public right-of-way permit for a major installation, within fifteen (15) working days. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the review period, the City shall either approve the permit, approve the permit with conditions or deny the permit. If the permit is denied, the City shall send a written notice of denial to the permittee at the address listed on the application, via first-class mail, postage prepaid. The notice shall include the reason for denial. 
(Prior code 12.04.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-90. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Before a public right-of-way permit is issued, the applicant shall pay to the City a permit fee, which shall be determined in accordance with the fee schedule contained in the Construction and Excavation Standards. Permit fees shall be reasonably related to the costs of managing the public rights-of-way. These costs include, but are not limited to, the costs of issuing right-of-way permits, verifying right-of-way occupation, mapping right-of-way occupation, inspecting work, administering this Division and, if applicable, costs relating to restoration of the public right-of-way to remedy degradation of that public right-of-way caused by the permittee. 
(b)  Restoration fees. 
(1)  Restoration fees shall only be charged to the applicant if the applicant chooses not to perform the required restoration of the public right-of-way to the City's standards, making the City responsible for performing the required restoration. The applicant shall decide at the time of application whether the applicant will perform the required restoration, and the applicant's decision shall be final. 
(2)  No restoration fees shall be required for a public right-of-way permit which does not include excavation. 
(3)  Restoration fees collected by the City shall be placed in a separate account for general street maintenance and construction. 
(4)  Restoration fees may be waived in the City's discretion when additional circumstances exist which would make restoration unnecessary, such as poor street quality or proposed street resurfacing or construction by the City. These circumstances are outlined in more detail in the section of the Construction and Excavation Standards addressing permit fees. 
(Prior code 12.04.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-100. - Insurance. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement or median maintenance agreement between a permittee and the City, prior to the granting of any permit, the permittee shall carry and maintain in full effect at all times the following insurance coverage: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including broad-form property damage, completed operations contractual liability, explosion hazard, collapse hazard, underground property damage hazard, commonly known as XCU, for limits not less then one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence for damages of bodily injury or death to one (1) or more persons; and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) each occurrence for damage to or destruction of property. 
(2)  Workers compensation insurance as required by state law. 
(b)  The permittee shall file with the City proof of such insurance coverage in a form satisfactory to the City. 
(c)  Upon prior written approval of the City, a permittee may provide self-insurance with the minimum coverage limits set forth in Paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) hereof. 
(Prior code 12.04.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-110. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Each permittee, for himself or herself and his or her related entities, agents, employees, subcontractors and the agents and employees of said subcontractors shall hold the City harmless and defend and indemnify the City, its successors, assigns, officers, employees, agents and appointed and elected officials from and against all liability or damage and all claims or demands whatsoever in nature and reimburse the City for all its reasonable expenses, as incurred, arising out of any work or activity in the public right-of-way, including but not limited to the actions or omissions of the permittee, its employees, representatives, agents, contractors, related entities, successors and assigns or the securing of and the exercise by the permittee of any rights granted in the permit, including any third-party claims, administrative hearings and litigation, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Division or other applicable law. A permittee shall not be obligated to hold harmless or indemnify the City for claims or demands to the extent that they are due to the negligence or willful and wanton acts of the City or any of its officers, employees or agents. 
(b)  Following the receipt of written notification of any claim, the permittee shall have the right to defend the City with regard to all third-party actions, damages and penalties arising in any way out of the exercise of any rights in the permit. If at any time, however, a permittee refuses to defend the City, and the City elects to defend itself with regard to such matters, the permittee shall pay all expenses incurred by the City related to its defense, including reasonable attorney fees and costs. 
(c)  If a permittee is a public entity, the indemnification requirements of this Section shall be subject to the provisions of the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act. 
(d)  If any provision of this Section conflicts with any provision of a valid, effective franchise agreement between the permittee and the City, the conflicting provision of this Section shall not apply to the franchisee, and the franchisee shall instead honor the provision of the franchise agreement. 
(e)  If any provision of this Section conflicts with any provision of a valid, effective median maintenance agreement between a special district and the City, the conflicting provision of this Section shall not apply to the special district, and the special district shall instead honor the provision of the median maintenance agreement. 
(Prior code 12.04.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-120. - Performance bonds and letters of credit. 
(a)  Before a public right-of-way permit is issued, the applicant shall file with the City a bond or letter of credit in favor of the City in an amount equal to the total cost of construction, including labor and materials but excluding the cost of any facilities being installed, or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is greater. The bond or letter of credit shall be executed by the applicant as principal and by at least one (1) surety upon whom service of process may be had in the State. The bond or letter of credit shall be conditioned upon the applicant fully complying with all provisions of City ordinances, resolutions and regulations and upon payment of all judgments and costs rendered against the applicant for any violation of any City resolution, regulation or ordinances or state law arising out of any negligent or wrongful acts of the applicant in the performance of work pursuant to the permit. 
(b)  The City may bring an action on the bond or letter of credit on its own behalf or on behalf of any person so aggrieved as beneficiary. 
(c)  The bond or letter of credit shall be approved by the City prior to the issuance of the permit. The City may waive the requirements of any such bond or letter of credit or may permit the applicant to post a bond without surety thereon, upon finding that the applicant has financial stability and assets located in the State to satisfy any claims intended to be protected against by the security required by this Section. 
(d)  A letter of responsibility, in a form acceptable to the City, shall be accepted from special districts and governmental agencies in lieu of a performance bond or letter of credit. 
(e)  A blanket bond of sufficient amount to cover all proposed work during the upcoming year may be filed with the City on an annual basis in lieu of the project-specific performance bonds or letters of credit required by Subsection (a) hereof. The form and amount of the blanket bond shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the City. Should the blanket bond be deemed insufficient by the City based on the work to date, the City may require additional, project-specific performance bonds or letters of credit pursuant to Subsection (a) hereof. 
(f)  The performance bond, blanket bond, letter of credit or letter of responsibility shall remain in force and effect for a minimum of two (2) years after completion and acceptance of the street cut, excavation or lane closure. 
(g)  If any provision of this Section conflicts with any provision of a valid, effective franchise agreement between the applicant and the City, the conflicting provision of this Section shall not apply to the franchisee, and the franchisee shall instead honor the provision of the franchise agreement. 
(h)  If any provision of this Section conflicts with any provision of a valid, effective median maintenance agreement between a special district and the City, the conflicting provision of this Section shall not apply to the special district, and the special district shall instead honor the provision of the median maintenance agreement. 
(Prior code 12.04.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-130. - Warranty. 
(a)  A permittee, by acceptance of the permit, expressly warrants and guarantees complete performance of the work in a manner acceptable to the City and in accordance with this Division and the Construction and Excavation Standards and warrants and guarantees all work done for a period of two (2) years after the date of probationary acceptance. 
(b)  Under the warranty, the permittee shall, at its own expense, repair or replace, at the discretion of the City, any portion of the work that fails, is defective, is unsound or is unsatisfactory because of design, engineering, materials or workmanship. 
(c)  The warranty period shall begin on the date of the City's probationary acceptance of the work. If repairs are required during the warranty period, those repairs need only be warranted until the end of the initial two-year period starting with the date of probationary acceptance. 
(d)  At any time prior to completion of the warranty period, the City may notify the permittee in writing of any needed repairs. If the defects are determined by the City to be an imminent danger to the public health, safety and welfare, the permittee shall begin repairs within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of the written notice and continue the repairs until completion. Nonemergency repairs shall be completed within thirty (30) days after notice. 
(e)  The warranty shall cover only those areas of work performed by the permittee which provided the warranty and not directly impacted by the work of any other permittee or the City. If a portion of work warranted by a permittee is subsequently impacted by work of another permittee, another user of the right-of-way or the City during the warranty period, the other permittee or the City, as applicable, shall assume responsibility for repair to the subsequently impacted portion of the public right-of-way. 
(Prior code 12.04.130; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-140. - Inspections. 
(a)  At a minimum, the following four (4) inspections shall take place: 
(1)  Preconstruction inspection. The permittee shall request that the City conduct a preconstruction inspection, to determine any necessary conditions for the permit. 
(2)  Completed work inspection. The permittee shall notify the City immediately after completion of work. The City shall inspect the work within twenty-one (21) days of the permittee's notification. Probationary acceptance shall be made if all work complies with this Division, the Construction and Excavation Standards and any other applicable City regulation, ordinance or resolution. Written notice of probationary acceptance shall be mailed by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the permittee's address as listed on the permit application. 
(3)  Warranty inspection. Approximately thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the two-year warranty period, the City shall conduct a final inspection of the work. If the work is still satisfactory, the bond or letter of credit shall be returned or allowed to expire, and the City shall issue a letter of final acceptance. 
(4)  Utility marking inspection. The City shall conduct a utility marking inspection pursuant to Division 2. 
(b)  Upon review of the application for a permit, the City shall determine how many additional inspections, if any, may be required. Required inspections shall be listed on the permit. For a permit which does not include excavation, the City may waive any or all of the above-listed inspections. 
(Prior code 12.04.140; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-150. - Time of completion. 
(a)  All work covered by the permit shall be completed within the time period stated on the permit, unless an extension has been granted by the City in writing; in which case, all work shall be completed within the time period stated in the written extension. 
(b)  Permits shall be void if work has not commenced within thirty (30) days after issuance, unless an extension has been granted by the City in writing. The permittee shall request such an extension in writing, and the City shall either grant or deny the request within five (5) days of receipt of the request. 
(Prior code 12.04.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-160. - Joint planning and construction. 
(a)  Permittees shall make reasonable efforts to attend and participate in meetings of the City, of which the permittee is notified, regarding public right-of-way issues that may impact its facilities, including planning meetings to anticipate joint trenching and boring. 
(b)  Each permittee owning, operating or installing facilities in public rights-of-way shall meet annually with the City, at the City's request, to discuss the permittee's planned major excavations in the City. As used in this Subsection, the term planned major excavations means any major excavations planned by the permittee that will affect any public right-of-way for more than five (5) days per year during the next three (3) years. Between the annual meetings to discuss planned major excavations, the permittee shall use his or her best effort to inform the City of any substantial changes in the planned major excavations discussed at the annual meeting. 
(c)  Whenever it is possible and reasonably practicable to joint trench or share bores or cuts, a permittee shall meet and cooperate with other providers, licensees, permittees and franchisees so as to reduce as much as possible the number of street cuts within the City and the amount of pedestrian and vehicular traffic that is obstructed or impeded. Should two (2) permittees refuse to joint trench or share bores or street cuts, the City may require each permittee to submit written evidence detailing why such joint trenching or sharing would be impossible or impractical. Such evidence may include the potential impact of joint trenching or sharing on the timing of the initiation or completion of the work. The City shall consider the evidence submitted. Should the permittee fail to provide evidence satisfactory to the City that joint trenching or sharing is impossible or impractical, the City may deny a permit on that basis. 
(Prior code 12.04.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-170. - Locate information. 
(a)  Any person owning facilities in the public right-of-way shall provide field locate information to the City and any other permittee with a valid public right-of-way permit which authorizes locate pothole excavation or other excavation work. Within seven (7) days of receipt of a written request from the City or such a permittee, the facility owner shall field locate facilities in the public right-of-way in which the work will be performed. 
(b)  For major installations, a permittee shall obtain a public right-of-way permit to locate other existing facilities as provided in the Construction and Excavation Standards. The location of such facilities shall be field-verified in a manner approved by the City. 
(c)  Before beginning excavation in any public right-of-way, a permittee shall contact the Utility Notification Center of Colorado (UNCC) and, to the extent required by Section 9-1.5-102, et seq., C.R.S., make inquiries of all ditch companies, utility companies, districts, local governments and all other agencies that might have facilities in the area of work to determine possible conflicts. The permittee shall contact the UNCC and request field locates of all facilities in the area pursuant to UNCC requirements. Field locates shall be marked prior to commencing work. 
(Prior code 12.04.170; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-180. - Minimal interference with other property. 
(a)  Work in the public right-of-way or on or near other public or private property shall be done in a manner that causes the least interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and residents. Facilities shall be located, constructed and maintained in such manner as not to interfere with sewers, water pipes or any City property, or with any other pipes, wires, conduits, pedestals, structures or other facilities that may have been laid in the public rights-of-way by the City or its authority. 
(b)  Facilities shall not unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the public rights-of-way or other public property, interfere with the travel and use of the public rights-of-way by the public during the construction, repair, operation or removal thereof or obstruct or impede traffic. 
(c)  No permit shall be granted for work in a landscaped median, unless the applicant demonstrates that his or her plans, specifications and a proposed schedule of work have been submitted to and approved by the special district or other entity responsible for the median landscaping. 
(Prior code 12.04.180; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-190. - Underground construction and use of poles. 
(a)  When an existing underground facility is required by the City, and in locations where all existing facilities are located underground, all of a permittee's facilities shall be installed underground at no cost to the City. 
(b)  In areas where existing facilities are above ground, the permittee may install aboveground facilities. 
(c)  For aboveground facilities, a permittee shall use existing poles wherever possible. 
(Prior code 12.04.190; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-200. - Use of trenches and bores by City. 
    Should the City desire to place its own facilities in trenches or bores opened by a permittee, the permittee shall cooperate with the City in any construction by the permittee that involves trenching or boring, provided that the City has first notified the permittee, in writing, that it is interested in sharing the trenches or bores in the area where the permittee's construction is occurring. The permittee shall allow the City to place its facilities in the permittee's trenches and bores, provided that the City incurs any incremental increase in cost of the trenching and boring, the City's installation does not unreasonably delay the permittee's work and the City's facilities are used solely for noncommercial, City purposes. The City shall be responsible for maintaining its respective facilities buried in the permittee's trenches and bores. If requested by the permittee, the City shall have separate access structures and shall not use the permittee's access structures. 
(Prior code 12.04.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-210. - Construction and excavation standards. 
(a)  Each permittee shall comply with the 2002 Construction Manual as adopted by Resolution for all work in the public right-of-way, including the location of the work and facilities within the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this Division, the permittee shall be fully responsible for the cost and actual performance of all of its work in the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  All restoration shall result in a work site condition equal to or better than that which existed prior to the commencement of the work performed. 
(Prior code 12.04.210; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-220. - Newly resurfaced and constructed streets. 
(a)  For newly resurfaced and constructed streets, no excavation in the pavement shall be permitted within two (2) years of the completion of the resurfacing or construction. 
(b)  The City shall publish once, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City each year, a list of those streets that will be resurfaced or constructed in that year. The list shall also be published on the City's website. 
(c)  Exemption. In rare circumstances, the City may grant an exemption from this Section in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  A request for exemption shall be in writing on a form acceptable to the City and shall contain the following information, at a minimum: 
a.  A detailed and dimensional engineering plan that identifies and accurately represents all public rights-of-way and other property that will be impacted by the proposed work and the method of construction. 
b.  The location, width, length and depth of the proposed excavation. 
c.  A statement as to how any of the criteria set forth in Paragraph (c)(2) hereof apply to the proposed work. 
(2)  Criteria for approval. In determining whether an exemption should be granted, the City shall consider the following criteria: 
a.  Whether alternative utility alignments that do not involve excavating in the street are available. 
b.  Whether the proposed excavation can reasonably be delayed until after the two-year period has elapsed. 
c.  Whether duct, conduit or other facilities are reasonably available from another user of the public right-of-way. 
d.  Whether the proposed work involves joint trenching or joint use and the number of users to share in the trenching or use. 
e.  Whether the proposed work is to be by horizontal boring, tunneling or open trenching. 
f.  Whether applicable law requires the applicant to provide service to a particular customer and whether denial of the exemption would prevent the applicant from providing such service. 
g.  Whether the purpose of the proposed work is to provide service to a particular building or a customer within a building who has requested such service and whether denial of the exemption would prevent the applicant from providing such service. 
h.  Whether the work is limited to locate potholing to provide locate information required by Section 11-3-170. 
(d)  Exemptions for emergency operations. Emergency operations in newly resurfaced or constructed streets shall be permitted pursuant to Section 11-3-260. 
(Prior code 12.04.230; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-230. - Relocation of facilities. 
(a)  If the relocation of any facilities in the public right-of-way becomes necessary to allow the City to make any public use of the public right-of-way, or because of the improvement, repair, construction or maintenance of any public right-of-way, or because of traffic conditions, public safety or installation of any type of public improvement by the City or other public agency or special district, or if the City implements any general program for the undergrounding of such facilities, the City may request a permittee to relocate facilities within or adjacent to public rights-of-way, either temporarily or permanently. The City shall notify the affected permittee at least ninety (90) days in advance, except in the case of emergencies, of the reason for the relocation and the projected start date of the project necessitating the relocation. The City shall provide the affected permittee with such notice at least one hundred twenty (120) days in advance, if the relocation will be considered a major installation. The permittee shall thereupon, at its own cost, accomplish the necessary relocation within a reasonable time from the date of the notification, but in no event later than three (3) working days prior to the date listed in the notice as the proposed start date, or immediately in the case of emergencies. 
(b)  Should the permittee fail to perform the relocation, the City may perform such relocation at the permittee's expense, and the permittee shall reimburse the City as provided in Section 11-3-260. 
(c)  Following relocation, the permittee shall, at the permittee's own expense, restore all affected property to, at a minimum, the condition which existed prior to the commencement of the work performed. A permittee may request additional time to complete a relocation project, and the City may grant an extension if, in its sole discretion, the extension will not adversely affect the City's project or the public use of the affected public rights-of-way. 
(Prior code 12.04.240; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-240. - Abandonment and removal of facilities. 
(a)  Notification. A permittee that intends to discontinue use of any facility within the public right-of-way shall notify the City, in writing, of the intent to discontinue use. Such notice shall describe the facilities for which the use is to be discontinued, a date of discontinuance of use, which date shall not be less than fifteen (15) days from the date such notice is submitted to the City, and the method of removal and restoration. The permittee may not remove, destroy or permanently disable any such facilities during said fifteen-day period without written approval of the City. After fifteen (15) days from the date of such notice, the permittee may commence removal and disposal of such facilities as set forth in the notice, as the notice may be modified by the City. The permittee shall complete such removal and disposal within one hundred eighty (180) days, unless additional time is requested from and granted by the City. 
(b)  Abandonment of facilities in place. Upon prior written approval of the City, a permittee may either: 
(1)  Abandon the facilities in place and immediately convey full title and ownership of such abandoned facilities to the City. The only consideration for the conveyance shall be the City's permission to abandon the facilities in place. The permittee shall be responsible for all obligations and liabilities until the conveyance to the City is completed; or 
(2)  Abandon the facilities in place, but retain ownership and responsibility for all liabilities associated therewith. 
(c)  If any provision of this Section conflicts with any provision of a valid, effective franchise agreement between the permittee and the City, the conflicting provision of this Section shall not apply to the franchisee, and the franchisee shall instead honor the provision of the franchise agreement. 
(Prior code 12.04.250; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-250. - Emergency procedures. 
(a)  Any person maintaining facilities in the public right-of-way may proceed with repairs upon existing facilities without a permit when emergency circumstances demand that the work be done immediately. The person doing the work shall apply to the City for a permit on the first working day after such work has commenced. All emergency work shall require prior telephone notification to the City's engineering department, the City's police department and the appropriate fire protection agency. 
(b)  If any damage occurs to an underground facility or its protective covering, the contractor or permittee responsible shall notify the facility's owner promptly. When the facility's owner receives a damage notice, he or she shall promptly dispatch personnel to the damage area to investigate. If the damage results in the escape of any inflammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid or endangers life, health or property, the contractor or permittee responsible shall immediately notify the facility's owner and 911 and take immediate action to protect the public and nearby properties. 
(Prior code 12.04.260; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-260. - Reimbursement of City costs. 
(a)  The City may make any repairs necessary to eliminate any imminent danger to the public health or safety without notice to any permittee, at the responsible permittee's expense. 
(b)  For any work not performed by a permittee as directed by the City, but not constituting imminent danger to the public health or safety, the City shall provide written notice to the permittee, ordering that the work be corrected within ten (10) days of the date of the notice. If the work is not corrected within the ten-day period, the City may correct the work at the permittee's expense. 
(c)  Costs of any work performed by the City pursuant to this Section shall be billed to the permittee. The permittee shall also be responsible for any direct costs incurred by the City. The permittee shall pay all such charges within thirty (30) days of the statement date. If the permittee fails to pay such charges within the prescribed time period, the City may, in addition to taking other collection remedies, seek reimbursement through the performance bond or letter of credit. Furthermore, the permittee may be barred from performing any work in the public right-of-way, and under no circumstances will the City issue any further permits of any kind to said permittee, until all outstanding charges (except those outstanding charges that are honestly and reasonably disputed by the permittee and being negotiated in good faith with the City) have been paid in full. 
(Prior code 12.04.270; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-270. - Permit revocation and stop work orders. 
(a)  A public right-of-way permit may be revoked or suspended by the City for any of the following: 
(1)  Violation of any condition of the permit or any provision of this Division or the 2002 Construction Standards Manual as adopted. 
(2)  Violation of any other City ordinance or state law relating to the work. 
(3)  Existence of any condition or performance of any act which, in the City's determination, constitutes or causes a condition endangering life or property. 
(b)  Stop work orders. A stop work order may be issued by the City to any person or persons performing or causing any work to be performed in the public right-of-way for: 
(1)  Performing work without a permit, except for emergency repairs to existing facilities as provided for in this Division. 
(2)  Performing work in violation of this Division, any other City resolution, ordinance or regulation or state law relating to the work. 
(3)  Performing any act which, in the City's determination, endangers life or property. 
(c)  A suspension, revocation or stop work order shall take effect immediately upon delivery of verbal or written notice to the person performing the work or to the permittee. If neither the person performing the work nor the permittee can be located on the work site on the day of issuance of the suspension, revocation or stop work order, the suspension, revocation or stop work order shall take effect upon mailing of the written notice via first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the permittee's last known address. 
(Prior code 12.04.280; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-280. - Penalties. 
(a)  If any contractor or permittee is found guilty of or pleads guilty to a violation of this Division, he or she shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article 4. Each and every day or portion thereof during which a violation is committed, continues or is permitted shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to or in lieu of the penalties set forth in Subsection (a) hereof, the City may impose the following monetary penalties: 
(1)  For any occupancy of a travel lane or any portion thereof beyond the time periods or days set forth in the traffic control plan approved by the City: 
a.  In arterial and collector streets (as defined in the City of Greenwood Village Transportation Plan) during the hours of 6:30 a.m. through 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. through 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday: one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each fifteen (15) minutes, or portion thereof, for a maximum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per day. 
b.  In arterial and collector streets during any time other than the times specified in Subparagraph (b)(1)a. hereof, or in local streets at any time: fifty dollars ($50.00) for each fifteen (15) minutes, or portion thereof, for a maximum of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per day. 
(2)  For commencing work without a valid permit: five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus twice the applicable permit fee. 
(3)  For facilities installed outside of the approved alignment: ten dollars ($10.00) per linear foot. This penalty shall not be imposed if the facilities are removed or relocated to comply with the approved alignment or the facilities are abandoned pursuant to Subsection 11-3-240(c). 
(4)  For any other violation of a permit: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation, with no maximum amount. 
(c)  The penalties set forth in this Section shall not be the City's exclusive remedy for violations of this Division and shall not preclude the City from bringing a civil action to enforce any provision of a public right-of-way permit or to collect damages or recover costs associated with any use of the public rights-of-way. Furthermore, the enforcement of one (1) penalty shall not preclude the City from enforcing any other penalty. 
(Prior code 12.04.290; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 2 - Utility Markings 

Sec. 11-3-410. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Permittee means the holder of a valid permit issued pursuant to this Division. 
    Public right-of-way means any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, easement, park, square, median, parkway, boulevard or plaza that is dedicated to public use. 
    Utility marking means a mark made of colored or metallic paint or similar material or utilizing any adhesive material of whatever description or a flag or similar removable device or item used by a public utility or its agent in a public right-of-way to mark the existing or future location of pipelines, cables, poles, wires or other similar features. 
(Prior code 12.06.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-420. - Removal of utility markings required. 
    All utility markings shall be fully and completely removed or camouflaged from public rights-of-way utilizing a method that is least destructive to the existing improvements, and which method has been approved by the City. The removal shall occur no later than forty-five (45) days after completion of the work. The right-of-way permittee or other persons (not under a City permit) that originally caused the utility markings to be placed shall be solely responsible for removal of the utility marking. 
(Prior code 12.06.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-3-430. - Penalty. 
    Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the maximum fine allowed under Chapter 1 of this Code. Each day such violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense. As an additional means of enforcement, and not as an alternative to or substitute for prosecution for violation of this Division, the City may remove or eradicate any utility markings which are not removed pursuant to this Division and bill the party responsible for such removal the full cost incurred by the City to effect such removal. Any such costs incurred shall be immediately due and payable, and failure to pay such costs in full within thirty (30) days of billing therefor by the City shall subject the responsible party to interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum, compounded monthly. Any requests for future permits by such permittee shall be denied until all unpaid balances are paid in full. 
(Prior code 12.06.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 11 11, 2013) 
ARTICLE 4 - Underground Relocation of Overhead Facilities 

Sec. 11-4-10. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Facility means all wires, cables, poles or other equipment for the transmission or distribution of electrical current impulses, sounds, voices, data or communications within, over or upon a public right-of-way. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or any other form of association or organization, which has an ownership or leasehold interest in a facility. 
    Public right-of-way means any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, easement, park, square, median, parkway, boulevard or plaza that is dedicated to public use. 
(Prior code 12.36.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-4-20. - Facility relocation. 
    On the expiration of the date given in a notice under Section 11-4-40 to relocate underground, it shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to attach, affix, place, install, use, operate or maintain a facility within any public right-of-way identified in the notice, unless pursuant to a specific exception under Section 11-4-30, or a written grant of variance in accordance with Section 11-4-60. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior code 12.36.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-4-30. - Exceptions to relocation requirements. 
    If otherwise in conformance with the intent of this Article and all applicable provisions of Chapter 16 and other provisions of this Code, the following shall constitute exceptions to the requirements of Section 11-4-20: 
(1)  A facility is located pursuant to the provisions of a validly existing franchise agreement which has been executed by the City and the franchisee; in which case, the provisions of said franchise agreement shall apply. 
(2)  Transformers, pull boxes, services terminals, meters, pedestal terminals, ducts, spike closures, apparatus cabinets, substations and other similar equipment necessary for the transmission or distribution of electrical current impulses, sounds, voices or communications, which are not attached to overhead poles. 
(3)  Temporary wires and cables or other equipment for the transmission or distribution of electrical current impulses, sounds, voices or communications required for construction purposes. 
(4)  A facility for which a variance has been granted pursuant to the provisions of Section 11-4-60. 
(Prior code 12.36.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-4-40. - Notice to owner or operator. 
    The City shall give a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) days' advance notice of the public right-of-way location and the date by which each owner or operator of a facility must relocate its facility underground. Said relocation underground of such facility shall be at the sole cost and expense of the owner or operator thereof and shall be accomplished in conjunction with, and at the same time as, the completion of the public works project undertaken by the City or other public agency or entity. 
(Prior code 12.36.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-4-50. - Cooperation with other owner or operator. 
    After giving notice under Section 11-4-40, the City shall attempt to work with the owner or operator of a facility so all may relocate in a common trench. Said trench shall be excavated and subsequently refilled and maintained at the sole cost of the owners and/or operators of facilities placed underground therein. The City may, but is not obligated to, contribute to the cost of excavation, refilling or maintenance of said trenches, in the sole discretion of the City Council. 
(Prior code 12.36.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-4-60. - Variance; opportunity for hearing. 
(a)  An owner or operator may request a variance from the strict application of this Article and have a hearing before the City Manager. All requests must be in writing and filed with the City Manager within sixty (60) days of mailing by the City of the notice under Section 11-4-40. The request for variance must contain the name and address of the owner or operator of the facility and specify the nature of and reason for the request for variance. The City Manager shall hold a hearing within fourteen (14) days of the date of receipt by the City Manager of the written request for variance, at which hearing the owner or operator and the City may present testimony and evidence. A record of the hearing shall be made by electronic or stenographic means. 
(b)  The City Manager shall have the authority to grant a variance from the strict application of this Article on terms and conditions he deems sufficient to preserve the intent of this Article, but only upon making the following affirmative findings: 
(1)  The variance will not negatively impact the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the City; and 
(2)  One (1) of the following conditions exists: 
a.  Extreme technological difficulty exists or is likely to be encountered by the owner or operator in relocating the facility underground; or 
b.  A reasonable likelihood exists for significant land development adjacent to the subject right-of-way, which justifies not relocating underground the facility until such development occurs. 
(c)  The City Manager shall notify the owner or operator making the variance request of the decision, which decision shall be in writing, within ten (10) working days of the hearing. Review of the decision of the City Manager shall be pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4), Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. Any party aggrieved by the decision, including the City through its City Council, may initiate review pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4). 
(Prior code 12.36.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-4-70. - City not obligated to pay costs of relocation underground. 
    Except as specifically provided herein, the City shall not be obligated to incur any costs of any kind or nature relating to the underground relocation of any facility owned or operated by any person, corporation, partnership or entity of whatever description other than the City. Nothing contained herein, however, shall preclude the owner or operator of such facility which is relocated underground from recouping the costs of such underground relocation by such means as are otherwise lawful and permitted by the Public Utilities Commission or any other regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the owner or operator of the facility. 
(Prior code 12.36.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-4-80. - Violation; penalty. 
    Any owner or operator of a facility who violates this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 1-4-20. Each day of violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Prior code 12.36.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 5 - Park Regulations 

Sec. 11-5-10. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Article is to regulate the use of the City's parks, natural open areas and trails, as well as the fields, and shelters associated with such areas, to minimize the impact by large groups and special events and to ensure that the parks are reasonably available and safe for use by the public. 
(b)  Applicability. This Article shall apply to all parks, natural open areas and trails in the City, provided that City-sponsored events may be exempted from this Article upon approval of the City Manager. 
(Prior code 12.32.010; Ord. 04 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 28 1, 2012; Ord. 10, 1, 2015 ) 
Sec. 11-5-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Alcoholic beverages means malt or vinous liquors, as those terms are defined in Article 3 of Title 44, C.R.S., but does not include fermented malt beverages as that term is defined in Article 4 of Title 44, C.R.S. 
    Event means an organized gathering of individuals at a reserved field or shelter or to participate in activities including, without limitation, a birthday party, family reunion, fundraiser, picnic, or sports tournament. 
    Field means a designated area within a park. 
    Historical use means a pattern established by teams that meets the needs of the community and that serves residents. 
    League means an association of teams that enrolls participants through a registration process. 
    Natural open areas means all undeveloped and preserved areas owned, leased or operated by the City. 
    Nonresident means a person, business, school or homeowners' association other than a resident. 
    Nonresident event means an event other than a resident event. 
    Parks means all developed recreational areas and facilities (including fields and shelters) owned, leased or operated by the City and open to the public. 
    Resident means a person with a primary residence in the City or a business, school or homeowners' association located in the City. 
    Resident event means an event for which the permittee is a resident; excluding an event for which the permittee is a resident but the event is actually being organized, managed or sponsored by a nonresident. 
    Season-long means a desired reservation for the purposes of utilizing particular fields on specific days and times for practices, games and instruction. 
    Shelter means a designated area within a park that provides protection from the elements. 
    Single date means a desired reservation for a single day only. 
    Special event means a temporary outdoor activity, with only temporary or no construction activity, including without limitation weddings, parades, fairs, arts and craft shows, carnivals, festivals, soap box derbies, rallies, walks, running or bicycling races, movie productions and charity events. 
    Special occasion alcohol permit means a permit authorizing the possession and consumption, but not the sale, of alcoholic beverages during an event taking place in any park. 
    Sports tournament means an organized gathering of individuals to participate in an athletic event, such as a football, baseball, lacrosse or soccer tournament. 
    Trails means routes or paths which have been specifically prepared or designed for one (1) or more public recreational functions and may be either paved or unpaved. 
(Prior code 12.32.020; Ord. 04 1, 2010; Ord. 07 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 28 2, 2012; Ord. 10,  2, 2015 ; Ord. 07 ,  7, 2018) 
Sec. 11-5-30. - Hours. 
(a)  Parks and natural open areas shall be open from dawn until dusk. 
(1)  Monday through Saturday, all parks can be reserved from 8:00 a.m. to dusk; Sundays and holidays, parks may be reserved from 10:00 a.m. to dusk, with the exception of Curtis Park, which may not be reserved before 1:00 p.m. 
(2)  Parks may only be reserved on Sundays for single date use. Reservations will not be accepted for consecutive Sundays except for City-sponsored programs or events. 
(b)  It is unlawful to enter, use or occupy any park or natural open area during the time such areas are closed. 
(c)  The High Line Canal Trail shall be open from dawn until dusk. All other trails are open for travel at all hours. 
(Prior code 12.32.030; Ord. 04 1, 2010; Ord. 07 2, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 28 3, 2012) 
Sec. 11-5-40. - Group use of fields and shelters. 
(a)  Residents and nonresidents may reserve the use of fields and shelters subject to the size and location limitations set forth below. 
(1)  Field and Shelter Group Use Table 
Group Size Event Host Type Resident Event or Special Event Nonresident Event
(Special Events not allowed) 0-50 May use any field or shelter at Castlewood, Silo, Westlands, Village Greens or William McKinley Carson Parks Same as resident event 51-100 May use any field or shelter at Village Greens Park or William McKinley Carson Park, or may use Westlands Park Center Pavilion Same as resident event 101-150 May use any field or shelter at Village Greens Park or William McKinley Carson Park or may use Westlands Park Center Pavilion Same as resident event 151-300 May use any field or shelter at Village Greens Park or William McKinley Carson Park Same as resident event 301+ May use any field or shelter at Village Greens Park or William McKinley Carson Park Use of fields or shelters prohibited  
(2)  Only residents may reserve fields and shelters for Special Events involving any combination of the following: temporary structures, vendors, amplified sound, entertainment, street closures or trail use. 
(3)  Portions of parking lots at Village Greens Park and William McKinley Carson Park may be reserved for events when deemed necessary by staff. 
(4)  Exceptions may be made to the limitations set forth above where most participants will be walking to an event taking place in their own neighborhood. 
(b)  Permit requirements. 
(1)  A single date permit is required for any group of thirty (30) or more individuals to use a field or shelter in a park, and a special event permit as set forth in Article 2 of Chapter 16 is required for all special events involving any combination of the following: street closures, partial park and/or trail use, temporary structures, vendors, amplified sound or entertainment. 
(2)  Submittal requirements. An application for a single date permit shall be submitted to the City Manager and shall include the following: 
a.  Completed application; 
b.  Application fee as established by City Council; 
c.  Refundable security deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00), if required by the City Manager after considering the size and nature of the event; and 
d.  Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(3)  Criteria and issuance. Within ten (10) days of receipt of a completed application, the City Manager shall review the application. If the City Manager finds that the proposed use will not adversely impact the surrounding neighborhood, the use of the park by others or the park itself (including, without limitation, the park turf), and will comply with this Article, the City Manager shall issue a group use permit. 
(4)  Term. A single date permit is valid for the duration of time stated on the permit application, and is not transferable. 
(5)  Revocation. The City Manager may summarily revoke a single date permit if any member of the group violates any provision of any Code during the group's use of field or shelter. 
(6)  Single date permit priority. Applicants for resident events may apply for a permit to use a field or shelter sixty (60) days before applicants for nonresident events, per the City's seasonal permitting schedule as administered by the City Manager. 
Single Date Reservation Time Table 
Season Dates Permitting Begins Residents Nonresidents Spring February 15 to May 14 November 15 January 15 Summer May 15 to August 14 February 15 April 15 Fall August 15 to November 14 May 15 July 15  
(Prior code 12.32.040; Ord. 04 1, 2010; Ord. 07 4, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 10,  3, 2015 ) 
Sec. 11-5-50. - Season-long field reservations. 
(a)  A season-long field permit is required for a league or group of individuals desiring a reservation for the purposes of utilizing a particular field on specific days and times for practices, games, or instruction. Fields for tournaments involving multiple leagues or teams from other leagues must be reserved separately and paid for as a single date rental. 
(b)  Permit requirements. 
(1)  A season-long field permit is required for any group desiring a reservation for the purpose of utilizing a particular field(s) on specific days and times for practice, instruction or games. 
(2)  Submittal requirements. An application for a season-long field permit shall be submitted to the City Manager and shall include the following: 
a.  Completed application; 
b.  Application fee as established by City Council; 
c.  Refundable security deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00), if required by the City Manager after considering the size and nature of the event; and 
d.  Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(3)  Criteria and issuance. Within ten (10) days of receipt of a completed application, the City Manager shall review the application. If the City Manager finds that the proposed use will not adversely impact the surrounding neighborhood, the use of the park by others or the park itself (including without limitation, the park turf), and will comply with this Chapter, the City Manager shall issue a season-long field permit. 
(4)  Term. A season-long field permit is valid for the duration of time stated on the permit application, and is not transferable. 
(5)  Revocation. The City Manager may summarily revoke a season-long field permit if any member of the group violates any provision of any Code during the group's use of the field. 
(6)  Season-long field priority. Historical use league applicants may apply for a permit sixty (60) days before all other applicants, per the City's seasonal permitting schedule as administered by the City Manager. 
(7)  Priority use: 
a.  City sponsored program/activities. 
b.  Village Greens Park only: Cherry Creek High School Sports during the school year, Monday through Friday from 2:45 p.m. - 6:00 p.m. 
c.  Youth and adult sport leagues that have established historical use patterns and serve Greenwood Village residents. 
d.  Resident groups and individuals. 
e.  Nonresident groups and individuals. 
Season-long Reservation Time Table 
Season Dates Permitting Begins Historical Users All Others Spring February 15 to May 14 November 15 January 15 Summer May 15 to August 14 February 15 April 15 Fall August 15 to November 14 May 15 July 15  
(Prior code 12.32.050; Ord. 07 5, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-5-60. - Special occasion alcohol permits. 
(a)  Description. Alcoholic beverages may be allowed in parks with a special occasion alcohol permit issued by the City Manager. This Section does not require a permit for fermented malt beverages. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. An application for a special occasion alcohol permit shall be submitted to the City Manager at least fourteen (14) days prior to the event, and the application shall include the following: 
(1)  Completed application; 
(2)  Application fee as established by City Council resolution; 
(3)  Refundable security deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(4)  A copy of the issued group use permit for the event, or a copy of the application for a group use permit for the event, which shall include a map or diagram showing the location of the event and the boundaries for possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages; 
(5)  A copy of the special event permit issued under the Colorado Liquor Code, if applicable; and 
(6)  Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(c)  Criteria and issuance. The City Manager shall review the application and shall issue the special occasion alcohol permit if the application meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The applicant is twenty-one (21) years of age or older as of the date of the application; 
(2)  The time, location and duration of the event are not likely to significantly interfere with public services or the normal, customary and general use and enjoyment of the park; 
(3)  The number and concentration of participants at the event are not likely to result in crowds exceeding limitations in the City Fire Code, or other significant inconvenience to the residents of the surrounding neighborhoods; and 
(4)  Issuance of the permit would not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare by reason of the nature of the event, the likelihood that the event would create a public nuisance or result in the consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors, its location within the City, or the failure of the applicant to conduct a past event in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(d)  Conditions. A special occasion alcohol permit is subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Service, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to clearly defined areas designated by permanent or temporary boundaries that effectively control and restrict ingress and egress by the general public to ensure admittance of only invited guests; 
(2)  Service, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to invited attendees of the private special occasion who are confirmed to be of twenty-one (21) years of age or older; 
(3)  Use of glass containers is prohibited unless the permit specifically states otherwise; 
(4)  The applicant shall be personally responsible for cleaning, trash disposal and repairs necessary as a result of the event; 
(5)  No spirituous liquors, as that term is defined in Article 3 of Title 44, C.R.S., shall be served; and 
(6)  The permit is valid for the duration of time stated on the permit application and is not transferable. 
(e)  Security. The City Manager may consult with the Police Department regarding the need for security and, where appropriate, may require the provision of security at the applicant's expense as a condition to the issuance of a special occasion alcohol permit. 
(f)  Revocation. The City Manager may summarily revoke a special occasion alcohol permit if any participant in the event violates any provision of this Code during the event. 
(Prior code 12.32.060; Ord. 04 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 10, 4, 2015 ; Ord. 07 ,  8, 2018) 
Sec. 11-5-70. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Use of motorized vehicles. It is unlawful to operate any motorized vehicle in any park, natural open area or trail, except on roadways intended for vehicular traffic and open for public use and as necessary for maintenance purposes by the City. However, the use of wheelchairs and Other Power-Driven Mobility Devices (OPDMD) by individuals with mobility disabilities, as described in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), is permitted in parks, natural open areas and trails. 
(b)  Swimming, wading and boating. It is unlawful to swim or wade in, or float upon by the use of any boat or other flotation device on, any waters in any park or open space area. 
(c)  Prohibited items. The following items are prohibited in parks, natural open areas and trails: 
(1)  Glass containers unless in compliance with a special occasion permit issued pursuant to this Article; 
(2)  Firearms or weapons, including bows and arrows, bow-fishing devices and harpoons in parks and natural open areas, except with prior written permission of the City Manager; 
(3)  Fires, except in enclosed grills; 
(4)  Alcoholic beverages (which does not include fermented malt beverages, a.k.a. "3.2 beer") unless in compliance with a special occasion permit issued pursuant to this Article; 
(5)  Field markings, without the consent of City staff; 
(6)  Tents, booths, awnings, canopies, etc., without the consent of City staff; 
(7)  Storage of equipment on fields such as blocking sleds, goals or pitching machines; and 
(8)  Sponsorship or other advertising signs or banners except for while games or tournaments are occurring. All signage and banners must be removed immediately after the conclusion of games and tournaments. 
(d)  No field shall be played upon when wet enough to cause damage to the field. 
(Prior code 12.32.070; Ord. 04 1, 2010; Ord. 07 6, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 28 4, 2012; Ord. 08 ,  1, 2017) 
Sec. 11-5-80. - William McKinley Carson Park Skate Facility. 
(a)  The William McKinley Carson Park Skate Facility may be used for skateboards and bicycles without pegs. The City Manager may limit the hours of use for either skateboards or bicycles as appropriate. 
(b)  Subject to Subsection (a) hereof, the City Manager may adopt appropriate rules and regulations for the William McKinley Carson Park Skate Facility, in addition to the park regulations adopted in this Article. 
(c)  The rules and regulations for the William McKinley Carson Park Skate Facility shall be posted on site. 
(Prior code 12.32.080; Ord. 04 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-5-90. - Violation; penalty. 
    Violations of this Article shall be governed by Section 1-4-20. 
(Prior code 12.32.090; Ord. 04 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 6 - Vendors and Solicitors on Public Land 

Sec. 11-6-10. - Applicability. 
    This Article shall apply to public rights-of-way, trails, parks and other property owned, leased or operated by the City. 
(Prior code 12.33.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-6-20. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this Article, the term public lands shall mean all public rights-of-way, trails, park lands and other property owned, leased or operated by the City. Public lands shall not include property owned, leased or operated by other public entities. 
(Prior code 12.33.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-6-30. - Vendors on public lands prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to sell any food, beverage or other item of tangible personal property on any public lands in the City. 
(Prior code 12.33.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-6-40. - Exception for youth sales. 
    The prohibitions of this Article shall not apply to occasional sales of beverages such as lemonade or other soft drinks by persons under twelve (12) years of age that are not a part of any organized or adult-controlled sales effort. 
(Prior code 12.33.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-6-50. - Exception for permitted activities. 
    This Article shall not apply to City-sponsored activities or events or to activities and events as to which the City has issued a permit conducted on public lands. 
(Prior code 12.33.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-6-60. - Violation; penalty. 
    Violations of this Article shall be governed by Section 1-4-20. 
(Prior code 12.33.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 7 - Reserved 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15, 1 , adopted Sept. 14, 2015, repealed Ch. 11, Art. 7,  11-7-10-11-7-90, which pertained to noise-attenuating structures and derived from Prior code 12.28.010-12.28.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011; and Ord. 3 1, 2014. 

Secs. 11-7-10-11-7-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 8 - Newsracks 

Sec. 11-8-10. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Article is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by controlling the location of newsracks in the public rights-of-way, and to alleviate the aesthetic harm caused by unregulated newsracks in the public rights-of-way, through reasonable time, place and manner regulations. 
(b)  Applicability. This Article shall apply to newsracks located in public rights-of-way in the City. 
(Ord. 16 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-8-20. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Newsrack means a self-service box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the distribution of newspapers or other publications with or without payment. 
    Public right-of-way means any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, easement, park, square, median, parkway, boulevard or plaza that is dedicated to public use. 
(Ord. 16 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-8-30. - Location. 
(a)  Newsracks shall not interfere with the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  No group of newsracks shall be longer than twenty (20) linear feet. 
(c)  No newsrack shall be located within three (3) feet of the curb or of any other designated parking space or loading zone. 
(d)  A newsrack shall not be located less than five (5) feet from a fire hydrant. 
(e)  A newsrack shall not be located less than five (5) feet from a bus stop sign, and newsracks shall not interfere with access to busses at bus stops. 
(f)  No newsrack shall be located less than five (5) feet from a crosswalk or street corner. 
(g)  No newsrack shall be located on a tree grate. 
(h)  No newsrack shall be located less than three (3) feet from any structure, other than another newsrack. 
(i)  No newsrack shall intrude into an intersection sight triangle. 
(Ord. 16 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-8-40. - Permits. 
(a)  Description. A permit is required to locate a newsrack in any public right-of-way in the City. One (1) permit is required for each separate newsrack. A fee as established by the City Council shall be payable annually. 
(b)  Eligibility. Only one (1) publication may be placed within a newsrack. To be eligible for a permit, the applicant must be the publisher of the publication to be placed in the newsrack. 
(c)  Submittal requirements. The application shall be submitted to the Community Development Director, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee; 
(2)  Map depicting the proposed location of the newsrack; 
(3)  Photographs of all sides of the newsrack; 
(4)  An executed agreement to indemnify and hold the City harmless, in a form approved by the City Attorney; 
(5)  Proof of liability insurance with coverages and limits of at least those set forth in the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act, Section 24-10-101, et seq., C.R.S., provided annually; and 
(6)  Any other information deemed necessary by the Community Development Director. 
(d)  Issuance. Within ten (10) days of receipt of a completed application, the Community Development Director shall determine whether the application complies with this Article and, if so, shall issue the newsrack permit. 
(e)  Term. A newsrack permit is valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. A permit may not be assigned, except incidental to the sale of the publication from one (1) publisher to another. 
(f)  Revocation. The Community Development Director may revoke a newsrack permit if: the newsrack is not stocked with the permittee's publication for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days; the permittee fails to properly maintain the newsrack for five (5) consecutive days; or the newsrack is moved from the location described in the application. Prior to revocation of a newsrack permit, the Community Development Director shall provide notice and an opportunity for the permittee to be heard on the proposed revocation. 
(g)  Removal. Within three (3) days of revocation or expiration of a newsrack permit, the permittee shall remove the newsrack. If the permittee fails to do so, the City may remove the newsrack and dispose of it as abandoned property. 
(Ord. 16 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-8-50. - Design standards. 
(a)  The permittee may place a copy of the publication found in the newsrack vertically inside the face plate so that it is visible to customers. 
(b)  No advertising is permitted on the outside of a newsrack, other than the name and logo of the publication being distributed from that newsrack. 
(c)  Newsracks shall be constructed of metal or like material. Plastic newsracks are prohibited. 
(d)  Each newsrack shall be one (1) solid color, other than the name and logo of the publication being distributed from that newsrack. 
(e)  Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, in a readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the distributor. 
(Ord. 16 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-8-60. - Maintenance. 
    The permittee shall maintain the newsrack in good working order and clean condition at all times, including without limitation and as applicable, the window and face plate, the exterior, the coin mechanism, the coin tray and the lock. 
(Ord. 16 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 9 - Storm Drainage 

Sec. 11-9-10. - Drainage Criteria Manual adopted. 
(a)  The Greenwood Village Drainage Criteria Manual, dated October 2003, ("Manual") is hereby adopted by reference. Three (3) copies of the Manual shall be maintained by the City Clerk's office and available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(b)  The purpose of the Manual is to prescribe the minimum design and technical criteria for storm drainage within the City. The Manual: includes requirements for drainage facilities for new development and redevelopment projects; establishes the City's storm drainage policies and floodplain regulations; contains hydrologic criteria and methodology for determining the storm runoff design peak flows and volumes to be used in the preparation of storm drainage studies, plans and facility design; contains environmental protection criteria, including standards for erosion control, non-point source pollution control and wetlands preservation; and adopts as a secondary code the current edition of the Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual, first published by the Urban Drainage and Flood Control District, Denver, Colorado, in March, 1969. The purpose of the Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual is to prescribe the minimum design and technical criteria for the analysis and design of storm drainage facilities. 
(Prior code 12.16.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-9-20. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the Greenwood Village Drainage Criteria Manual. 
(b)  It is declared to be a nuisance for any owner, developer or occupant of any real property within the City to fail to comply with any of the provisions of the Manual. 
(c)  Upon violation of any provision of the Manual, any person may be subject to the following penalties and enforcement provisions: 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of the Manual, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code; or 
(2)  Any person violating any provision of the Manual shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 7, Article 1 of this Code. 
(d)  Each day during which the illegal construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance, use or noncompliance with conditions continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Prior code 12.16.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 11-9-30. - Construction Standards adopted. 
(a)  The Greenwood Village Construction Standards, dated October 2003, is hereby adopted by reference. Three (3) copies of the Construction Standards shall be maintained in the City Clerk's office and available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(b)  The purpose of the Construction Standards is to prescribe the minimum design and technical criteria for construction within the City. The Construction Standards: contain criteria for sitework permits, including standards for flatwork, grading and landscaping permits; and contain environmental protection criteria, including standards for erosion and sediment control plans. 
(Prior code 12.16.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
CHAPTER 16 - Land Development Code 
ARTICLE 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 16-1-10. - Purpose, construction, applicability and exceptions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purposes of this Chapter are: 
(1)  To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City to ensure logical growth; 
(2)  To promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order and prosperity of the present and future community; 
(3)  To lessen congestion in the streets; 
(4)  To secure safety from fire, panic, floodwaters and other danger; 
(5)  To provide adequate light and air; 
(6)  To provide for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public amenities; 
(7)  To prevent the overcrowding of land; 
(8)  To avoid undue concentration of population in accordance with the City's Comprehensive Plan; and 
(9)  To ensure that impacts of development are appropriately mitigated. 
(b)  Construction. 
(1)  Where this Chapter imposes a greater restriction upon land, buildings or structures than imposed or required by other ordinances, this Chapter shall control. 
(2)  This Chapter states what uses are permitted on particular parcels of property. If a use of property is not expressly permitted pursuant to this Chapter, it is prohibited. 
(3)  Where the text of any provision of this Chapter conflicts with any graphic representation or drawing, the text shall control. Similarly, where the text of any document submitted under this Chapter conflicts with any graphic representation or drawing on that document, the text shall control. 
(c)  Applicability. This Chapter regulates: 
(1)  The height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; 
(2)  The percentage of lot occupied and the size of yards; 
(3)  The density of population; 
(4)  The location and use of buildings, structures and land for business, industry, residence and other purposes; and 
(5)  Uses on or along stormwater or floodwater runoff channels and basins. 
(Prior code 15.02.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-1-20. - No liability. 
    This Chapter shall not be construed to impose liability on the City for any damage to persons or property by reason of any inspection authorized in this Chapter or any failure to inspect. 
(Prior code 15.02.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-1-30. - Comprehensive Plan. 
(a)  Adoption. The Greenwood Village Comprehensive Plan, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of the Comprehensive Plan is to set forth the goals and policies of the City and to provide guidance to decision makers concerning the future growth and development of the City. The Comprehensive Plan contains a statement of overall goals, as well as specific goals and policies related to land use, transportation, housing, open space, environment, utilities, parks and recreation and growth. 
(c)  Effect. The Comprehensive Plan is advisory only. 
(d)  Amendments. Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan shall be made by ordinance, but amendments need not be included in the Greenwood Village Code. All amendments to the comprehensive plan are incorporated by reference in this Article. 
(e)  Copies. At least one (1) copy of the Comprehensive Plan shall be maintained in the City Clerk's office and shall be open to public inspection during regular business hours. One (1) copy of the Comprehensive Plan shall be filed with the Arapahoe County Clerk and Recorder. 
(Prior code 1.12.010-1.12.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-1-40. - Zoning map. 
(a)  The boundaries of the zone districts described in this Chapter are shown upon the zoning map of the City, which is incorporated herein by this reference and is available for public inspection at City Hall. 
(b)  Interpretation. When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the zone districts shown on the zoning map, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Where a district boundary divides a lot, the regulations of the district in which fifty-one percent (51%) or more of the lot is located shall apply. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed to follow such lot lines. 
(4)  In the event any other uncertainty regarding zone district boundaries exists, the Director shall be responsible for interpretation of the boundaries. 
(c)  Amendments. Following adoption of any zoning change by the City Council, the Director or designee shall be responsible to amend the official zoning map and certify such changes by his dated signature on the official zoning map. 
(Prior code 15.06.010, 15.52.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-1-50. - Other standards. 
    This Chapter incorporates by reference the following: 
(1)  The Revised Greenwood Village Drainage Criteria Manual, as amended is hereby adopted by reference. A copy of the Manual shall be maintained by the City and available for public inspection during regular business hours. Such manual may be amended by resolution of the City Council. 
a.  Applicability. The Revised Greenwood Village Drainage Criteria Manual prescribes the minimum design and technical criteria for storm drainage within the City. The Manual: includes requirements for drainage facilities for new development and redevelopment projects; establishes the City's storm drainage policies and floodplain regulations; contains hydrologic criteria and methodology for determining the storm runoff design peak flows and volumes to be used in the preparation of storm drainage studies, plans and facility design; contains environmental protection criteria, including standards for erosion control, non-point source pollution control and wetlands preservation; and adopts as a secondary code the current edition of the Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual, first published by the Urban Drainage and Flood Control District, Denver, Colorado, in March, 1969. The purpose of the Urban Storm Drainage Criteria Manual is to prescribe the minimum design and technical criteria for the analysis and design of storm drainage facilities. 
(2)  The Greenwood Village Construction Site Management Manual, as amended is hereby adopted by reference. The Community Development Director is authorized to establish design and technical criteria for construction within the City. A copy of the Construction Site Management Manual shall be maintained by the City and available for public inspection during regular business hours. Such manual may be amended by resolution of the City Council. 
a.  Applicability. The Construction Site Management Manual prescribes the minimum design and technical criteria for construction within the City. The Construction Site Management Manual: contain criteria for site work permits, including standards for flatwork, grading and landscaping permits; and contain environmental protection criteria, including standards for erosion and sediment control plans. 
(3)  The Greenwood Village Design and Construction Standards Manual, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference. The Department of Public Works is authorized to establish standards and specifications for the construction of all public improvements in the City. The standards shall be designed to assure long life, good performance and minimum maintenance. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct or demolish any public improvement in the City except in compliance with Department of Public Works standards and specifications. A copy of the Design and Construction Standards Manual shall be maintained by the City and available for public inspection during regular business hours. Such manual may be amended by resolution of the City Council. 
a.  Applicability. The Design and Construction Standards defines and establishes principles, standards and procedures for the planning, design, approval, construction, inspection, testing and documentation of public improvements. The Manual includes requirements for transportation Impact studies, soil investigations, pavement design, lighting, landscaping, trenching, and street, pedestrian and bicycle facilities for development and redevelopment projects in the City. 
(4)  All appropriate City of Greenwood Village Application Checklists, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference. Copies of the checklists shall be maintained by the City and conform to requirements established by the Director. 
a.  Applicability. The Application Checklists provides a list of the different types of information and documentations to assist the applicants with the submittal requirements of applications for annexation, Comprehensive Plan amendments, rezoning, MDP, SDP, PUD, SUP, PSP, landscaping plan amendments, telecommunications facilities, variances, appeals, major subdivisions, minor subdivisions, preliminary plats, final plats, vacations of public rights-of-way or easements and exceptions to the subdivision requirements which are subject to submittal requirements contained in the Submittal Requirements table and to the review procedures set forth in Division 2 of this Article. 
(5)  It is declared to be a nuisance for any owner, developer or occupant of any real property within the City to fail to comply with any of the provisions of any of the referenced Manuals and such nuisance may be abated pursuant to Chapter 7 of this Code. In addition, any violation may result in a fine in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20 of this Code. 
(6)  Each day during which the illegal construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance, use or noncompliance with conditions continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Prior code 12.16.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 3 1, 2014) 
Sec. 16-1-60. - Refusal to process applications where violation exists. 
    Upon receipt of an application for any rezoning, plat, MDP, SDP, PUD, FDP, SUP, or PSP, variance, vacation of right-of-way or building permit, the Director shall, before processing said application, first determine that there are no violations of this Code on any property included in the application. If the Director finds any violations, the Director shall notify the applicant in writing and shall not process the application until the violation has been corrected. 
(Prior code 15.56.005; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-1-70. - Stop order. 
    Upon discovery of any violation of this Chapter, the Director may issue a stop order requiring that all work on the property cease until the violation is eliminated. If the stop order is given verbally, it shall be followed by a written stop order within forty-eight (48) hours thereafter. It is unlawful for any person to perform any work in violation of a stop order. 
(Prior code 15.56.010, 15.56.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-1-80. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  The following are unlawful and shall be considered violations of this Chapter: 
(1)  A violation of any provision of this Chapter; 
(2)  Failure to comply with an order to discontinue or remove any violation of the Chapter within the time period stated in the order; or 
(3)  Failure to comply with any condition, requirement or limitation imposed upon any zoning or rezoning plat, MDP, SDP, PUD plan, FDP, SUP or PSP. 
(b)  Violations of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00). 
(c)  A conviction of an offense under this Chapter for which the penalty may not exceed a fine of four hundred ninety-nine ($499.00) with no possibility of imprisonment does not constitute a crime and the punishment imposed shall not be deemed for any purpose to be penal or criminal punishment. Any person charged with such an offense shall not have a right to trial by jury 
(d)  In addition to the above penalty, the Director may choose to schedule a hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission to determine whether the violation warrants a revocation of a license or permit held under this Chapter. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to the license or permit holder by U.S. mail not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. The license or permit holder may appeal the Planning and Zoning Commission finding to the City Council by filing an application for appeal within seven (7) days of the date such findings were made. In the event the Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council upon appeal, makes a finding that the violation of the license or permit poses an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general public, it may immediately revoke the license or permit. Upon revocation, no person shall operate a license or permit without obtaining reinstatement. 
(e)  If the City Council finds that any person holding a license or permit under this Chapter has violated any provision of this Code and based on that violation, the City Council suspends or revokes such license or permit, the City Council may require that the licensee or permittee pay to the City the reasonable costs incurred by the City, not to exceed fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00), in investigating and prosecuting the alleged violation. Such costs shall include the reasonable attorney fees of any special counsel appointed to conduct the investigation and present evidence at the hearing, but shall not include any fees of the City Attorney acting as legal advisor to the City. The costs imposed pursuant to this Section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by the City Council or the Greenwood Village Municipal Court, and shall have no bearing on or relationship to any penalty imposed by the Greenwood Village Municipal Court. 
(f)  Once a permit or license has been revoked, an applicant may obtain reinstatement of the license or permit by filing a petition for reinstatement with the Director. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and decide on the petition in accordance with the administrative procedural requirements of Section 2-6-50. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny the petition. No petition for reinstatement shall be approved or conditionally approved unless the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that the violations which resulted in revocation of the permit or license have been corrected, and that the applicant has provided the City with reasonable assurances that said violations will not occur in the future. In the event the Planning and Zoning Commission denies a petition for reinstatement, the applicant may appeal such denial to the City Council by filing an application for appeal within seven (7) days of the date of the denial. City Council shall conduct a de novo hearing on appeal in accordance with the procedural requirements of Section 2-6-50. 
(g)  Violations of this Chapter may also be abated as nuisances pursuant to Chapter 7 of this Code. 
(h)  Each day during which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Prior code 15.02.040, 15.56.030, 15.56.040, 15.62.080; Ord. 10 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-1-90. - Undergrounding of electric and communication lines. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly provided by law, no plat, MDP or SDP shall be approved unless existing overhead electric and communication utility lines are installed or relocated underground. 
(b)  The following shall be exempt from this Section: 
(1)  Transformers, switching boxes, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, ducts and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground and street lighting facilities when placed above ground within a utility easement or public right-of-way, as appropriate; 
(2)  Facilities reasonably necessary to connect underground facilities or permitted overhead or aboveground facilities; 
(3)  As approved by the City, overhead electric transmission and distribution feeder lines and overhead communication long distance trunk and feeder lines, existing or new; and 
(4)  Any property for which the Director determines that the cost of undergrounding substantially outweighs the public benefit of undergrounding due to the size and number of lots involved. 
(Prior code 14.04.015; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-1-100. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Access to a public street means frontage on an existing public street built to the standards of this Chapter, a public street offered for dedication as part of a proposed subdivision and acceptable to the City, or a public street dedicated to the City on a recorded plat. 
    Accessory building means a subordinate building, such as a garage or storage shed, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal use on the same lot. 
    Accessory structure means a subordinate structure, such as a patio, hot tub, outdoor kitchen or swimming pool, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal use on the same lot. 
    Accessory use means a subordinate use which is customarily incidental to the principal use of a lot or building located on the same lot. 
    Adjacent lot means a lot sharing a common point with the lot line of the subject lot or a lot that would share such a point were it not for the presence of a street or right-of-way. 
    Agriculture means the use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming, dairying, horticulture, grazing and animal and poultry husbandry. 
    Antenna means an exterior transmitting or receiving devices mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communications signals. 
    Art studio or gallery means work space for one or more artists or artisans and/or a commercial establishment in which works of art are bought, sold, loaned, appraised, or exhibited to the general public. 
    Assisted living facility means a long-term care facility for elderly or disabled people who are able to move around on their own but may need help with some activities of daily living, or simply prefer the convenience of having their meals in a central cafeteria and having nursing staff on call. 
    ASTM means the American Society for Testing and Materials. 
    Attached garage means a garage attached to a single-family dwelling by all of the following: a common or integrated foundation; architectural continuity; and a common wall or roof element. 
    Bar means an establishment open to the public and serving alcoholic beverages pursuant a liquor license under State law. 
    Berm means a continuous earthen mound barrier designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable views, provide privacy or reduce noise. 
    BOAA means the Board of Adjustments and Appeals. 
    Building means a structure which has a roof supported by columns or walls. 
    Building faade means the exterior walls of a building exposed to public view. 
    Building ground coverage means the land area covered by a building. 
    Building height means the height of a building measured as set forth in Article 21, Division 6. 
    Business service means a commercial establishment that provides services to businesses on a fee or contract basis, including but not limited to mailing centers, repair service centers, and catering facilities. 
    Car wash means a commercial establishment containing facilities for washing or waxing automobiles. 
    Child care center means a facility providing care on a recurring daily or weekly basis, at least four (4) days per week and for more than four (4) hours per day, for which service the owner or operator receives any form of remuneration or compensation, for four (4) or more children who are not related to the owner, operator or manager thereof, who do not reside in the facility, who are present primarily during some portion of the daytime hours, and who do not stay overnight, including without limitation facilities commonly known as day care centers, nursery schools, preschools, day camps and summer camps. 
    Club means an organization catering to members and their guests and conducting activities not principally for financial gain. 
    Comprehensive Plan means the Comprehensive Plan of the City, as amended. 
    Controlled intersection means an intersection equipped with a stop sign, yield sign, traffic control signal or other suitable traffic control warning sign. 
    Construction Site Management Manual means the Greenwood Village Construction Site Management Manual, as adopted by the City Council. 
    Corner lot means a lot abutting on two (2) or more streets at their intersection, with only one front yard. 
    Courtyard wall means a decorative wall that is used to enclose an area that has at least one (1) side contiguous with a wall of a residential structure and contains a full-size door entry into the structure. 
    Craft brewery, distillery, or taproom means a business licensed as a manufacturer of spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverages by the state who distill or ferment less than 45,000 liters on the premises each calendar year and who serve only their manufactured beverages to the public without being required to serve food. 
    dB(A) means the sound level measure in decibels obtained through use of the A scale. 
    Deck means an unroofed, unenclosed platform, either freestanding or attached to a building, that is supported by pillars or posts. 
    Decorative monument means a freestanding pillar structure, which may or may not incorporate a mailbox. 
    Decorative wall means a courtyard wall, entry wall or wing wall. 
    Detached garage means a garage that does not share a common wall, roof or foundation with an adjacent dwelling unit. 
    Detached single-family dwelling means a residential structure designed to house a single-family unit, with a private outside entrance, that does not share a common wall with another dwelling unit. 
    Director means the Director of Community Development or designee. 
    Dog run means an area enclosed on one (1) or more sides by a fence intended for holding dogs or other animals for any length of time. 
    Drainage Criteria Manual means the Greenwood Village Drainage Criteria Manual, as adopted by the City Council. 
    Drainage study means a study prepared by a professional engineer analyzing a proposed development project's compliance with the Drainage Criteria Manual. 
    DRC means the Development Review Committee established by the City in the Community Development Department. 
    Dry cleaner means a commercial establishment where customers drop off, pick up and pay for garments to be dry-cleaned or laundered on or off the premises, but excluding self-serve Laundromats. 
    Dwelling unit means a housekeeping unit designed and used for occupancy by a single individual or a family and containing cooking, living, sleeping and sanitary facilities, and having a separate entrance. 
    Enclosed means having a roof and all sides closed to the weather with walls, windows or doors. 
    Entry wall means a freestanding decorative wall, located at a driveway, walkway or street entrance, which may or may not incorporate a decorative monument. 
    Equipment rental center means a commercial establishment offering the temporary use of tools, lawn and garden equipment, party supplies and similar goods and equipment in exchange for payment including storage and incidental maintenance. 
    Extended stay hotel or motel means a hotel or motel in which all rooms contain accommodations for sleeping and a kitchen equipped with a full-sized refrigerator, built-in cooking facilities, microwave, sink, dishwasher, cooking utensils, dishes and cutlery. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration or its successor agency. 
    Family means a group of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or by the relationship of guardian, ward or foster family, who may not necessarily be related by blood or marriage, or a group of not more than three (3) unrelated persons living together in a dwelling unit, living together as a single household unit; except that a family shall not include more than one (1) individual, or two (2) individuals related by marriage, required to register as a sex offender pursuant to State law. 
    Family child care home means a residential household in which state-licensed care is provided for two (2) or more children under the age of thirteen not related to an adult who resides in the home. 
    Fast-food restaurant means a restaurant with the primary purpose of selling food or beverages in a ready-to-consume state for either consumption on the premises or carry-out, typically containing a drive-in or drive-through facility. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or its successor agency. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency or its successor. 
    Fence means a linear structure consisting of wood, metal, wire, vinyl, masonry, stone or other manufactured material, which is intended to define an area, mark a property boundary or provide screening. 
    Final development plan (FDP) means a final plan adopted for a development site within the MC District to establish precise site and building plans and land uses, street dedication, ground coverage, landscaping detail land and transportation system improvements. 
    Financial institution means and includes banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, brokers and dealers of securities and commodities and security and commodity exchanges. 
    Fixed wireless antenna means a stationary antenna installed on a customer's property that is designed to receive and transmit commercial nonbroadcast communications signals via wireless technology using radio waves. The term includes, but is not limited to, multichannel multipoint distribution system (MMDS) antennae, wireless cable antennae and other similar technologies. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the term does not include the following: satellite dish antennae, AM/FM radio antennae, citizens band radio antennae, amateur radio (HAM) antennae or digital audio radio services (DARS) antennae. 
    Footprint means the area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building, measured at ground level, or the area included within the perimeter of the surrounding supporting elements of a structure, measured at ground level. 
    Front yard means that portion of a property that is parallel to and extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and principal building, provided that there can only be one (1) front yard on a lot. 
    Freestanding small wireless facility means a freestanding structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas for a small wireless facility. 
    Furniture or flooring showroom means a portion of a commercial building where samples are displayed for sale and the merchandise is later delivered from a warehouse at another location. 
    Garage means an accessory building or that portion of a principal building designed or used for the shelter of motor vehicles owned or operated by the occupant of the principal building. 
    Garden or building supply center means that area of a developed retail sales establishment or shopping center devoted to the display and sale of garden supplies or building materials. 
    General retail store means a place of business selling wares to the public at retail, such as groceries, books, clothing, jewelry, appliances, electronics, gifts, stationery, sports equipment, furniture, alcoholic beverages, hardware, garden supplies, music and musical instruments and similar items, but excluding pawn shops, sexually oriented businesses and used merchandise and thrift stores. 
    Greenhouse means a building with a roof and sides made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of fragile or out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or personal enjoyment. 
    Gross floor area has the same meaning as NFA. 
    Gross land area means all of the land area within the TC District, including public rights-of-way; provided that, where the boundaries of the TC District include part of the rights-of-way of abutting major streets, such rights-of-way shall be included in the gross land area except when the abutting street is an interstate highway, in which case the gross land area shall not include the right-of-way. 
    Group care facility means a facility providing custodial care and treatment, or social services, in a protective living environment for persons residing in the facility either voluntarily or by court placement, including without limitation facilities commonly known as group homes for the aged, group homes for the developmentally disabled, group foster care homes, shelters for abused persons, safehouses, nursing homes, intermediate care facilities and residential care facilities licensed by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, but excluding correctional and post-correctional facilities, addiction treatment centers, juvenile detention facilities, temporary custody facilities and facilities which house more than one (1) individual who is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to State law. 
    Home occupation means an occupation which is conducted within a dwelling unit and is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit. 
    Hotel or motel means a building containing guest rooms, which may have eating and drinking facilities, an interior car rental counter and meeting rooms as accessory uses, with a garage or parking area conveniently proximate, and which is intended only for transient occupancy of less than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
    Interstate 25 corridor means an area within four hundred (400) feet of the right-of-way of Interstate 25. 
    Kennel means a commercial facility for animal grooming, training, daycare and boarding, including overnight boarding, where the animals are limited to dogs and cats. 
    LEQ means the equivalent steady state sound level which in a stated period of time would contain the same acoustic energy as the time-varying sound level during the same time period. 
    Light assembly and manufacturing means fabrication or assembly facilities, packaging facilities and warehouses with no outdoor storage and no production of noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare, air pollution, fire hazards and noxious emissions beyond the property line or so as to cause a disturbance to any other tenant in a multi-tenant commercial building. 
    Light industrial facility means a place of business for light industrial or high technology uses, including without limitation laboratories, research facilities, fabrication or assembly facilities, packaging facilities and warehouses. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or designed to be occupied by one (1) building and accessory buildings, including the open space required, or any land designated as a lot on a duly recorded plat. 
    Lot area means the square footage or acreage of a lot as measured within the boundaries of the lot measured or a horizontal plane upon which the boundaries have been vertically projected, including all easements, to which may be added the area of an abutting street. 
    Lot depth means the shortest distance from the front of the lot to the nearest point of the back boundary. 
    Lot frontage means the shortest distance between the sides of the lot along the boundary abutting the street or private road. 
    Lot width means the distance parallel or nearly parallel to the front lot line measured between side lot lines through that part of the area allowed for structures where the lot is narrowest. 
    Mailing center means a center open to the public and offering mailing and shipping services, whether publicly or privately owned, including United States Postal Service offices. 
    Major subdivision means any subdivision that is not a minor subdivision. 
    Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) means the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, published by the Federal Highway Administration. 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. Marijuana does include medical marijuana but does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or other product. 
    Marijuana club means an entity that allows members and their guests to consume marijuana or marijuana products on the premises in a commercially zoned area. 
    Marijuana cultivation facility means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to other marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana product manufacturing facility means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana; manufacture, prepare and package marijuana products; and sell marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
    Marijuana testing facility means an entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana. 
    Master development plan (MDP) means a development plan specifying regulations on development of a property, including but not limited to allowed land uses, building floor areas, parking ratios, landscaping and open space requirements, setbacks, building heights, design standards and the street system. 
    Medical or dental clinic means a group of medical or dental offices organized as a unified facility to provide medical or dental treatment, as contrasted with an unrelated group of such offices, but not including bed patient care. 
    Medical marijuana means marijuana that is grown and sold for a purpose authorized by Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Medical marijuana center means a person licensed to operate a business as described in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code that sells medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products to registered patients or primary caregivers as defined in Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution, but is not a primary caregiver, and which a municipality is authorized to prohibit as a matter of law. 
    Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer means a person licensed pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code to operate a business manufacturing medical marijuana-infused products, and which a municipality is authorized to prohibit as a matter of law. 
    Micro wireless facility means a facility that is no larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height and that have an exterior antenna, if any, of no more than eleven (11) inches in length. 
    Midpoint means a horizontal line that is parallel with the front property line and is located at the exact middle of the distance between the extreme rear corner and the extreme front corner of the foundation of a primary structure. 
    Minor subdivision means a subdivision meeting all of the following conditions: 
a.  The property has previously been platted within the City; 
b.  There is no public right-of-way dedication; 
c.  The resulting subdivision will produce no more than two (2) lots; 
d.  There are no exceptions to Article 26 of this Chapter; and 
e.  There is no new point of access to an arterial street within the City. 
    Mobile food service means the preparation or service of food or beverages for immediate consumption to members of the public from a vehicle, cart or portable vending device when such service occurs on a regular basis at a fixed location and for a period of time longer than fifteen (15) minutes within any six-hour period. 
    Multi-family dwelling unit means a structure or portion thereof designed to house two or more families, with each dwelling unit having a separate entrance. 
    Net floor area (NFA) means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors within the exterior walls of a building, including interior balconies and mezzanines, measured to the interior finished faces of the exterior walls of each such floor, but excluding: any floor area devoted to mechanical, electrical or communication equipment or uses, as may be required for the operation of the building, including elevators serving the building or devoted to stairwells; any floor area in a story the ceiling whereof is less than four (4) feet above grade at any point unless the floor area is devoted to office, commercial or service uses; any floor area used exclusively as parking or circulation space for motor vehicles; any floor area in exterior balconies; and any floor area that serves as interior common area open space, such as atriums and lobbies, except that the first floor of any atrium or lobby shall constitute net floor area. 
    NIM means a neighborhood input meeting. 
    Noise-attenuating structure means any wall or berm constructed for the purpose of reducing traffic noise from an adjoining public right-of-way. 
    Nonconforming structure means a lawful structure existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which these provisions derive, or any amendment thereto, or a lawful structure existing in unincorporated Arapahoe County prior to annexation to the City, which structure does not conform with the requirements of this Chapter or the building code, as amended. 
    Nonconforming use means a lawful use existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which the provisions of this Chapter derive, or any amendment thereto, which use or structure does not conform with the requirements of this Chapter. 
    Nursery means a place where trees, shrubs, vines and plants are propagated, grown and cultivated from seed or stock for sale. 
    Office means a building or portion thereof used for financial services, professional services, insurance sales, real estate services, call centers, medical services, dental services or similar services. 
    Off-street loading space means an off-street space for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks. 
    Open space , for the purposes of calculating the percentage of a developed lot, means a public or privately owned and maintained parcel of land or body of water within a development upon which there are no buildings, parking areas, or driveways, but including plazas, sidewalks, trails, space for active and passive recreation, and landscaped areas. Parking lot landscaping and plaza areas without direct pedestrian access from the public way (including roof-top space) are not credited for inclusion in the required open space area calculations. For all other purposes open space means open areas not formally maintained and typically not providing programmed recreational activities. 
    Optional premises cultivation operation means a person licensed pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code to grow and cultivate medical marijuana for a purpose authorized by Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution, and which a municipality is authorized to prohibit as a matter of law. 
    Outdoor display and sales means the outdoor presentation for open view and retail sale of items or goods, which presentation is made on a sidewalk immediately adjacent to the retail store offering such items or goods for such sale and display, or in a parking lot, including without limitation sidewalk sales, farmers markets, outdoor display and sale of seasonal merchandise, outdoor sales by charitable organizations, and the display of tires for sale outdoors during regular business hours, provided that such outdoor display of tires is within fifteen (15) feet of the principal building and the display area does not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet. 
    Outdoor eating area means an area located on a patio adjacent to a restaurant or store at which tables or chairs are available for use by patrons of the establishment. 
    Outdoor kitchen means a permanent outdoor structure on a residential property which contains cooking facilities such as a grill, stove, burner or oven or any combination thereof. 
    Owner means the record fee owner of real property. 
    Parcel means an area of real property used for a single development, which may include a single lot or multiple contiguous lots. 
    Patient has the meaning set forth in Article XVIII,  14(1)(c) of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Patio means a level, unenclosed, hard-surfaced area that is placed directly on the ground, that is not used for motor vehicle travel or parking. 
    Personal service center means and includes hair salons, beauty salons, spas, nail salons, tanning salons, skin care centers, acupuncturist clinics, chiropractic clinics, nutrition centers and similar uses, but excluding sexually oriented businesses and massage parlors, as defined in Section 12-48.5-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
    Place of worship means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, used solely and exclusively for religious worship. 
    Planned unit development (PUD) means a development involving a related group of buildings and associated uses planned as an entity and developed and regulated as one (1) complex land use unit rather than as a mere aggregation of individual buildings located on separate unrelated lots. 
    Play structure means an unenclosed outdoor structure intended for use by children for play, including jungle gyms, swing sets, slides, climbing bars, trampolines, similar structures and any combination of such structures, but excluding skateboard structures and sport courts. 
    Pole-mounted facility means a telecommunications facility with antennae that are mounted and supported entirely on a legally existing traffic signal, utility pole, street light, flagpole, electric or transmission line support tower or other similar structure. 
    Primary caregiver has the meaning set forth in Article XVIII,  14(1)(f) of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Principal building means a building containing one (1) or more residential dwelling units, including attached garages, allowed as a use by right in any residential zone district, or an agricultural building allowed as a use by right in an agricultural zone district; provided that there can only be one (1) principal building on a lot. 
    PSP means a planned sign program. 
    Public building or facility means a use or facility owned or operated by an agency or entity exercising some portion of the sovereign functions of the government for the benefit of the public. 
    Public utility means structures and operations associated with the provision of heat, power or light systems; water, sewer or storm drainage transmission lines; or any other energy-producing source within the city serving or supplying the public. 
    Public way means a public street, public right-of-way, trail or sidewalk. 
    Radio and television studios means a commercial establishment containing one or more broadcasting studios for over-the-air, cable or satellite delivery of radio or television programs, or studios for the audio or video recording or filming of musical performances, radio or television programs, or motion pictures. This term does not include a transmission tower. 
    Real estate sign means an unlighted, temporary sign advertising the sale or lease of property. 
    Rear yard means that portion of a property that is parallel to and extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and principal building. 
    Recreation facility means a facility providing recreational services to the public or members of the facility, such as a recreation center, athletic club or swimming pool, and also includes ice rinks, bowling alleys, sport courts, arcades, batting cages, play areas, velodromes, skateboard facilities, water parks, climbing walls, teen clubs and similar uses. 
    Recreational trailer means a trailer that can be towed by a car or truck and is designed to be used for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use, including but not limited to travel trailers, fifth wheels, camping trailers, horse trailers, boat trailers and utility trailers. 
    Recreational vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle, built on a single chassis and designed to be used for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use, including but not limited to motor homes, truck campers, boats and other watercraft. 
    Repair service center means a facility for improvements to correct deficiencies in consumer products resulting from normal wear and tear, such as appliances, shoes, jewelry and electronics. 
    Restaurant means an establishment with the primary purpose of serving food to the public. 
    Retail marijuana store means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers. 
    Riding stable means a private establishment where horses are kept without the exchange of compensation. 
    Roof-mounted facility means a telecommunications facility that is mounted and supported entirely on the wall of a legally existing building, including the walls of architectural features such as parapets, chimneys and similar appurtenances. 
    Safehouse means a building providing a safe and confidential residence to women and their children who have been victimized by physical or emotional abuse. 
    Satellite dish antenna means an antenna that is designed to receive one (1) of the following: direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite service; video programming services via multi-point distribution services, including multi-channel, multi-point distribution services, instructional television fixed services and local multi-point distribution services; or television broadcast signals. 
    School means a public or private educational institution, including preschools, grammar schools, middle schools, high schools and charter schools, but excluding colleges and universities. 
    Seasonal merchandise means lawn and garden supplies, produce, bedding plants, nursery stock, fertilizer, sod, pumpkins, Christmas trees, holiday items and other similar items which are customarily offered for sale outdoors during a particular season of the year and not at other times. 
    Self-storage facility means a structure or group of structures containing separate, individual and private storage spaces of varying sizes which are individually leased. 
    Setback means the required distance between the property line and a structure. 
    Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments open to the public which are planned, constructed and managed by a single entity, with customer and employee parking provided on-site. 
    Short term rental means the furnishing of accommodations for compensation in a primary residence or lawful inhabitable accessory structure for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
    Side yard means that portion of a property extending across the full width of the lot between the front and rear yards and side lot line. 
    Site Development Plan (SDP) means a detailed development plan for a property zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or LI, and the final step in the MDP process for property zoned TC or MC. 
    Skateboard structure means a structure containing slopes, ramps, pipes or passageways for recreational use by skateboarders. 
    Small cell facility means either of the following: 
(a)  Micro wireless facilities that are no larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height and that have an exterior antenna, if any, of no more than eleven (11) inches in length; or 
(b)  A wireless service facility where each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic feet or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic feet and where primary equipment enclosures are no larger than seventeen (17) cubic feet in volume. 
    Small cell network means a collection of interrelated small cell facilities designed to deliver wireless service. 
    Small wireless facility or small cell wireless means either of the following: 
(a)  Micro wireless facilities; or 
(b)  A wireless service facility where each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic feet or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic feet and where primary equipment enclosures are no larger than seventeen (17) cubic feet in volume. 
    Small wireless network means a collection of interrelated small wireless facilities designed to deliver wireless service. 
    Special event means a temporary outdoor activity, with only temporary or no construction activity, including without limitation weddings, parades, fairs, arts or craft shows, carnivals, soap box derbies, rallies, movie productions and charity events. 
    Sport court means an unenclosed outdoor structure used for sport, including without limitation basketball courts, handball courts, tennis courts, volleyball courts and shuffleboard courts. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above. 
    Street frontage means the property line of a lot which adjoins a public or private street or roadway, including Interstate 25 and light rail right-of-way. 
    Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, posts, beams, girders, floor joists or roof joists. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected upon or in the ground, excluding utility poles and flagpoles. 
    Support facilities means support buildings, structures or equipment cabinets containing electrical and mechanical equipment and devices used for the reception of or transmission of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. 
    Swimming pool means a structure intended for swimming and designed to contain water over twenty-four (24) inches deep, whether in-ground, aboveground or on-ground. 
    Telecommunications facility means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts pedestals, antennae, towers, electronics and other appurtenances used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications service, but excluding direct-to-home satellite dish antennae less than one (1) meter in diameter, TV antennae for the reception of broadcast television signals, and wireless cable antennae designed to receive or transmit fixed commercial non-broadcast communications signals via satellite to and/or from a fixed customer location. 
    Telecommunications service means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease or in exchange for other value received, or for the provision of any emergency telecommunications purposes, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium, and includes broadband service as set forth in 7 U.S.C. sec. 950bb(b)(1), as amended. 
    Telecommunications tower means a freestanding structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennae for a telecommunications facility, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopole towers, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers and other similar structures. 
    Tent means a freestanding fabric-covered structure supported by a wood or metal framework that may or may not require the use of guy wires or ropes for its support. 
    Theater means a building or part of a building used to show motion pictures or for drama, dance, musical or other live performances, excluding sexually oriented businesses. 
    Trade contractor office means an office for one (1) or more contractors providing trade services such as construction, plumbing, electrical, heating, ventilation and air conditioning and involving the outdoor storage or use of equipment or materials. 
    Transportation Impact Study (TIS) means a report prepared by a licensed traffic engineer to evaluate and plan for changes in traffic levels and patterns brought about by development projects, to analyze such projects for consistency with the City's transportation plan and policies, and to address potential for safety and congestion problems. 
    Uncontrolled intersection means an intersection that is not equipped with a stop sign, yield sign, traffic control signal or other suitable traffic control warning sign. 
    USGS means the United States Geological Survey or its successor. 
    Variance , for purposes of applications heard by the BOAA, means any deviation from the requirements of a residential zoning ordinance or residential building regulation except as permitted by a planned unit development. 
    Vehicle body shop means a commercial establishment where the integral component parts of a vehicle chassis or body are built, altered, removed, repaired, or improved. 
    Vehicle dealership means a facility for the sale and leasing of motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles and personal watercraft and the incidental repair of such vehicles. 
    Vehicle fueling station means a use devoted to the retail sale of vehicle fuel and oil, with repair activities that are minor in scope and subordinate to the sale of fuel products, and facilities for washing of not more than three (3) vehicles completely enclosed in a structure. 
    Vehicle rental facility means a commercial establishment offering the temporary use of automobiles or trucks in exchange for payment, including office space, parking areas for rental vehicles, parking areas for customers and employees, and servicing and repair facilities, but not including facilities for bodywork, painting or restoration. 
    Vehicle repair facility means a commercial establishment for the purpose of vehicle repair and servicing of a minor nature, such as tune-up, oil change, chassis lubrication, tire change or repair, wheel alignment and muffler repair or installation. 
    Vehicle stacking means the minimum required length of an on-site drive aisle necessary to allow for the movement of vehicles within a parking lot to a drive-up window service or other drive-through services without impeding the flow of traffic on-site and off-site. 
    Veterinary clinic means a facility for animal care maintained by a licensed veterinarian where the animals are limited to dogs, cats and other comparable household pets, without overnight boarding except when necessary for treatment. 
    Wall-mounted facility means a telecommunications facility that is mounted and supported entirely on the wall of a legally existing building, including the walls of architectural features such as parapets, chimneys and similar appurtenances. 
    Warehouse means a building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
    Wholesale business means a commercial establishment primarily engaged in selling and/or distributing merchandise to retail, industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers. 
    Wing wall means a decorative wall that extends outward from any corner of a principal residence, not including walls retaining earth completely on one (1) side or load-bearing walls of the residence. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building, that space being unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward by any structure or portion thereof, except a roof with a projection of not more than three (3) feet from the building. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.04.020, 15.04.030, 15.04.060, 15.04.062, 15.04.064, 15.04.070, 15.04.090, 15.04.105, 15.04.110, 15.04.120, 15.04.125, 15.04.145, 15.04.157, 15.04.158, 15.04.159, 15.04.169, 15.04.180, 15.04.190, 15.04.200, 15.04.210, 15.04.224, 15.04.226, 15.04.230, 15.04.232, 15.04.240, 15.04.242, 15.04.244, 15.04.250, 15.04.274, 15.04.290, 15.04.300, 15.04.305, 15.04.310, 15.04.320, 15.04.340, 15.04.348, 15.04.350, 15.04.360, 15.04.370, 15.04.380, 15.04.400, 15.04.402, 15.04.404, 15.04.408, 15.04.430, 15.04.456, 15.04.458, 15.04.460, 15.04.470, 15.04.480, 15.04.497, 15.04.500, 15.04.520, 15.04.550, 15.04.552, 15.04.557, 15.04.559, 15.04.560, 15.04.562, 15.04.564, 15.04.568, 15.04.570, 15.04.612, 15.04.620, 15.04.630, 15.04.640, 15.04.641, 15.04.642, 15.04.643, 15.04.643.5, 15.04.644, 15.04.645, 15.04.646, 15.04.648, 15.04.660, 15.42.310, 15.42.520, 15.04.495, 15.44.090, 15.44.100, 15.48.104, 15.48.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 1 1, 2012; Ord. 1 1, 2013; Ord. 8 1, 2014; Ord. 16 13, 2015 ; Ord. 22 1, 2015 ; Ord. 02 2 , 2016; Ord. 05 1, 2016; Ord. 09 ,  1, 6-19-2017; Ord. 03  1, 4-15-2019; Ord. 07  1, 4-15-2019) 
ARTICLE 2 - Procedures 
Division 1 - Types of Land Use Applications 

Sec. 16-2-10. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Division is to list the different types of development applications which are subject to the review procedures set forth in Division 2 of this Article. 
(b)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to applications for annexation, Comprehensive Plan amendments, rezoning, MDP, SDP, PUD, SUP, PSP, landscaping plan amendments, variances, appeals, major subdivisions, minor subdivisions, preliminary plats, final plats, vacations of public rights-of-way or easements and exceptions to the subdivision regulations. 
(c)  Treatment of Historical Plans. 
(1)  PUDs shall only apply to residential properties. Commercial PUDs existing as of the date of this ordinance shall be processed as SDPs pursuant to this Chapter; 
(2)  FDPs existing as of the date of this ordinance shall be processed as SDPs pursuant to this Chapter; 
(3)  Master Land Use Plans or Preliminary Development Plans (PDP) adopted at the time of annexation into the City shall be processed as MDPs pursuant to this Chapter; and 
(4)  Site plans existing as of the date of this ordinance shall be processed as SDPs. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. No. 09 ,  2, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 16-2-20. - Annexation. 
(a)  Description. Territory not within the boundaries of the City may be annexed to the City as provided by this Division and state law. 
(b)  Eligibility. 
(1)  Every annexation shall meet the requirements of Section 31-12-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
(2)  Every annexation shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  An annexation of territory used or zoned for residential purposes requires an election pursuant to Section 1.07 of the Charter. 
(c)  Submittal requirements. The submittal requirements are contained in the Submittal Requirements table. 
(d)  Steps. The steps for annexation requests are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(e)  Review criteria. The City Council shall consider the criteria set forth in Section 31-12-116, C.R.S., when reviewing a proposed annexation. 
(f)  Zoning of annexed area. 
(1)  Temporary. The City Council, by Charter, may determine temporary zoning and establish a temporary zoning district or districts. 
(2)  Permanent. Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of an ordinance of annexation, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the appropriate zoning for the annexed area, in accordance with Section 16-2-280. Within fifteen (15) days of such hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit its recommendation to the City Council, which shall, within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the annexation ordinance, adopt an ordinance zoning the annexed property. 
(Prior code 15.06, 15.06.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-30. - Rezoning. 
(a)  Description. This Section governs a change in the zoning of property. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The submittal requirements for a rezoning application are set forth in the Submittal Requirements table, provided that the application may be filed by the Director, the City Council or the property owner. 
(c)  Steps. The steps required to process a rezoning application are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(d)  Review criteria. In reviewing the proposed rezoning, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider whether the rezoning: 
(1)  Is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  Is compatible with surrounding land uses; and 
(3)  Adequately mitigates any adverse impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services. 
(Prior code 15.52.005(part), 15.52.010, 15.52.030, 15.52.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-40. - Master Development Plan. 
(a)  Description. The MDP establishes the general land uses on property comprised of multiple parcels, including development criteria and restrictions, development standards and design guidelines, and allows flexibility in establishing specific building architecture and site layout details. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The submittal requirements for an MDP application are set forth in the Submittal Requirements table. 
(c)  Steps. The steps required to process an MDP application are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(d)  Review criteria. In reviewing an MDP, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider whether the proposed MDP: 
(1)  Is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  Is compatible with surrounding land uses; and 
(3)  Adequately mitigates any adverse impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.38; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 1, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-2-50. - Site Development Plan. 
(a)  Description. An SDP is a detailed development plan for a property zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 or LI, property not owned by the City and zoned O-1, O-2 or A, property for which an SUP is proposed, and as the final step in the development process for property zoned TC or MC. The Site Development Plan approval process allows for the modification of any applicable development standard that is established in this code. 
(b)  Applicability. An SDP is required for: 
(1)  A scrape-off of all or a majority of existing improvements; 
(2)  A modification to an existing building that increases the NFA and parking requirements; 
(3)  An open space reduction of more than five percent (5%) or a reduction in open space that would result in a percentage lower than the minimum established for the specific property; or 
(4)  Development of a vacant parcel. 
(c)  Submittal requirements. The submittal requirements for an SDP application are set forth in the Submittal Requirements table. 
(d)  Steps. The steps required to process an SDP application are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(e)  Review criteria. The Director, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider the following criteria when reviewing an SDP application, unless the applicable MDP provides for different criteria: 
(1)  Whether the development is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  Whether the development is compatible with surrounding land uses; 
(3)  Whether the development adequately mitigates any adverse impacts it causes, including, without limitation, adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services; 
(4)  Whether the development is in conformance with the development criteria, restrictions and standards set forth in the MDP; 
(5)  Whether the development is in conformance with the general development objectives set forth in Section 16-21-20 of this Chapter; and 
(6)  In cases involving parcels zoned O-1 or O-2, whether the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission has reviewed the proposal. 
(f)  Modifications. If an applicant wishes to modify an approved SDP, the applicant shall submit a request for such modification to the Director. The Director shall determine whether the proposed modification is a major, minor or administrative modification. 
(1)  Major modification. 
a.  Description. A major modification is one which would alter the concept or intent of the SDP, including without limitation increases in density, changes in height, reductions of open space or parking, changes in development standards or changes in governing agreements. 
b.  Submittal requirements and steps. The submittal requirements and review steps are the same as for an initial SDP application. 
c.  Review criteria. The City Council shall consider whether the modification: 
1.  Is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Is compatible with surrounding land uses; 
3.  Adequately mitigates any adverse impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services; and 
(2)  Minor modification. A minor modification is one that does not increase the approved density, height or floor area ratio, nor decrease the open space or parking requirements by more than five percent (5%) or decrease an approved setback. 
a.  Submittal requirements and steps. A minor modification shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission, including such information necessary to inform the Planning and Zoning Commission of the substance of the proposed modification and its effect on surrounding properties. 
b.  Review criteria. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider whether the modification: 
1.  Is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Is compatible with surrounding land uses; and 
3.  Adequately mitigates any adverse impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services. 
(3)  Administrative modification. 
a.  Description. Authority is delegated to the Director to make administrative modifications to previously approved and recorded SDP, subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  The modification shall be for the sole purpose of correcting an administrative or clerical error, such as correction of inaccurate legal descriptions, inaccurate topographic information and other technical information. 
2.  No administrative modification shall be made by the Director until the Director has reviewed the information submitted to the City Council at the time of the City Council's approval of the SDP, and the Director has determined that the information as corrected conforms with the City Council's intent in approving the original SDP request. 
3.  No administrative modification shall be made by the Director which would have the effect of increasing density, diminishing a setback or authorizing any use not specifically approved by the City Council, or otherwise enable any property or building to be used in violation of this Code. 
b.  Submittal requirements and steps. A request for an administrative modification of an SDP shall be submitted to the Director, including such information necessary to inform the Director of the substance of the modification and its effect on surrounding properties. 
c.  Review criteria. The Director shall consider whether the modification: 
1.  Is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Is compatible with surrounding land uses; and 
3.  Adequately mitigates any adverse impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.38, 15.40, 15.52.140; Ord. 14 2, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 22 1, 2, 2012; Ord. 16 2, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-2-60. - Planned Unit Development. 
(a)  Description. The PUD procedure allows for the establishment of flexible development standards for efficient use of land in the City, to result in a development that is better planned and more desirable than one produced in accordance with the conventional zoning controls. The PUD outlines the development standards and design guidelines for a property. A premise upon which a PUD is conditioned is that it contains positive features not typically required of traditional development. The flexibility is justified by, for instance, a reduction on the burden of traffic on the streets, the conservation of open space or preservation of natural characteristics of a site and the enhancement of pedestrian and equestrian corridors. 
(b)  Applicability. A PUD is required for a rezoning in the R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 and R-0.05 Districts and is not permitted in any other zone district. 
(c)  Submittal requirements. The submittal requirements for a PUD application are set forth in the Submittal Requirements table. 
(d)  Steps. The steps required to process a PUD application are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(e)  Review criteria. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider the following criteria in making their determination as to approval or denial of a PUD application: 
(1)  Whether the development is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  Whether the development is compatible with surrounding land uses; 
(3)  Whether the development adequately mitigates any adverse impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services; and 
(4)  Whether a deviation from the zone district requirements and limitations is warranted by virtue of the improved design and amenities provided in the PUD. 
(f)  Modifications. If an applicant wishes to modify an approved PUD, the applicant shall submit a request for such modification to the Director. The Director shall determine whether the proposed modification is a major, minor or administrative modification. 
(1)  Major modification. 
a.  Description. A major modification is required for changes which would alter the concept or intent of the PUD, including without limitation increases in density, changes in height, reductions in open space, changes in standards or changes in governing agreements. 
b.  Submittal requirements and steps. The submittal requirements and steps are the same as for an initial PUD application. 
c.  Review criteria. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider whether the modification: 
1.  Is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Is compatible with surrounding land uses; 
3.  Adequately mitigates any adverse impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services; and 
4.  Promotes the goals of the approved PUD. 
(2)  Minor modification. 
a.  Description. A minor modification is one that does not increase the approved residential density, height or floor area ratio, nor decrease the open space requirements or parking requirements by more than five percent (5%) or decrease an approved setback. 
b.  Submittal requirements and steps. A request for a minor modification to a PUD shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission, including such information necessary to inform the Planning and Zoning Commission of the substance of the proposed modification and its effect on surrounding properties. 
c.  Review criteria. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider whether the modification: 
1.  Is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Is compatible with surrounding land uses; 
3.  Adequately mitigates any adverse impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services; and 
4.  Promotes the goals of the approved PUD. 
(3)  Administrative modification. 
a.  Description. Authority is delegated to the Director to make administrative modifications to a previously approved and recorded PUD, subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
1.  The modification shall be for the sole purpose of correcting an administrative or clerical error, such as correction of inaccurate legal descriptions, inaccurate topographic information and other technical information. 
2.  No administrative modification shall be made by the Director until the Director has reviewed the information submitted to the City Council at the time of the City Council's approval of the plan, and the Director has determined that the information as corrected conforms with the City Council's intent in approving the original plan request. 
3.  No administrative modification shall be made by the Director which would have the effect of increasing density, diminishing a setback, authorizing any use not specifically approved by the City Council or otherwise enabling any property to be used in violation of this Code. 
b.  Submittal requirements and steps. A request for an administrative modification of a PUD shall be submitted to the Director, including such information necessary to inform the Director of the substance of the modification and its effect on surrounding properties. 
c.  Review criteria. The Director shall consider whether the modification: 
1.  Is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Is compatible with surrounding land uses; 
3.  Adequately mitigates any adverse impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services; and 
4.  Promotes the goals of the approved PUD. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.54.010; 15.54.020; 15.54.110, 15.54.120, 15.54.130, 15.54.140, 15.54.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 07 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-2-70. - Special Use Permit. 
(a)  Description. An SUP allows a special use where appropriate and compatible with existing uses, subject to additional review by the City. 
(b)  Applicability. An SUP is required for a special use in any zone district. 
(c)  Submittal requirements. The submittal requirements for an SUP application are set forth in the Submittal Requirements table. 
(d)  Steps. The steps required to process an SUP application are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(e)  Review criteria. In reviewing an application for an SUP, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider whether the special use: 
(1)  Is expressly allowed as a special use in the zone district; 
(2)  Is compatible with surrounding land uses; 
(3)  Adequately mitigates any adverse impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services; and 
(4)  Is properly designed with regard to landscaping, open space, parking, setbacks and building elevations. 
(f)  Transferability. Upon approval of an SUP, the City Council shall determine whether the SUP shall be transferable to other owners and shall make such determination a condition of approval. 
(g)  Abandonment. In the event the holder of a special use permit fails to operate the special use for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the special use shall be deemed to have been abandoned, the right to operate or conduct the special use shall be immediately terminated and the special use permit shall be void and of no further effect. 
(h)  Amendments. 
(1)  Major amendment. 
a.  Description. A major amendment to an SUP is required for the addition of a use and associated improvements or site modifications to a property with an existing SUP, including: the addition of any use; an increase in building coverage; an increase in structure height; or a change in parking or open space coverage by five percent (5%) or more. 
b.  Submittal requirements. The submittal requirements for a major amendment to an SUP are set forth in the Submittal Requirements table. 
c.  Steps. The steps required to process a major amendment to an SUP are set forth in the Review Process table. 
d.  Review criteria. The criteria shall be those set forth in subsection (e) hereof. 
(2)  Minor amendment. 
a.  Description. A minor amendment to an SUP is appropriate when there is no change in use, expansion of building coverage of less than five hundred (500) square feet or a reduction of open space or parking coverage of less than five hundred (500) square feet. 
b.  Submittal requirements. The submittal requirements for a minor amendment to an SUP are set forth in the Submittal Requirements table. 
c.  Steps. The steps required to process a minor amendment to an SUP are set forth in the Development Review Process table. 
d.  Review criteria. The criteria shall be those set forth in subsection (e) hereof. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.16.010, 15.60.020, 15.60.050, 15.60.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-80. - Planned Sign Program. 
(a)  Description. A PSP is a voluntary optional alternative to the general sign regulations, which is intended to encourage the maximum incentive and latitude to achieve variety and good design. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The submittal requirements for a PSP application are set forth in the Submittal Requirements table. 
(c)  Steps. The steps required to process a PSP application are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(d)  Criteria for approval. Prior to approval of a PSP, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall find that: 
(1)  The program will accomplish the general objectives of this Chapter with regard to encouraging a desirable urban character, enhancing the economic value of the community, reduction of safety hazards and provision of way-finding; 
(2)  The program is well-designed and pleasing in appearance employing variety and good design relationships; 
(3)  The program is compatible with the Comprehensive Plan and adjacent land uses; and 
(4)  Illumination and size of signs in the program are appropriate for the location, use and character of the neighborhood, particularly existing nearby residential uses or structures. The program should minimize adverse impacts from intense illumination and large signs or structures which visually dominate an area. 
(e)  Sign copy. The sign copy for a sign shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the sign area. 
(f)  Signs affixed to buildings. 
(1)  The sign area for a sign affixed to a building shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the building faade upon which such sign is located. 
(2)  A sign located above a building faade (eave line) shall be integral with the building and also an integral design feature of the building. 
(g)  Signs within sixty (60) feet of property used for residential purposes. Signs, including lighting, shall be designed to minimize negative visual impacts on nearby residential neighborhoods. Signs shall not be illuminated after the close of business. 
(h)  Ground signs. 
(1)  Ground signs within the I-25 corridor shall not exceed the height necessary for the sign to be legible for motorists traveling on I-25. If highway and light rail infrastructure do not provide a visual impediment, then a ground sign shall meet the height standard for the applicable zone district. A request for a deviation from the ground sign height standard for the applicable zone district should include adequate documentation, such as photo-simulations and cross-sections, demonstrating the need for the deviation from the height standard for motorists to reasonably view the signs from I-25. 
(2)  Monument signs with architecturally compatible bases are encouraged in order to avoid a top-heavy appearance of the sign. 
(i)  Amendments. 
(1)  Description. An amendment to a PSP is required for any change, including without limitation changes in area, height, location, materials, letter style, color, illumination, method used for structural support or attachment, or sign shape. 
(2)  Submittal requirements and steps. The submittal requirements and steps for an amendment to a PSP shall be the same as the original PSP. 
(3)  Review criteria. In reviewing an amendment to a PSP, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the PSP criteria set forth in Subsection (d) hereof. 
(Prior code 15.46.010, 15.46.080; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-90. - Landscaping plan. 
(a)  Description. A landscape plan is a detailed plan that identifies existing and proposed hardscape and landscape by delineating walkways, paved surfaces, trees, shrubs and ground covers, as well as alterations of the site for grading, paving and/or excavation. 
(b)  Applicability. This Section applies to any new or amended MDP, SDP, PUD plan, SUP or site plan. 
(c)  Submittal requirements. The submittal requirements for a landscaping plan are set forth in Section 16-21-220. 
(d)  Steps. The steps required to process an application that includes a landscape plan are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(e)  Review criteria. The Director, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider the landscape plan pursuant to the MDP, SDP, PUD plan, or SUP review criteria as set forth in Article 21 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.45.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-100. - Landscaping plan amendment for water conservation. 
(a)  Description. Amendments to existing landscaping plans for purposes of water conservation may be processed administratively. 
(b)  Applicability. This Section applies to an amendment to any landscaping plan that has been approved pursuant to a PUD, SDP or SUP. 
(c)  Review criteria. Prior to approving an amendment to an existing landscaping plan, the Director shall review the intent of the existing landscaping plan and determine that the amended landscaping plan satisfies the intent of the existing landscaping plan and the following: 
(1)  The landscaping serves as a buffer to adjacent property in one (1) or more of the following ways: by mitigating impacts from incompatible uses, by buffering window views between buildings or by providing a reasonable transition between differing land uses; or the landscaping screens adjacent property in one (1) or more of the following ways: by minimizing impacts of accessory uses or structures, by screening loading areas, mechanical areas or other service areas or by mitigating unsightly views, noise, glare, dust or other off-site effects on a year-round basis; or the landscaping enhances the appearance or functionality of the site in one (1) or more of the following ways: by promoting a park-like appearance, by creating visual breaks between streets and parking lots, by reducing large expanses of pavement by including foundation plantings that visually anchor buildings to a site or by including appropriate plantings for streets, driveways or walkways; 
(2)  The amendment satisfies the intent of the original landscaping plan; 
(3)  The amendment provides for proper coordination of the planning and engineering necessary to implement the amended landscaping plan; 
(4)  The amendment provides for adequate irrigation for the survival of plant material while conserving water, and provides for soil amendments to increase the water-holding capacity of the soil; 
(5)  The amendment includes a variety of plant sizes and species that at maturity are appropriate in relation to the size of the site or the landscaped area; 
(6)  The amendment places shrubs to achieve massing at maturity; 
(7)  The amendment maintains appropriate ground coverage in areas subject to high levels of pedestrian traffic; 
(8)  The amendment ensures adequate snow storage areas, does not hinder views of pedestrians or motorists and ensures that appropriate levels of sunlight are present to minimize icing conditions in areas of vehicle and pedestrian traffic; 
(9)  The amendment does not include noxious weeds set forth in Section 7-4-10 of this Code; and 
(10)  The amendment provides adequate landscaping for fences or walls. 
(Prior code 15.74.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09 ,  3, adopted June 19, 2017, repealed  16-2-110. Former  16-2-110 pertained to telecommunications facilities and derived from prior code 15.72.080 and Ord. 32, adopted in 2011. 
Sec. 16-2-120. - Variance. 
(a)  In order for a variance from residential zoning ordinances or residential building codes to be granted for properties developed as a residential use, the request must meet all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon similar properties or buildings in the vicinity and in the same zone district. 
(2)  The variance will be in harmony with and not alter or weaken the spirit and purpose or essential character of the zoning for the zone district in which the property is located. 
(3)  The variance will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent property in the same zone district. 
(4)  The variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(b)  In addition to meeting all four (4) of the criteria in subsection (a), a variance request must also satisfy at least one (1) of the following three (3) criteria: 
(1)  The existence of special conditions or circumstances, such as size, shape, location, topography or surroundings of the land, structure or building involved, which deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by owners of other properties in the vicinity or in the same zone district. 
(2)  The variance is necessary and appropriate to make possible the reasonable use of the land or the structures on the property. 
(3)  The variance will ameliorate a difficulty which did not result from the acts or omissions of the applicant. 
(c)  Vote. The BOAA members present shall vote by voice vote on each application. To deny a variance, a simple majority vote shall be required. The failure to obtain the following required number of affirmative votes to grant a variance shall constitute a denial: 
Number of BOAA 
Members Present Number of Affirmative 
Votes Required 5 4 6 5 7 5 8 6  
(d)  Conditions. The BOAA may impose reasonable conditions on the grant of any variance. In addition, upon approval of a variance, the BOAA shall determine whether the variance is limited to the conditions existing on the property at the time of approval, or whether the variance runs with the land regardless of whether the conditions on the property change. 
(e)  Decision. The BOAA's decision shall be final, subject only to judicial review. 
(f)  Time limits. 
(1)  Building and other permits required to complete an approved variance must be acquired within one (1) year from the approval date, and construction pursuant to such a variance shall be completed within one (1) year from the date following issuance of the permit(s) unless otherwise specified by the BOAA in its decision. If either the permit is not issued or construction is not completed within the established deadlines, the variance shall automatically terminate. However, upon application made prior to either deadline, the BOAA may, for good cause shown, issue not more than one (1) extension of the deadline. Upon completion of construction, the applicant shall contact the City to schedule an inspection, and, if determined necessary by the Director, the applicant shall provide an improvement location certificate for the property. 
(2)  No application for a variance which is the same or substantially the same as an application previously considered and ruled upon by the BOAA shall be accepted by the City until at least one (1) year has elapsed from the date of the last ruling by the BOAA. 
(Prior code 2.44.060, 2.44.070, 15.78; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 05  3 , 2016; Ord. No. 07 ,  1, 5-1-2017) 
Sec. 16-2-130. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals of administrative decisions or stop work order. 
(1)  Description. 
a.  This Section allows a person affected by an administrative decision of the Director to appeal that decision to the BOAA. 
b.  Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity deeming itself aggrieved by the issuance of a stop order pursuant to this Chapter may appeal the issuance of the order to the BOAA within thirty (30) days after service of the stop order. 
(2)  Submittal requirements. The submittal requirements for appeals are set forth in the Submittal Requirements table. 
(3)  Steps. The steps required to process an appeal are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(4)  Review criteria. The BOAA shall determine whether the Director's decision was supported by the evidence presented to the Director and in accordance with this Chapter, and then either affirm or reverse the Director's decision. 
(5)  Procedure. A written notice of appeal of any administrative decision or stop work order shall be filed within fifteen (15) days of the decision being appealed. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Director and shall state with specificity the reasons for appeal. The BOAA shall hear such appeal within thirty (30) days of the filing of the notice of appeal. At such hearing, both the appellant and the Director shall have an opportunity to be heard and present evidence. 
(6)  Decision. A simple majority vote is required to either affirm or reverse the Director's decision. 
(7)  Ruling. The BOAA may affirm the decision, reverse the decision or affirm the decision with conditions. The ruling of the BOAA shall be final, subject to judicial review. 
(8)  No repeat appeals. The BOAA shall not consider an appeal which is the same or substantially the same as an appeal previously considered and ruled upon by the BOAA. 
(Prior code 2.44.060, 2.44.070, 2.44.110, 2.44.130, 15.56.020, 15.78; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-140. - Major subdivision. 
(a)  Description. The major subdivision process includes both a preliminary and final plat review, and is governed by Article 26 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. All such submittals shall comply with the Submittal Requirements table set forth in Division 2, and the appropriate Application Checklist, referenced in Article 26 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Steps. The steps required to process a major subdivision application are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(d)  Review criteria. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider the following criteria when reviewing an application for a major subdivision: 
(1)  Whether the subdivision is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  Whether the subdivision is in conformance with the Zoning District and this Chapter; 
(3)  Whether the subdivision is compatible with surrounding land uses; and 
(4)  Whether the subdivision adequately mitigates any impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services. 
(e)  Major subdivisions are subject to all fees and public land dedications. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-150. - Minor subdivision. 
(a)  Description. The minor subdivision process is intended to provide a streamlined review process for subdivisions of land that are minor in nature, with only a final plat review, and is governed by Article 26 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. All such submittals shall comply with the Submittal Requirements table set forth in Division 2, Documentary Requirements, of Article 26 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Steps. The steps required to process a minor subdivision application are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(d)  Review criteria. The City Council shall consider the following criteria when reviewing an application for a minor subdivision: 
(1)  Whether the subdivision is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)  Whether the subdivision is in conformance with this Chapter; 
(3)  Whether the subdivision is compatible with surrounding land uses; and 
(4)  Whether the subdivision adequately mitigates any impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services. 
(e)  Minor subdivisions are subject to all fees and public land dedications. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-160. - Vacation of public right-of-way or easement. 
(a)  Description. This Section allows the City Council to vacate a public right-of-way or easement in the City. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. All such submittals shall comply with the Submittal Requirements table set forth in Division 2, and the appropriate Application Checklist referenced in Article 26 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Steps. The steps required to process an application to vacate a public right-of-way or easement are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(d)  Review criteria. The City Council shall consider the following criteria when reviewing an application to vacate a public right-of-way or easement: 
(1)  Whether the public right-of-way or easement being vacated is needed in the short or long term; 
(2)  Whether the proposed vacation is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
(3)  Whether the proposed vacation will leave any land adjoining said right-of-way without an established public road connecting said land with another public road; and 
(4)  Whether the vacation will serve the public health, safety and welfare, specifically considering its impact on surrounding properties. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-170. - Certified survey map. 
(a)  Description. The certified survey map procedure is applicable to properties subject to development or other contractual agreements that require the certified survey map procedure. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. All such submittals shall comply with the Submittal Requirements table set for in Division 2, and the appropriate Application Checklist referenced in Article 26 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Steps. The steps required to process an application for a certified survey map are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(d)  Review criteria. If the applicant files a complete application, the Director shall approve the certified survey map. The Director shall review the application within fifteen (15) days of receipt of such application and fee. If the submitted survey map does not meet the submittal requirements, the Director shall return the submitted map to the submitting person or entity within the fifteen (15) days of receipt along with a written explanation why such submitted survey map does not meet the submittal requirement. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 14 4, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-180. - Lot line adjustment. 
(a)  Description. The lot line adjustment process allows the adjustment of a lot line without following the subdivision process, when all property owners consent and there is no dedication or vacation of public right-of-way or easement. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. All such submittals shall comply with the Submittal Requirements table set forth in Division 2, and the appropriate Application Checklist referenced in Article 26 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Steps. The steps required to process an application for a lot line adjustment are set forth in the Review Process table. 
(d)  Review criteria. The Director shall determine whether the lot line adjustment: 
(1)  Meets the requirements of the zone district in which the property is located; and 
(2)  Whether the lot line adjustment adequately mitigates any impacts it causes including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-190. - Vacation of interior lot line. 
(a)  Description. The vacation of interior lot line process allows the removal of interior lot lines and the aggregation of property under single ownership. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. All such submittals shall comply with the Submittal Requirements table set forth in Division 2, and the appropriate Application Checklist referenced in Article 26 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Steps. The steps required to process an application for vacation of an interior lot line are set forth in the Review Process table and shall be approved by the Director. 
(d)  Review criteria. The Director shall determine whether the vacation of interior lot line: 
(1)  Meets the requirements of the zone district in which the property is located; and 
(2)  Adequately mitigates any impacts it causes, including without limitation adverse impacts on traffic, view corridors, noise, property values and the provision of public services. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-195. - Request for accommodation under the Fair Housing Amendments Act 
(a)  Description. This section allows the Community Development Department to grant accommodations in the application of land use regulations, policies, and procedures to persons with disabilities or handicaps seeking equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The request for relief from any land use regulation or procedure in this Code necessary to ensure equal access to housing for an individual with a disability may come from the person with a disability or handicap, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities. 
(c)  Steps. 
(1)  The request shall be submitted in writing on a form provided by the Community Development Department, or in another manner deemed acceptable by the Director, along with any additional information required. 
(d)  Review criteria. The following criteria will be considered when reviewing a request for reasonable accommodation under the Fair Housing Amendments Act. 
(1)  Whether the dwelling unit will at all times be used by an individual or group of individuals with a qualifying disability or handicap; 
(2)  Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to afford persons with disabilities equal opportunities to use and enjoy housing; 
(3)  Whether the requested accommodation is reasonable under the factual circumstances; 
(4)  Whether the requested accommodation will impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City or will require a fundamental alteration of the subject rules, regulations, ordinances, policies, and practices; 
(5)  Whether adequate measures are in place to mitigate potential negative impacts to surrounding properties; 
(6)  Whether there are alternative reasonable accommodations available that would provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant. 
(e)  Decision. The request may be approved, conditionally approved or denied in accordance with federal law. 
(1)  If the request is approved or approved with conditions, the request is granted to a disabled individual or individuals for a period of one (1) year only and shall not run with the land unless the request requires a physical modification of a structure that cannot be easily removed or altered. 
(2)  The accommodation may continue to be used and maintained only by the individual or individuals with a disability under the Fair Housing Amendments Act and must be re-applied for annually. 
(3)  If the applicant is a provider of housing for persons with a disability, the applicant shall certify to the following in writing as a condition of approval: 
a.  The property will not be used as temporary shelter for homeless persons during the term of the reasonable accommodation nor to provide any treatment or care so as to qualify the property as a group care facility under this chapter; 
b.  The provider will comply with all building code and health department requirements, nuisance laws and other generally applicable laws, ordinance, rules and regulations of the City other than those that have been waived or modified as part of the approved request; and 
c.  The property is designed and intended for persons with disabilities as defined by the Fair Housing Amendments Act and that the provider will use its best efforts to ensure that all residents are persons with disabilities as defined by the Fair Housing Amendments Act. 
d.  The provider will maintain liability insurance. 
(4)  In the event the application is denied, the decision may be appealed to the City Council, who shall hold a hearing on the appeal as close as possible to within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the request for appeal. 
(f)  Termination of reasonable accommodation. In the event that any condition placed upon a grant of reasonable accommodation is violated or the property is no longer used and maintained only by an individual or individuals with a disability under the Fair Housing Amendments Act, the reasonable accommodation shall automatically terminate and the property shall be subject to the same land use regulations, policies, and procedures as any other similarly situated dwelling in the Village. 
(Ord. No. 03 ,  1, 3-6-2017) 
Division 2 - Review Procedures 

Sec. 16-2-210. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Division is to establish standardized procedures for the applications described in Division 1 of this Article. 
(b)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to an application for a rezoning, MDP, SDP, SUP, PSP, landscaping plan amendment, variance, appeal, major subdivision, minor subdivision, vacation of public right-of-way or easement and exception to the subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. 14 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. No. 09 ,  4, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 16-2-220. - Preapplication meeting. 
(a)  Description. A prospective applicant is encouraged to request a meeting prior to completing and filing a land use application with the Director. This meeting is an informal review of a sketch or concept of a development proposal and allows major problems to be identified before a formal application is submitted. The meeting provides an opportunity to: 
(1)  Inform the applicant of the City's standards and requirements for the application; 
(2)  Review the City's approval process and procedures for the application, which may involve site history, previous applications, policy direction and discussion of project alternatives or modifications; and 
(3)  Identify the information and materials the City will require with the application and any necessary technical studies and information relating to the project. 
(b)  Applicability. The review meeting is voluntary for all land use applications. Neither the preapplication review nor the provision of information or applicable policies shall be construed as a recommendation for approval or denial of the application or project by the City. A failure by the City to identify all required studies or all applicable requirements does not constitute a waiver of those requirements. 
(c)  Submittal requirements. The applicant is encouraged to provide as much detail as possible when preparing the materials for the meeting. The following shall be submitted, at a minimum, at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting. 
(1)  The location of the proposed project; 
(2)  A description of the significant features in the vicinity and on-site; 
(3)  An informal sketch of the requested development; and 
(4)  A description of the applicant's ownership or interest in the property. 
(d)  Attendance. In addition to the applicant and City representatives, other referral agents may be included, as necessary, depending on the nature of the application. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.40.060, 15.40.080, 15.40.100, 15.48.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-230. - Neighborhood Input Meeting. 
(a)  Description. The NIM is an opportunity for both the applicant and residents to give and receive input regarding proposed development projects prior to formal application. The meeting allows the applicant to present the nature, character and extent of the development and those in attendance to comment on the proposal. The NIM is held prior to submittal of a formal application so residents have an opportunity to provide input before excessive time and effort have been expended by the applicant. The constructive input provides for a more carefully designed development that is compatible with surrounding neighborhoods. It is not the intent of the City Council to require formal agreements between applicants and residents prior to the submission of applications, nor shall an applicant be denied a right to proceed to a required or permitted hearing on an application because no agreement is reached. The intent of this Section is to encourage reasonable, honest and good faith communication between residents and applicants. 
(b)  Applicability. A NIM is required for a rezoning or change in use. Whether a NIM is required, all applicants are encouraged to contact and meet with residents, neighborhood and homeowners' associations and building owners near the property to inform them about the proposed project and consider their concerns in the project design. 
(c)  Exceptions. The Director may waive the requirement for a NIM based on consideration of the following: 
(1)  There is no significant increase in the use or intensity of use currently allowed on the property. 
(2)  Not more than one (1) year has elapsed since the date of a NIM for the same or similar request for which an application was deemed complete by the Director. 
(d)  Notice. The applicant shall send written notice via first-class United States mail to all property owners within two thousand (2,000) feet of the boundary lines of the property that is the subject of the application, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the NIM. The notice shall be in substantially the form provided in Appendix F to this Chapter. The applicant shall provide an affidavit of notice in substantially the form provided in Appendix B. 
(e)  Attendance. At least one (1) representative of the applicant and at least one (1) representative of the City shall attend the NIM. 
(f)  Procedure. The procedure for the NIM is as follows: 
(1)  The applicant shall present the proposal, invite comments from those in attendance and answer questions. 
(2)  The applicant shall make a written record of those persons in attendance. 
(3)  The applicant shall prepare and submit to the City a written summary of the comments made at the NIM and the applicant's responses to those comments within ten (10) days after the meeting. The City shall review the summary for accuracy and completeness and make any changes deemed necessary by the Director. The written summary shall become part of the record for the application and the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, as applicable, may review and rely on the summary in their decision-making process. 
(g)  Compliance. No application requiring a NIM shall be accepted by the City until the applicant has complied with this Section. 
(Prior code 14.04.020, 15.38.086, 15.52.025, 15.54.035, 16.60.025; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-240. - Application submittal requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. The application submittal requirements are set forth in the Submittal Requirements table and further described in this Section. 
(b)  Proof of ownership. Proof of ownership shall be in the form of a current title commitment dated not more than ninety (90) days prior to the date of the application. Every application shall be filed by the property owner or the property owner's authorized representative except for City-initiated rezoning or MDP amendments. 
(c)  Certificate of taxes due. The certificate shall be issued by the County Assessor and shall be dated not more than ninety (90) days prior to the date of the application. 
(d)  Fees. Application fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall be paid at the time of submittal of the application. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-250. - Determination of completeness. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application, the Director shall determine whether the application is complete and ready for review. The Director shall notify the applicant of any additional information that is necessary. 
(b)  If the application is incomplete, no review of the application shall occur until the application is complete. 
(c)  A determination of completeness shall not preclude the Director from requesting additional information or studies at any time during review of the application. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-260. - Referral. 
(a)  The Director shall refer the application to other departments, boards or commissions, service providers, outside agencies and registered organizations that may be affected by the proposal in the application. Referral may also be made to the DRC. 
(b)  Referral comments should address whether the application is consistent with the standards of the reviewing authority. 
(c)  The applicant may revise the application based on referral comments, provided that significant revisions may require this step to be repeated. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-270. - Public notice. 
(a)  Applicability. Notice of all public hearings under this Article shall be required as set forth in the Noticing Requirements table. 
(b)  Notice by mail. 
(1)  Responsibility. For any application that requires notice by mail, the applicant shall be responsible for mailing the notice at the applicant's expense. 
(2)  Distance. Mailed notice shall be provided to the record owners of all neighboring real property as follows: 
a.  MDPs, SDPs, Rezoning, Subdivisions and SUPs. 
1.  Mailed notice for rezoning, MDPs, SUPs, SDPs, major subdivisions (preliminary plats), SUPs and major or minor modifications to MDPs, SUPs or SDPs shall be provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to the record owners of all real property within Council-approved development impact zones based upon the anticipated impact of the proposal as determined by the Director, to any properties outside the development impact zone or corporate boundaries of the City that lie immediately adjacent to the subject property, and to any neighborhood groups or homeowners' associations registered with the City within the area of notification. 
2.  Mailed notice for rezoning, MDPs, SUPs, SDPs, major subdivisions (preliminary plats) and major modifications to MDPs or SDPs outside of Council-approved development impact zones shall be provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to the record owners of all real property within two thousand (2,000) feet of the property lines of the property included in the application and to any neighborhood groups or homeowners' associations and properties outside the corporate limits of the City that lie immediately adjacent to the subject property. 
3.  Mailed notice for minor amendments to MDPs, SDPs outside of Council-approved development impact zones, and telecommunications applications requiring Council review (excluding reviews done under 16-2-60(e)) shall be provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to the record owners of all real property within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property lines of the property included in applications and to any neighborhood groups or homeowners' associations and properties outside the corporate limits of the City that lie immediately adjacent to the subject property. 
b.  PUDs. Mailed notice for PUDs and major modifications to existing PUD shall be provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to the record owners of all real property within the corporate boundaries of the City within two thousand (2,000) feet of the property lines of the property included in the application, to any properties outside the corporate boundaries of the City that lie immediately adjacent to the subject property, and to any neighborhood groups or homeowners' associations registered with the City within the area of notification. 
c.  Variances. Mailed notice for a variance shall be provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to the record owners of all real property within the corporate boundaries of the City that lie immediately adjacent to the subject property. 
d.  Planned Sign Programs. 
1.  Mailed notice shall be provided to record owners of all real property adjacent to any planned sign program requests at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. 
2.  Mailed notice shall also be provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to all record owners of residential property within five hundred (500) feet of a proposed sign that will be visible to said residential properties. 
3.  Mailed notice shall also be provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to the record owners of all residential property within one thousand (1,000) feet of a proposed sign that will be visible to said properties and which sign application requests a variation greater than one hundred fifty (150) percent of standards otherwise allowed by this Code. 
(3)  Manner. Notice by mail shall be sent by first-class United States mail. 
(4)  Proof. The applicant shall file an affidavit of mailing with the Director, attached to a copy of the letter sent and the addresses to which the letters were sent. This affidavit and attachments shall constitute prima facie evidence of the fact that the notice by mail was done in the prescribed manner. 
(c)  Notice by posting. 
(1)  Responsibility. For posted notice, the City shall provide the required signs, but the applicant shall be responsible for posting the signs and ensuring that the signs remain posted and legible throughout the required time period. 
(2)  Manner. The signs provided by the City shall be posted on each street adjoining the property at the locations selected by the City, for a period of at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. 
(3)  Proof. An affidavit of posting signed by the applicant with a photograph of the signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the required posting. 
(4)  Removal. Signs should be removed within three (3) days after the close of the hearing. 
(d)  Notice by publication. 
(1)  Responsibility. The City shall be responsible for notice of publication at the City's cost. 
(2)  Manner. The City shall publish notice of the date, time, location and subject matter of a public hearing on its website at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing; provided that technical issues with the website which affect the publication shall not invalidate any public notice or require continuation or postponement of any public hearing. 
(3)  Proof. The City Clerk shall provide proof of publication at the public hearing. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.02.050; Ord. 14, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 24 1, 2013; Ord. 2 1, 2014; Ord. 7 1, 2014; Ord. 03  2, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 16-2-280. - Public hearings. 
(a)  Description. Land use applications are heard by the body having jurisdiction over the matter at a public hearing. 
(b)  Order of proceedings. 
(1)  Opening. The public hearing is opened. 
(2)  Staff presentation. The staff shall present a narrative and graphic description of the land use application. 
(3)  Applicant presentation. The applicant shall present any relevant information the applicant deems appropriate. 
(4)  Public testimony. Any person may appear at a public hearing and submit evidence, provided that the body holding the hearing may exclude or limit testimony or evidence it finds to be irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious. Each person who appears at a public hearing shall state his or her name, municipality or county of residence and, if appearing on behalf of another person, the name and municipality or county of residence of the person being represented. 
(5)  Applicant response. The applicant may respond to any testimony or evidence presented by the public at the direction of the body holding the hearing. 
(6)  Staff response. The staff may respond to any statement made or evidence presented by the applicant or the public, or answer questions, at the direction of the body holding the hearing. 
(7)  Closure. The public hearing is closed. 
(8)  Deliberation. After the public hearing is closed, the body hearing the application may deliberate. 
(9)  Decision. After consideration of the application, the staff report and the evidence received at the public hearing and any deliberation, the body holding the hearing shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. The decision shall include a statement of specific findings and a statement of the basis upon which the facts were determined, with specific reference to the relevant standards set forth. 
(c)  Conditions. The body making the decision may impose conditions on approval of the application as necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter, having a reasonable relationship to potential impacts of the proposed land use and being roughly proportional, both in nature and extent, to the impacts of the proposed land use. Any conditions mutually agreed upon by the City and the applicant may also be imposed. Commitments made by the applicant in the public hearing are deemed enforceable and shall be considered conditions of approval. 
(d)  Moratorium. If an application is denied by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the BOAA, the resubmittal of an application for the same or substantially similar request shall not be accepted by the City for one (1) year from the date of such denial. 
(Prior code 2.64.040-2.64.070, 15.02.050, 15.52.005, 15.52.130, 15.60.120, 15.72.080, 15.78.020, 15.78.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-290. - Document recordation. 
(a)  Upon final approval of any application, the applicant shall provide documents in accordance with the approval granted. At a minimum, two (2) sets of approved plans in reproducible 24" by 36" Mylar are required. 
(b)  Copies of materials presented at a public hearing, including electronic copies, shall be provided by the applicant and made a part of the record. 
(c)  Final documents shall be provided within thirty (30) days of approval at the applicant's expense. If such documents are not submitted, the approval shall lapse, provided that the Director may grant one (1) extension of time upon a finding of good cause. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.72; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-295. - Staff discretionary authority. 
(a)  Authority is expressly delegated to the Director to grant deviations from the strict application of this Chapter upon a finding by the Director of the existence of the following facts: 
(1)  The deviation is required in order to allow construction to be completed where a legitimate, good faith error has been made; 
(2)  The deviation will not result in weakening or degradation of the purpose and intent of the regulatory provision being deviated from; and 
(3)  The deviation is one percent (1%) or less from the applicable performance standard or regulation. 
(b)  In addition to the authority set forth above, the Director may grant permission to public entities, as that term is defined in the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act, Section 24-10-103(5), C.R.S., to deviate from strict application of this Chapter upon a finding by the Director that the deviation will not extend beyond two (2) years from the date the deviation first occurs, and that the deviation will not negatively affect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Prior code 15.74.010, 15.74.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 3 - Exactions and Dedications 

Sec. 16-2-310. - Findings, purpose and interpretation. 
(a)  Findings. The City Council finds that dedications of real property to the City and exactions in the form of monetary payments to the City in lieu of real property dedications should be required in those instances where the City Council determines that a proposed development will create the need for new public facilities or services or will result in increased use of existing public facilities or services so as to require the expansion or eventual replacement of such facilities or services. 
(b)  Purpose. Where a cause and effect relationship, or essential nexus, is identified between the proposed development and the resultant need for additional public facilities or services, it is the purpose of this Division to provide a mechanism whereby dedications and exactions can be quantified to assure that a fair and equitable proportionality is established between the cost of the public facilities or services attributable to the proposed development and the overall cost of such public facilities or services. 
(c)  Interpretation. In interpreting this Division, the City shall fairly balance the needs of the public, and especially City residents, against the need for the public facilities or services which is created by the proposed development, so as not to burden disproportionately the general public with costs or expenses to provide public facilities or services the need for which is generated by the proposed development. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.62.010, 15.62.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-320. - Authority. 
    The City Council, following public hearings before both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council in conjunction with an application for rezoning, subdivision, PUD or building permit, is authorized to require exactions and dedications. Such dedications and exactions may include without limitation: 
(1)  Dedication of real property for the construction, reconstruction, reconfiguration, widening or extension of streets or acceleration/deceleration lanes or payment for all or a portion of the construction of streets, including without limitation the widening, improvement, traffic signalization or construction of acceleration/deceleration lanes; 
(2)  Dedication of real property for public parks; 
(3)  Dedication of real property for the construction, reconstruction, extension or maintenance of recreational trails; 
(4)  Dedication of real property for open space; or 
(5)  Payment of funds in lieu of any of the foregoing dedications. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.62.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-330. - Criteria. 
(a)  Generally, the City Council shall be guided by the overriding principle that an exaction or dedication is unfair, disproportionate and unconstitutional if it imposes a burden on an applicant which in equity and fairness should be borne by the public in general. However, an exaction or dedication is constitutional if the failure of the applicant to provide the dedication or exaction would fail to remedy a public problem created or exacerbated by the development to such an extent that the governing body would be justified in denying approval of the application. 
(b)  Specifically, a dedication or exaction will be required if the City Council finds that: 
(1)  A legitimate, identifiable public purpose is served by the required exaction or dedication; 
(2)  The City is acting within its power to provide the facility or service for which the exaction or dedication is required, either directly or indirectly, for the benefit of City residents; 
(3)  The projected use of the public facilities or services generated by the proposed development are contributing causes to the need for the new or expanded public facilities or services; 
(4)  The City would be legally justified in denying approval of the development unless the exaction or dedication is imposed, because of the negative effect of the proposed development on either existing private property or public facilities or services; 
(5)  The City, acting within its lawful authority, requires all applicants similarly situated to provide similar or roughly similar exactions and dedications, in both quantity and quality; and 
(6)  The exaction or dedication will serve the proposed development directly; provided that the fact that the exaction or dedication will also serve as a general benefit to all City residents shall not constitute a valid basis for failing to impose the exaction or dedication. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.62.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-340. - Determination. 
(a)  Upon a determination by the City that exactions and dedications may lawfully be required, the amount of such exactions and dedications shall be determined using one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  The applicant may accept the City's determination of the appropriate exactions and dedications. If an applicant accepts the City's determination, no public hearing on the exactions and dedications shall be required, and the applicant shall be deemed to have waived any right to challenge such exactions and dedications at any time. 
(2)  The applicant may request in writing that an individualized study be made relating solely to its project to determine whether exactions and dedications will be required and, if so, the amount thereof. Such study shall fairly and accurately delineate the needs for public services and facilities which will be generated by the development, and shall consider the criteria in Section 16-2-330. 
(b)  The individualized study described in Paragraph (a)(2) hereof may be prepared by either of the following methods: 
(1)  The applicant may prepare the study at its sole cost and expense. Upon the submission of the study, the applicant shall pay the fee established by resolution of the City Council to cover the City's time reviewing the study. 
(2)  Upon the written request of the applicant the City shall cause to be prepared an individualized study to be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days of receipt of the written request. The applicant shall reimburse the City for the cost of the study. 
(c)  If an individualized study is prepared, the staff shall review the study and comment thereon in writing to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. If the applicant agrees with the study, the study shall be submitted as a joint recommendation. If the applicant disagrees with the study, the applicant may, at his or her sole expense, submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council a written report outlining his or her reasons for disagreement. 
(d)  Based on the individualized study, the staff comments and testimony at the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend to the City Council an appropriate amount of exactions and dedications. 
(e)  The City Council shall consider the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the study, the staff comments and testimony, and shall apply the criteria in Section 16-2-330 to determine the amount of exactions and dedications required. The decision of the City Council shall be final, subject only to judicial review. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.62.040, 15.62.050, 15.62.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 4 - Vesting of Property Rights 

Sec. 16-2-410. - Definition. 
    Only the following shall constitute a site specific development plan within the meaning of Section 24-68-102(4), C.R.S.: 
(1)  A PUD approved in accordance with 16-2-60 that sets forth the design guidelines for the residential development; or 
(2)  An approved SDP. 
(Prior code 15.55.010, 15.55.020; Ord. 321, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-420. - Duration. 
    A property right which vests pursuant to this Article shall remain vested for a period of three (3) years unless the City and the property owner enter into an agreement, approved by ordinance and subject to referendum, provided that property rights under a site specific development plan shall be vested for a period exceeding three (3) years. 
(Prior code 15.55.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-430. - Required language. 
    Every document which purports to constitute a site specific development plan shall contain the following language: 
This plan constitutes a site specific 
development plan pursuant to the 
Greenwood Village Municipal Code and 
C.R.S., Section 24-68-101, and establishes 
vested property rights, for three (3) years 
from its effective date, to undertake and 
complete the development and use of the 
property in accordance with this plan. 
(Prior code 15.55.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-440. - Conditional approval. 
    The conditional approval of a site specific development plan shall result in the establishment of vested property rights under the approved plan, but failure to fulfill or abide by the terms and conditions of the conditional approval shall result in a forfeiture of the vested property rights by operation of law, without notice or hearing. 
(Prior code 15.55.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-450. - Zoning or rezoning. 
    Unless approved as part of a site specific development plan, the zoning or rezoning of a property shall not itself constitute a site specific development plan and shall not result in the creation of vested property rights. 
(Prior code 15.55.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-460. - Notice and recording. 
(a)  Within fourteen (14) days after the approval of a site specific development plan, notice of the approval of the site specific development plan creating a vested property right under the site specific development plan shall be published and shall include the effective date of the City's motion, resolution or ordinance approving the SDP or PUD. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to pay for and ensure that the requisite notice has been published within the required time-frame. A Vested Right for which the requisite notice was published shall be deemed effective fourteen (14) days after the approval of the applicable SDP or PUD. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days of the approval of a site specific development plan, the property owner shall submit two (2) sets of twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch (24"  36") photographic Mylar copies of the approved plan containing the language required in Section 16-2-430. If such Mylar copies are not submitted within such time period, the vested property rights shall lapse, provided that the Director may grant one (1) extension upon a finding of good cause. 
(Prior code 15.55.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 5 - Permits 

Sec. 16-2-500. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Division is to establish procedures for issuance of certain specific permits required by this Chapter. 
(b)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to floodplain permits, sitework permits, fence permits, outdoor sale and storage permits, mobile food service permits, tent permits, special event permits, parking lot permits, sign permits, outdoor eating area permits, accessory structure permits and access permits. 
(Prior code 15.40.160, 15.40.170, 15.42.513, 15.44.100, 15.48.050, 15.48.060, 15.49.020, 15.50.020, 15.50.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-505. - Floodplain permit. 
    Floodplain permits shall be processed in accordance with the Drainage Criteria Manual. 
(Prior code Title 14, 2.44.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-510. - Sitework permit. 
(a)  Sitework permits shall be processed in accordance with the Construction Site Management Manual. 
(b)  No permit is required for landscaping activities for developed single family homes except under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The landscaping activity involves structures, patios, fences, walls, or creating berms; 
(2)  The landscaping activity alters existing drainage paths; 
(3)  The landscaping activity involves excavation or fill in excess of ten cubic yards (10 CY); or 
(4)  The area to be landscaped or graded is one (1) acre or more in size. 
(Prior code 15.40.160, 15.40.170, 15.42.513, 15.44.100, 15.48.050, 15.48.060, 15.49.020, 15.50.020, 15.50.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-515. - Fence permit. 
(a)  Description. A fence permit is required for the construction or erection of a fence, decorative monument, decorative wall or noise-attenuating structure in the City, pursuant to Article 21 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee. 
(2)  A sketch or written description of the proposed fence, decorative monument, decorative wall or noise-attenuating structure, including, at a minimum, building footprints and dimensions, property lines, streets bordering the property, the location of the midpoint of the principal building and the location and dimensions of existing and proposed fences, decorative monuments, decorative walls and noise-attenuating structures. 
(c)  Additional submittal requirements for noise-attenuating structure. In addition to the requirements of Subsection (b) hereof, for a noise-attenuating structure, the applicant shall submit the following: 
(1)  A list of names and addresses of those persons wishing to participate in the construction of the noise-attenuating structure, a map of the area and the name, address and telephone number of a contact person representing the persons listed; 
(2)  An explanation of how the construction of the noise-attenuating structure will be funded; 
(3)  A drawing and written description depicting the height, dimensions and materials to be used in constructing the noise-attenuating structure; 
(4)  The report required by Section 16-21-380; 
(5)  A landscape plan showing any new plantings proposed adjacent to the noise-attenuating structure; 
(6)  A statement of maintenance responsibility for the noise-attenuating structure and landscaped area; 
(7)  Evidence that the plans for the proposed noise-attenuating structure have been submitted to the homeowners' association, if any; 
(8)  Evidence that the adjacent property owners will grant construction easements; and 
(9)  Any other documentation deemed necessary by the City. 
(d)  Issuance. The Director shall determine whether the application complies with this Chapter, and if so, shall issue the permit. 
(e)  Private covenants. Issuance of a permit does not ensure that a fence, decorative monument, decorative wall or noise-attenuating structure meets any private covenant affecting the property. In some instances, applicable covenants are more restrictive than this Article, and property owners are advised to review the covenants affecting their property. 
(Prior code 15.48.050, 15.48.060, 15.48.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-520. - Tent permit. 
(a)  Description. A tent permit is required for the erection of a tent in the City pursuant to Article 24 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee; 
(2)  The estimated number of attendees for each day and during peak periods; 
(3)  Number of parking spaces to be displaced, and a plan for ensuring that adequate parking will be available for all attendees and other patrons, as applicable; 
(4)  A description of how the tent will be secured; 
(5)  A traffic control plan, if applicable; 
(6)  A site plan, showing lot lines, proposed location of the tent, setbacks of the tent from lot lines, tent dimensions and proposed traffic and pedestrian circulation to and around the tent; and 
(7)  Any other information deemed necessary by the Director. 
(c)  Issuance. The Director shall determine whether the application complies with this Chapter and, if so, shall issue the permit. 
(Prior code 15.80.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-525. - Special event permit. 
(a)  Description. A special event permit is required to hold a special event in the City pursuant to Article 24 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee; 
(2)  Proof of liability insurance; 
(3)  The estimated number of attendees for each day and during peak periods; 
(4)  Number of parking spaces to be displaced, and a plan for ensuring that adequate parking will be available for all attendees and other patrons, as applicable; 
(5)  A traffic control plan, if applicable; 
(6)  A plan for trash disposal; 
(7)  Hours of operation; 
(8)  A description of all signage; 
(9)  Location of restrooms; 
(10)  A site plan, showing lot lines, structures and proposed traffic and pedestrian circulation; and 
(11)  Any other information deemed necessary by the Director. 
(c)  Issuance. The Director shall determine whether the application complies with this Chapter and, if so, shall issue the permit. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-530. - Outdoor sale and storage permit. 
(a)  Description. A permit is required for the outdoor sale or storage of merchandise in the City pursuant to Article 24 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee; 
(2)  A written statement from the property owner, if different from the applicant, that the applicant is permitted to conduct the outdoor display or sales on the property; and 
(3)  A site plan showing the locations of proposed points of access to the site, parking areas, fences, barriers and other temporary structures. 
(c)  Issuance. The Director shall issue the permit if the Director finds: 
(1)  That adequate parking exists for the proposed use and for other affected businesses; 
(2)  That all electrical and other utility services are properly installed at the site; and 
(3)  That the proposed use will not create a hazard or nuisance on the site or surrounding properties. 
(Prior code 15.42.501; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-535. - Mobile food service permit. 
(a)  Description. A mobile food service permit is required for mobile food service in the City pursuant to Article 24 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee; 
(2)  A written description of the nature of the mobile food service to be conducted by the applicant, including the type of food or beverages to be served; 
(3)  A copy of a valid City sales tax license; 
(4)  A description of the cart or other vending device from which food or beverages are to be served; 
(5)  A statement indicating the distance of the proposed mobile food service location from the nearest occupied dwelling and school property; 
(6)  Evidence of compliance with applicable health regulations; and 
(7)  If the mobile food service is to be conducted on private property, a written statement signed by the property owner granting permission to conduct the mobile food service on the property. 
(c)  Issuance. The Director shall determine whether the proposed location of the mobile food service is compatible with the public interest and the use of the public right-of-way, considering the width of the sidewalk and the public right-of-way, the location of adjacent buildings, the availability of adequate parking areas, the proximity of loading zones, and the presence of any other characteristics which may result in obstruction of the sidewalk or public right-of-way or in pedestrian or street congestion and, if so, shall issue the permit. 
(d)  Revocation. If the Director determines that the presence of the mobile food service creates street congestion or is a threat to pedestrian or vehicle traffic safety, the permit may be revoked. 
(Prior code 15.42.513, 15.04.408, 15.42.512; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 34 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-2-540. - Parking lot permit. 
(a)  Description. A parking lot permit is required to construct, stripe, reconstruct, restripe or resurface a parking lot in the City, pursuant to Article 21 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee; 
(2)  A site plan showing the proposed parking lot configuration; and 
(3)  Any other information deemed necessary by the Director. 
(c)  Issuance. The Director shall determine whether the parking lot permit application complies with this Chapter and, if so, shall issue the permit. 
(Prior code 15.44.020, 15.44.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-545. - Sign permit. 
(a)  Description. A sign permit is required for certain signs in the City, pursuant to Article 21 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee; 
(2)  A site plan showing the proposed location of any sign requested under the permit; 
(3)  A drawing and written description depicting the height and dimensions of the wall on which the sign is proposed to be affixed, if applicable; 
(4)  Detailed illustrations of the requested signs, including dimensions, materials and illumination; and 
(5)  Any other information deemed necessary by the Director. 
(c)  Issuance. Within seven (7) days of receipt of the application, the Director shall determine whether the application complies with this Chapter and, if so, shall issue the permit. 
(Prior code 15.46.060, 15.46.070, 15.46.170; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-550. - Outdoor eating area permit. 
(a)  Description. An outdoor eating area permit is required for outdoor eating areas in the City pursuant to Article 21 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee; and 
(2)  Site plan showing the location of all tables and chairs and the location of the physical barrier between the tables and chairs and the parking area, sidewalk or roadway. 
(c)  Issuance. The Director shall determine whether the application complies with this Chapter and, if so, shall issue the permit. 
(Prior code 15.04.497, 15.42.500, 15.42.501; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-555. - Accessory structure permit. 
(a)  Description. An accessory structure permit is required for the erection in the City of an accessory structure with a footprint greater than fifty (50) square feet but less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet, pursuant to Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee; 
(2)  A statement concerning the proposed use of the accessory structure; 
(3)  A plan showing the proposed location of the accessory structure in relation to the property lines and other structures on the property; and 
(4)  A sketch or written description of the dimensions and type of the accessory structure. 
(c)  Issuance. The Director shall determine whether the application complies with this Chapter and, if so, shall issue the permit, provided that issuance of an accessory structure permit shall not constitute approval of the structural integrity of the accessory structure. 
(Prior code 15.82.010, 15.82.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-565. - Access permit. 
(a)  Description. An access permit is required for the construction and maintenance of any access approach, driveway or curb cut in the City. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Application form and fee; 
(2)  A site plan showing the proposed location of the access approach, driveway or curb cut; and 
(3)  A traffic control signage plan, if applicable. 
(c)  Issuance. The Director shall determine whether the application complies with this Chapter and whether the proposed access approach, driveway or curb cut is safe for persons or vehicles in the vicinity of the proposed access approach, driveway or curb cut and, if so, shall issue the permit. 
(d)  Safety requirements. In making this determination, the Director shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the street to which access is sought is residential or commercial in character; 
(2)  Whether the proposed access approach, driveway or curb cut would cross a sidewalk; 
(3)  Whether drivers of vehicles using the proposed access approach, driveway or curb cut would have difficulty in seeing pedestrians or other vehicles in the vicinity; 
(4)  Whether pedestrians or the drivers of other vehicles would have difficulty in seeing vehicles using the proposed access approach, driveway or curb cut; 
(5)  Whether the proposed access approach, driveway or curb cut would result in increased noise, dirt, smoke or fumes in the vicinity of the proposed access approach, driveway or curb cut; 
(6)  Whether the property for which an access approach, driveway or curb cut is proposed is already served by an existing access approach, driveway or curb cut; 
(7)  Whether parking is permitted on the street to which access is proposed; 
(8)  The width of the street to which access is sought; 
(9)  The posted speed limit on the street to which access is sought; 
(10)  The distance of the proposed access approach, driveway or curb cut from the curb line of the nearest street which intersects the street to which access is proposed; and 
(11)  The proximity of the proposed access approach, driveway or curb cut to residential neighborhoods and schools. 
(Prior code 15.50.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-2-580. - Submittal requirements, review process and noticing requirements. 
    The following tables set forth the submittal requirements, review process and noticing requirements for land use within the City: 
SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 
Land Use
Review Type Proof of Ownership Application Form
& Fees Legal Description Letter of Description
& Justification Existing Conditions
Alta Survey Tax Certification Development Standards Site Plan Landscape Plan Submittal Checklists Lighting/Photometric
Plan Grading/Drainage
Study Site Cross-Sections/
Building Elevations Sign Details Transportation Impact
Study/Letter Required State/
Federal/Agency Permits Will Service/ ACC
Letter Agreements (LOC,
DIA, SIA) Electronic Submittal &
Recorded Documents Annexation/Rezone Annexation X X X X X X X Rezoning X X X X X X X Development Plan Master Development Plan (MDP) X X X X X X X X Modification to MDP X X X X X X X X X X Site Development Plan (SDP) X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Major Modification to SDP X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Minor Modification to SDP X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Development Plan Administrative Modification to SDP X X X X X X X X X X Planned Unit Development (PUD) X X X X X X X X X X X X Major Modification to PUD X X X X X X X X X X Minor Modification to PUD X X X X X X X X Administrative Modification to PUD X X X X X X X Special Uses Special Use Permits (SUP) X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Major Amendment to SUP X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Minor Amendment to SUP X X X X X X X Special Uses Administrative Amendment to SUP X X X X X X X Telecommunications Facilities - SUP X X X X X X X X X Telecommunications Facilities - Administrative X X X X X X X X X Subdivision Major Subdivision X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Minor Subdivision X X X X X X X X X X X X X Lot Line Adjustment/ Vacation of Interior Lot Line X X X X X X X X X Certified Survey Maps X X X X X X ROW Vacations of Rights-of-Way/ Easements X X X X X Revocable License Agreement X X X X X X X X Sign Program Planned Sign Program (PSP) & PSP Amendments X X X X X X X X X X X X Variance Appeal Variance X X X X X X X Appeal X X X X X  
X = Required - Requirements may be waived upon a determination by the Director that the material would not be appropriate or necessary for the specific application. Requests shall be made in writing. 
REVIEW PROCESS 
Development Review Type Review Decision-Making Body Post-Decision Action Neighborhood Input Meeting (NIM) Application Submittal & Determination of Sufficiency Impact/ Exaction Analysis Referrals BOAA P&Z CC CD Director Document Submittal/ Recordation Electronic Submittal Annexation/ 
Rezone Annexation X X X X X X X X Rezoning X X X X X X X X Development Plan Master Development Plan (MDP) X X X X X X X Modifications to MDP X X X X X X X Site Development Plan (SDP) X X X X X X X Major Modification to SDP X X X X X X X Minor Modification to SDP X X X X Administrative Modification to SDP X X X X X X Planned Unit Development (PUD) X X X X X X X X Major Modification to PUD X X X X X X X X Minor Modification to PUD X X X X X Administrative Modification to PUD X X X X Special Use Special Use Permit (SUP) X X X X X X X * X SUP Amendment (Major - use change) X X X X X X X X SUP Amendment (Minor - no use change) X X X X X Special Use/ 
Telecommunica- 
tions Facilities Telecommunications Facilities - SUP X X X X X X Telecommunications Facilities - Administrative X X X Subdivision Major Subdivision (2 steps) Preliminary Plat X X X X X X Final Plat X X X X Minor Subdivision X X X X Lot Line Adjustment/ Vacation of Interior Lot Line X X X X X Certified Survey Maps X X X X ROW Vacation of Rights-of-Way/ Easements X X X X Revocable License Agreement X X X Sign 
Program Planned Sign Program X X X X Planned Sign Program Amendment X X Variance/ 
Appeal Variance X X Appeal X X  
X = Required 
* = Exception: Following the approval of a Special Use Permit for a safehouse, the City Clerk shall remove or excise all information concerning the location of the safehouse from every document in the possession of the City. The City Clerk shall not record such Special Use Permit with the Arapahoe County Clerk and Recorder. 
NOTICING REQUIREMENTS 
Planning & Zoning Commission
Public Hearing City Council
Public Hearing BOAA
Public Hearing Written Notice*
US Mail & Affidavit Mineral Estate Notice
(Certified Mail) & Affidavit Posting & Affidavit Written Notice*
US Mail & Affidavit Mineral Estate Notice**
(Certified Mail) & Affidavit Posting & Affidavit Written Notice*
US Mail & Affidavit Posting & Affidavit Rezoning - Zone Map Amendment X X X X Master Development Plan (MDP) X X X X X Modification to MDP X Site Development Plan (SDP) X X X X X Major Modification to SDP X X X X Minor Modification to SDP Planned Unit Development (PUD) X X X X Major Modification to PUD X X X X Minor Modification to PUD X Special Use Permit (SUP) X X X X SUP Amendment X X X Telecommunications Facilities - SUP X X X X Planned Sign Program X X X X Major Subdivision X X X X X Minor Subdivision Lot Line Adjustment/Vacation of Interior Lot Line Variance X X Appeal X Vested Property Rights*** Vacation of Rights-of-Way/Easement  
*  Not less than 15 days before an initial scheduled public hearing. 
** Not less than 30 days before an initial scheduled public hearing - certification must be presented prior to convening hearing. 
*** Publish 14 days after the approval of a site specific development plan. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 2, 2014) 
Editor's note- This table was updated per administrative changes dated August 17, 2017 and July 18, 2018. 
ARTICLE 3 - Open Space Districts (O-1 and O-2) 

Sec. 16-3-10. - Intent. 
    The Open Space Districts (O-1 and O-2) are intended to provide for and to preserve open areas within the City. 
(Prior code 15.36.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 21 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-3-20. - O-1 uses by right. 
    Uses by right in O-1 designated areas are as follows: 
(1)  Natural/native areas; 
(2)  Recreational trails; 
(3)  Agricultural activities; 
(4)  Public water storage reservoirs; 
(5)  Outdoor public art; 
(6)  Designated wildlife habits; and 
(7)  Accessory buildings and uses which are reasonably related to the principal allowed uses. 
(Prior code 15.36.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 21 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-3-30. - O-1 special uses. 
    Special uses in O-1 designated areas are as follows: 
(1)  Public buildings, facilities or utilities. 
(Prior code 15.36.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 21 1, 2012; Ord. No. 09 ,  5, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 16-3-40. - O-2 uses by right. 
    Uses by right in O-2 designated areas are as follows: 
(1)  All uses allowed in O-1; 
(2)  Any improvements approved by City Council pursuant to the development process set forth below or, for property not owned by the City, pursuant to an SDP or MDP process; and 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses reasonably related to the principal allowed uses and improvements. 
(Prior code 15.36.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 21 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-3-50. - Development process; review. 
(a)  Pursuant to Article 13 of Chapter 2 of this Code, the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission shall formulate parks, trails and open space acquisition and development plans for approval by the City Council of property owned by the City. 
(b)  Prior to submittal of any development, redevelopment or master plan to the City Council, the Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission shall provide opportunity for public input, including but not limited to charrettes, open houses and neighborhood meetings, in addition to regular Commission meetings. 
(Ord. 21 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-3-60. - Development standards - parking. 
    The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be determined during the review procedure. 
(Ord. 21 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-3-70. - Height limitations, setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in height, unless otherwise approved by City Council pursuant to the development process set forth above or, for property not owned by the City, pursuant to an SDP or MDP process. 
(b)  Accessory structures shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height and shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from a residential district, unless otherwise approved by City Council pursuant to the development process set forth above or, for property not owned by the City, pursuant to an SDP or MDP process. 
(Ord. 21 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-3-80. - Limitations on rezoning or conveyance. 
    No Open Space (O-1 or O-2) property owned by the City may be rezoned, sold, leased, traded or otherwise conveyed, nor may any exclusive license or permit on such open space land be given, until approval of such by the registered electors of the City at any regular or special election. 
(Ord. 21 1, 2012) 
ARTICLE 4 - Agricultural (A) District 

Sec. 16-4-10. - Intent. 
    The Agricultural (A) District is intended to encourage and preserve agricultural uses in the City. 
(Prior code 15.34.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-4-20. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Agriculture; 
(2)  Farm buildings appurtenant to agricultural use; 
(3)  Animal hospitals, at least five hundred (500) feet from any property zoned residential; 
(4)  Open space, parks and trails; 
(5)  Riding stables; 
(6)  Greenhouses; 
(7)  Not more than one (1) dwelling unit per five (5) acres for persons employed on the property; and 
(8)  Accessory uses. 
(Prior code 15.34.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-4-30. - Open space. 
    The minimum open space on a parcel shall be eighty percent (80%). 
(Prior code 15.34.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-4-40. - Development standards. 
(a)  The minimum area shall be ten (10) acres. 
(b)  The minimum front width of lot for dwelling shall be three hundred (300) feet. 
(c)  The minimum net area of dwellings shall be one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet. 
(Prior code 15.34.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-4-50. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Front setback: one hundred (100) feet. 
(2)  Rear setback: one hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Side setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Accessory structures shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Front setback: one hundred (100) feet. 
(2)  Rear setback: one hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Side setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(Prior code 15.35.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-4-60. - Height. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall have at least one (1) story above grade, but shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in height. 
(b)  Accessory structures shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height. 
(Prior code 15.34.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 5 - Residential 2.5 (R-2.5) District 

Sec. 16-5-10. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Agriculture; 
(3)  Riding stables; 
(4)  Open space, parks and trails; 
(5)  Home occupations; and 
(6)  Accessory uses. 
(Prior code 15.08.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-5-20. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Places of worship; 
(2)  Child care centers; 
(3)  Schools; 
(4)  Group care facilities; 
(5)  Public buildings and facilities; and 
(6)  Home occupations with more than one employee. 
(Prior code 15.08.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-5-30. - Development standards. 
(a)  The minimum lot area shall be two and one-half (2.5) acres. 
(b)  The maximum dwelling units per acre shall be four-tenths (0.4). 
(c)  The minimum lot frontage on a public right-of-way shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(d)  The minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet. 
(e)  The maximum ground coverage for accessory structures shall be nine hundred (900) square feet per acre. 
(Prior code 15.08.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-5-40. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: one hundred (100) feet. 
(2)  Minimum rear setback: one hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Minimum side setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.08.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-5-50. - Height. 
(a)  On lots of more than two and one-quarter (2.25) acres, no principal building shall have less than one (1) story above grade or exceed thirty (30) feet in height. 
(b)  On lots of two and one-quarter (2.25) acres or less, no principal building shall have less than one (1) story above grade or exceed twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(c)  Accessory structures shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height; provided that the maximum height of accessory structures used exclusively for agriculture shall be twenty-two (22) feet. 
(Prior code 15.08.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 6 - Residential 2.0 (R-2.0) District 

Sec. 16-6-10. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Agriculture; 
(3)  Riding stables; 
(4)  Open space, parks and trails; 
(5)  Home occupations; and 
(6)  Accessory uses. 
(Prior code 15.10.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-6-20. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Places of worship; 
(2)  Child care centers; 
(3)  Schools; 
(4)  Group care facilities; 
(5)  Public buildings or facilities; and 
(6)  Home occupations with more than one employee. 
(Prior code 15.10.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-6-30. - Development standards. 
(a)  The minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres. 
(b)  The maximum dwelling units per acre shall be one-half (0.5). 
(c)  The minimum lot frontage on a public right-of-way shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(d)  The minimum lot width shall be one hundred seventy-five (175) feet. 
(e)  The maximum ground coverage for accessory structures shall be nine hundred (900) square feet per acre. 
(Prior code 15.10.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-6-40. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: one hundred (100) feet. 
(2)  Minimum rear setback: one hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Minimum side setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.10.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-6-50. - PUD standards. 
    In lieu of the standards in Section 16-6-30 through 16-6-40, a PUD shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
(2)  Maximum dwelling units per acre: one-half (0.5). 
(3)  No structures are permitted in a floodway or area of special flood hazard. 
(4)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
a.  Minimum front setback: fifty (50) feet. 
b.  Minimum rear setback: forty (40) feet. 
c.  Minimum side setback: forty (40) feet. 
(5)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.10.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-6-60. - Height. 
(a)  On lots of more than two and one-quarter (2.25) acres, no principal building shall have less than one (1) story above grade or exceed thirty (30) feet in height. 
(b)  On lots of two and one-quarter (2.25) acres or less, no principal building shall have less than one (1) story above grade or exceed twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(c)  Accessory structures shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height, provided that the maximum height for accessory structures used exclusively for agriculture shall be twenty-two (22) feet. 
(Prior code 15.10.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 7 - Residential 1.5 (R-1.5) District 

Sec. 16-7-10. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Agriculture; 
(3)  Open space, parks and trails; 
(4)  Home occupations; and 
(5)  Accessory uses. 
(Prior code 15.12.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-7-20. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Places of worship; 
(2)  Child care centers; 
(3)  Schools; 
(4)  Group care facilities; 
(5)  Public buildings or facilities; 
(6)  Riding stables; and 
(7)  Home occupations with more than one employee. 
(Prior code 15.12.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-7-30. - Development standards. 
(a)  The minimum lot area shall be one and one half (1.5) acres. 
(b)  The minimum lot frontage on a public right-of-way shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(c)  The minimum lot width shall be one hundred seventy-five (175) feet. 
(d)  The maximum ground coverage for accessory structures shall be nine hundred (900) square feet per acre. 
(Prior code 15.12.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-7-40. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Minimum rear setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(3)  Minimum side setback: forty (40) feet. 
(b)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.12.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-7-50. - PUD standards. 
    In lieu of the standards in Section 16-7-30 through 16-7-40, a PUD shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet. 
(2)  Maximum dwelling units per acre: seven-tenths (0.7). 
(3)  No structures are permitted in a floodway or area of special flood hazard. 
(4)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
a.  Minimum front setback: fifty (50) feet. 
b.  Minimum rear setback: forty (40) feet. 
c.  Minimum side setback: forty (40) feet. 
(5)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.12.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-7-60. - Height. 
(a)  On lots of more than two and one-quarter (2.25) acres, no principal building shall have less than one (1) story above grade or exceed thirty (30) feet in height. 
(b)  On lots of two and one-quarter (2.25) acres or less, no principal building shall have less than one (1) story above grade or exceed twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(c)  Accessory structures shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
(Prior code 15.12.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 8 - Residential 1.0 (R-1.0) District 

Sec. 16-8-10. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Agriculture; 
(3)  Open space, parks and trails; 
(4)  Home occupations; and 
(5)  Accessory uses. 
(Prior code 15.14.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-8-20. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Places of worship; 
(2)  Child care centers; 
(3)  Schools; 
(4)  Group care facilities; 
(5)  Public buildings or facilities; 
(6)  Riding stables; and 
(7)  Home occupations with more than one employee. 
(Prior code 15.14.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-8-30. - Development standards. 
(a)  The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre. 
(b)  The minimum lot frontage on a public right-of-way shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(c)  The minimum lot width shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(d)  The maximum ground coverage for accessory structures shall be nine hundred (900) square feet per acre. 
(Prior code 15.14.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-8-40. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Minimum rear setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(3)  Minimum side setback: forty (40) feet. 
(b)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.14.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-8-50. - PUD standards. 
    In lieu of the standards in Section 16-8-30 through 16-8-40, a PUD shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. 
(2)  Maximum dwelling units per acre: one (1). 
(3)  No structures are permitted in a floodway or area of special flood hazard. 
(4)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
a.  Minimum front setback: forty (40) feet. 
b.  Minimum rear setback: forty (40) feet. 
c.  Minimum side setback: forty (40) feet. 
(5)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.14.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-8-60. - Height. 
(a)  On lots greater than eight-tenths (0.8) of an acre, no principal building shall have less than one (1) story above grade or exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in height. 
(b)  On lots of eight-tenths (0.8) of an acre or less, no principal building shall have less than one (1) story above grade or exceed twenty-six (26) feet in height. 
(c)  Accessory structures shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and shall comply with the minimum setbacks provided in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.14.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 9 - Residential 0.75 (R-0.75) District 

Sec. 16-9-10. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Open space, parks and trails; 
(3)  Home occupations; and 
(4)  Accessory uses. 
(Prior code 15.16.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-9-20. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Places of worship: 
(2)  Child care centers; 
(3)  Schools; 
(4)  Group care facilities; 
(5)  Public buildings or facilities; 
(6)  Riding stables; and 
(7)  Home occupations with more than one employee. 
(Prior code 15.16.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-9-30. - Rezoning. 
    Every rezoning shall require a PUD. 
(Prior code 15.16.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-9-40. - Development standards. 
(a)  The minimum lot area shall be twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet. 
(b)  The minimum lot frontage on a public right-of-way shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(c)  The maximum dwelling units per acre shall be one and one-third (1.33). 
(Prior code 15.16.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-9-50. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: forty (40) feet. 
(2)  Minimum rear setback: twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Minimum side setback: twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.16.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-9-60. - Height. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall have at least one (1) story above grade, but shall not exceed twenty-six (26) feet in height. 
(b)  Accessory structures shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and shall comply with the minimum setbacks provided in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.16.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 10 - Residential 0.5 (R-0.5) District 

Sec. 16-10-10. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Open space, parks and trails; 
(3)  Home occupations; and 
(4)  Accessory uses. 
(Prior code 15.18.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-10-20. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Places of worship; 
(2)  Child care centers; 
(3)  Schools; 
(4)  Group care facilities; 
(5)  Public buildings and facilities; and 
(6)  Home occupations with more than one employee. 
(Prior code 15.18.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-10-30. - Rezoning. 
    Every rezoning shall require a PUD. 
(Prior code 15.18.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-10-40. - Development standards. 
(a)  The minimum lot area shall be seventeen thousand (17,000) square feet. 
(b)  The maximum dwelling units per acre shall be two (2). 
(c)  No structures are permitted in a floodway or area of special flood hazard. 
(Prior code 15.18.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-10-50. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Minimum rear setback: twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Minimum side setback: twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.18.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-10-60. - Height. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall have at least one (1) story above grade, but shall not exceed twenty-six (26) feet in height. 
(b)  Accessory structures shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and shall comply with the minimum setbacks in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.18.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 11 - Residential 0.25 (R-0.25) District 

Sec. 16-11-10. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Open space, parks and trails; 
(3)  Home occupations; and 
(4)  Accessory uses. 
(Prior code 15.20.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-11-20. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Places of worship; 
(2)  Child care centers; 
(3)  Schools; 
(4)  Group care facilities; 
(5)  Public buildings and facilities; and 
(6)  Home occupations with more than one employee. 
(Prior code 15.20.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-11-30. - Rezoning. 
    Every rezoning shall require a PUD. 
(Prior code 15.20.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-11-40. - Development standards. 
(a)  The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(b)  The minimum lot frontage on a public right-of-way shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(c)  The maximum dwelling units per acre shall be four (4). 
(Prior code 15.20.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-11-50. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Minimum rear setback: twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Minimum side setback: ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.20.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-11-60. - Height. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall have at least one (1) story above grade, but shall not exceed twenty-six (26) feet in height. 
(b)  Accessory structures shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and shall comply with the minimum setbacks in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.20.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 12 - Residential 0.1 (R-0.1) District 

Sec. 16-12-10. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Multi-family dwelling units; 
(2)  Open space, parks and trails; 
(3)  Home occupations; and 
(4)  Accessory uses. 
(Prior code 15.22.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 22 2, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-12-20. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Places of worship; 
(2)  Child care centers; 
(3)  Schools; 
(4)  Group care facilities; 
(5)  Public buildings and facilities; and 
(6)  Home occupations with more than one employee. 
(Prior code 15.22.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-12-30. - Rezoning. 
(a)  Every rezoning shall require a PUD. 
(b)  To be eligible for rezoning, the parcel shall: 
(1)  Have a proximate relationship to an employment center with a documented housing need, located within a one-quarter-mile radius; 
(2)  Serve a cross-section of the employees of that center; and 
(3)  Provide pedestrian access to that center. 
(Prior code 15.22.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-12-40. - Open space. 
    The minimum open space on a parcel shall be sixty percent (60%). 
(Prior code 15.22.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-12-50. - Development standards. 
(a)  The minimum lot area shall be eight thousand eight hundred (8,800) square feet. 
(b)  The minimum lot frontage on a public right-of-way shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(c)  The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be four thousand three hundred fifty-six (4,356) square feet. 
(d)  The maximum dwelling units per acre shall be ten (10). 
(Prior code 15.22.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-12-60. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Minimum rear setback: twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Minimum side setback: ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.22.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-12-70. - Height. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall have at least one (1) story above grade, but shall not exceed twenty-six (26) feet in height. 
(b)  Accessory structures shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and shall comply with the minimum setbacks in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.22.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 13 - Residential 0.05 (R-0.05) District 

Sec. 16-13-10. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Multi-family dwelling units; 
(2)  Open space, parks and trails; 
(3)  Home occupations; and 
(4)  Accessory uses. 
(Prior code 15.24.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 22 2, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-13-20. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Places of worship; 
(2)  Child care centers; 
(3)  Schools; 
(4)  Group care facilities; 
(5)  Public buildings and facilities; and 
(6)  Home occupations with more than one employee. 
(Prior code 15.24.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-13-30. - Rezoning. 
(a)  Every rezoning shall require a PUD. 
(b)  To be eligible for rezoning, the parcel shall: 
(1)  Have a proximate relationship to an employment center with a documented housing need, located within a one-half-mile radius; 
(2)  Serve a cross-section of the employees of that center; and 
(3)  Provide pedestrian access to that center. 
(Prior code 15.24.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-13-40. - Open space. 
    The minimum open space on a parcel shall be forty percent (40%). 
(Prior code 15.24.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-13-50. - Development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot area: eight thousand eight hundred (8,800) square feet. 
(b)  Maximum dwelling units per acre: twenty (20). 
(Prior code 15.24.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-13-60. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Minimum rear setback: twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Minimum side setback: ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Accessory structure setbacks are set forth in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.24.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-13-70. - Height. 
(a)  Principal buildings shall have at least one (1) story above grade, but shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height. 
(b)  Accessory structures shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and shall comply with the minimum setbacks in Article 22 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.24.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 14 - Business Professional (B-1) District 

Sec. 16-14-10. - Intent. 
    The Business Professional (B-1) District is intended to allow for appropriately located groups of retail stores, office buildings, service establishments and civic uses serving the daily needs of the neighborhood, and of such character, scale, appearance and intensity so as to be compatible with surrounding residential areas. 
(Prior code 15.26.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-14-20. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Offices; 
(2)  Pharmacies; 
(3)  Schools, universities, and colleges; 
(4)  Places of worship; 
(5)  Child care facilities; 
(6)  Assisted living facilities; 
(7)  Open space, parks and trails; 
(8)  Clubs; 
(9)  Public buildings and facilities; and 
(10)  Accessory uses, not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the NFA and wholly included within the principal building. 
(Prior code 15.26.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-14-30. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Public buildings and facilities other than general office; 
(2)  Public utilities; and 
(3)  Businesses with drive-in or drive-up facilities. 
(Prior code 15.26.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-14-40. - Open space. 
    The minimum open space on a parcel shall be forty percent (40%). 
(Prior code 15.26.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-14-50. - Rezoning. 
    Every rezoning shall require an SDP. 
(Prior code 15.26.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-14-60. - Development standards. 
    Every lot shall have a minimum frontage width of one hundred (100) feet. 
(Prior code 15.26.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-14-70. - Setbacks. 
    Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Minimum side setback: fifteen (15) feet on an interior lot; twenty-five (25) feet on a corner lot. 
(3)  Minimum rear setback: twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Prior code 15.26.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-14-80. - Height. 
(a)  The maximum height shall be twenty-five (25) feet at all minimum setback lines, and for each additional foot of height, an additional three (3) feet of setback on all sides. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Subsection (a) hereof, buildings shall not exceed ninety-five (95) feet in height, or thirty (30) feet in height within six hundred sixty (660) feet of any lot zoned R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 or R-0.05. 
(Prior code 15.26.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 15 - Neighborhood Business (B-2) District 

Sec. 16-15-10. - Intent. 
    The Neighborhood Business (B-2) District is intended to allow for appropriately located groups of retail stores, office buildings, service establishments and civic uses serving the daily needs of the neighborhood, and of such character, scale, appearance and intensity so as to be compatible with surrounding residential areas. 
(Prior code 15.28.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-15-20. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  All uses by right in the B-1 District; 
(2)  Business services; 
(3)  General retail stores of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less, and not including drive-in businesses; 
(4)  Restaurants and bars, not including drive-in businesses; 
(5)  Personal service centers of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less; 
(6)  Drycleaners; 
(7)  Medical and dental clinics; and 
(8)  Public buildings and facilities. 
(Prior code 15.28.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 3, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-15-30. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Veterinary clinics; 
(2)  Public buildings and facilities other than general office; 
(3)  Public utilities; and 
(4)  Businesses with drive-in or drive-up facilities. 
(Prior code 15.28.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-15-40. - Rezoning. 
    Every rezoning shall require an SDP. 
(Prior code 15.28.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-15-50. - Open space. 
    The minimum open space on a parcel shall be thirty percent (30%). 
(Prior code 15.28.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-15-60. - Development standards. 
    Every lot shall have a minimum frontage width of one hundred (100) feet. 
(Prior code 15.28.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-15-70. - Setbacks. 
    Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Minimum side setback: fifteen (15) feet on an interior lot; twenty-five (25) feet on a corner lot. 
(3)  Minimum rear setback: twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Prior code 15.28.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-15-80. - Height. 
(a)  The maximum height shall be twenty-five (25) feet at all minimum setback lines; provided that, for each additional foot of height, an additional three (3) feet of setback shall be required on all sides. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Subsection (a) hereof, buildings shall not exceed ninety-five (95) feet in height, or thirty (30) feet in height within six hundred sixty (660) feet of any lot zoned R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 or R-0.05. 
(Prior code 15.28.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 16 - Community Business (B-3) District 

Sec. 16-16-10. - Intent. 
    The Community Business (B-3) District is intended to allow for appropriately located groups of retail stores, office buildings, service establishments and civic uses serving the daily needs of the local area, and of such character, scale, appearance and intensity so as to be compatible with surrounding residential areas. 
(Prior code 15.30.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-16-20. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  All uses by right in the B-2 District; 
(2)  Vehicle fueling stations; 
(3)  Car washes; 
(4)  Theaters; 
(5)  Wholesale businesses; 
(6)  Public buildings and facilities; and 
(7)  General retail stores of five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater. 
(Prior code 15.30.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 02 3 , 2016) 
Sec. 16-16-30. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Veterinary clinics; 
(2)  Warehouses and self-storage facilities; 
(3)  Indoor recreation facility; 
(4)  Public buildings and facilities other than general office; 
(5)  Public utilities; and 
(6)  Businesses with drive-in or drive-up facilities. 
(Prior code 15.30.021; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-16-40. - Rezoning. 
    Every rezoning shall require an SDP. 
(Prior code 15.30.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-16-50. - Open space. 
    The minimum open space on a parcel shall be thirty percent (30%). 
(Prior code 15.30.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-16-60. - Development standards. 
    Every lot shall have a minimum frontage width of one hundred (100) feet. 
(Prior code 15.30.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-16-70. - Setbacks. 
    Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Minimum side setback: fifteen (15) feet on an interior lot; twenty-five (25) feet on a corner lot. 
(3)  Minimum rear setback: twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Prior code 15.30.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-16-80. - Height. 
(a)  The maximum height shall be twenty-five (25) feet at all minimum setback lines; provided that, for each additional foot of height, an additional three (3) feet of setback shall be required on all sides. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Subsection (a) hereof, buildings shall not exceed ninety-five (95) feet in height, or thirty (30) feet in height within six hundred sixty (660) feet of any lot zoned R-0.05, R-0.1, R-0.25, R-0.5, R-0.75, R-1.0, R-1.5, R-2.0 or R-2.5. 
(Prior code 15.30.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 17 - Service Business (B-4) District 

Sec. 16-17-10. - Intent. 
    The Service Business (B-4) District is intended to allow for commercial, civic, office, entertainment and lodging uses serving the daily needs of the community, adjacent to arterial roadways. 
(Prior code 15.32.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-17-20. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  All uses by right in the B-3 District except that General Retail Stores shall be limited to no more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and not including drive-in businesses and service uses shall be limited to laundry and dry cleaning facilities; 
(2)  Hotels and motels; 
(3)  Auto service stations and repair garages for minor repairs; 
(4)  Retail stores for the sale of new automobile parts and accessories; 
(5)  Theaters; 
(6)  Mailing centers; 
(7)  Art studios and galleries; 
(8)  Recreation facilities; 
(9)  Public buildings and facilities; and 
(10)  Extended stay hotels and motels in existence as of January 1, 2014. 
(Prior code 15.32.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 8 2, 2014) 
Sec. 16-17-30. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  New automobile dealerships, provided: 
a.  Vehicles as sold by a licensed franchised dealer of only one (1) make of automobile where all models of said make are marketed as "luxury vehicles" and defined as such by Kelly Blue Book, Ward's Automotive Group U.S. Market Segmentation, or other nationally recognized resource for prices, values and review on new cars; 
b.  There shall be no off-site storage of vehicles; 
c.  Showrooms for the display or sale of motor vehicles may have as an accessory use thereof, outdoor display area for new and previously owned vehicles and a fully enclosed service or repair shop; 
(2)  Public buildings and facilities; 
(3)  Public utilities; 
(4)  Businesses with drive-in or drive-up facilities; and 
(5)  Extended stay hotels and motels. 
(Prior code 15.32.025; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 8 3, 2014) 
Sec. 16-17-40. - Rezoning. 
    Every rezoning shall require an SDP. 
(Prior code 15.32.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-17-50. - Open space. 
    The minimum open space on a parcel shall be thirty percent (30%). 
(Prior code 15.32.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-17-60. - Development standards. 
    Every lot shall have a minimum frontage width of one hundred (100) feet. 
(Prior code 15.35.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-17-70. - Setbacks. 
    Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Minimum side setback: fifteen (15) feet on an interior lot; twenty-five (25) feet on a corner lot. 
(3)  Minimum rear setback: twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Prior code 15.32.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-17-80. - Height. 
(a)  The maximum height shall be twenty-five (25) feet at all minimum setback lines; provided that, for each additional foot of height, an additional three (3) feet of setback shall be required on all sides. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Subsection (a) hereof, buildings shall not exceed ninety-five (95) feet in height, or thirty (30) feet in height within six hundred sixty (660) feet of any lot zoned R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 or R-0.05. 
(Prior code 15.32.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-17-90. - Limitations on duration of occupancy in hotels, motels and extended stay hotels and motels. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put up or stay at the same hotel or motel for longer than twenty-nine (29) days in a consecutive sixty (60)-day period. It shall also be unlawful for the owner, operator, manager or person in charge of a hotel or motel to permit or allow a person to stay at the hotel or motel in excess of twenty-nine (29) days in a consecutive sixty (60)-day period. This Section shall not apply to extended stay hotels or motels, as defined in Section 16-1-100 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Subsection (a) above, a stay in excess of twenty-nine (29) days in a consecutive sixty (60)-day period may occur in the following situations: 
(1)  Where there is a written contract between the hotel or motel and a governmental, charitable or insurance agency to house families in crisis who are receiving temporary housing assistance from said governmental, charitable or insurance agency; or 
(2)  Where there is a written contract between the hotel or motel for an on-site resident manager or employee to live at the hotel or motel 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a hotel or motel owner, operator, manager or person in charge of a hotel or motel to permit an employee of the hotel or motel to live at the hotel or motel for more than twenty-nine (29) days in a consecutive sixty (60)-day period unless the room occupied by the employee contains a kitchen separate from sanitary facilities equipped with a full-sized refrigerator, built-in stove, dishwasher and microwave. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an extended stay hotel or motel owner, operator, manager or person in charge of an extended stay hotel or motel to allow guest stays longer than one hundred twenty (120) days in a consecutive one hundred fifty (150)-day period in more than thirty percent (30%) of the rooms, except in circumstances where there is a written contract between the hotel and (1) a governmental, charitable or insurance agency to house families in crisis, (2) a relocation service as part of a business relocation, or (3) a specific business entity for a business purpose which requires extended temporary occupancy. 
(Ord. 8 4, 2014) 
ARTICLE 18 - Mixed Commercial (MC) District 

Sec. 16-18-10. - Intent. 
    The Mixed Commercial (MC) District is intended to allow for office, entertainment, lodging and a variety of retail uses serving the daily needs of the region. The MC District should generally be located adjacent to major thoroughfares. 
(Prior code 15.40.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 4, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-18-20. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Accessory uses; 
(2)  Art studios and galleries; 
(3)  Banks; 
(4)  Business services; 
(5)  Businesses with drive-in or drive-up facilities; 
(6)  Car washes; 
(7)  Drycleaners; 
(8)  Extended stay hotels and extended stay motels in existence as of January 1, 2014; 
(9)  General retail stores; 
(10)  Hotels and motels; 
(11)  Medical and dental clinics; 
(12)  Offices; 
(13)  Personal service centers of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less; 
(14)  Restaurants and bars; 
(15)  Theaters; and 
(16)  Vehicle fueling stations. 
(Prior code 15.40.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 5, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-18-30. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Craft breweries, distilleries, and taprooms; 
(2)  Equipment rental centers; 
(3)  Extended stay hotels or motels; 
(4)  Kennels; 
(5)  Light assembly and manufacturing; 
(6)  Motorcycle, all-terrain vehicles, water craft and boat dealerships, both new and used; 
(7)  Public buildings and facilities other than general office; 
(8)  Public utilities; 
(9)  Radio and television studios; 
(10)  Recreation facilities; 
(11)  Vehicle rental centers; 
(12)  Vehicle repair facilities; 
(13)  Veterinary clinics; and 
(14)  Wholesale businesses. 
(Prior code 15.40.031; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 8 5, 2014; Ord. 16 6, 2015 ; Ord. 02 1 , 2016; Ord. 6 ,  1, 2018) 
Sec. 16-18-40. - Eligibility requirements. 
    A parcel is eligible for MC zoning if it consists of not less than ten (10) acres. 
(Prior code 15.40.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-18-50. - Open space. 
    The minimum open space on a parcel shall be twenty percent (20%). 
( Ord. 16 7, 2015 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16,  7 , adopted Oct. 5, 2015, amended  16-18-50 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former  16-18-50 pertained to rezoning, and derived from Prior code Title 14, 15.52 and Ord. 32 1, 2011. 
Sec. 16-18-60. - Development standards. 
    Every lot shall have a minimum frontage width of one hundred (100) feet. 
( Ord. 16 8, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-18-70. - Setbacks. 
    Principal buildings shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Minimum front setback: twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Minimum side setback: fifteen (15) feet on an interior lot; twenty-five (25) feet on a corner lot. 
(3)  Minimum rear setback: twenty-five (25) feet. 
( Ord. 16 9, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-18-80. - Height. 
(a)  Maximum height: twenty-five (25) feet at all minimum setback lines, and for each additional foot of height, an additional three (3) feet of setback shall be required on all sides. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) hereof, buildings shall not exceed ninety-five (95) feet in height or thirty (30) feet in height within six hundred sixty (660) feet of any lot zoned R-0.05, R-0.1, R-0.25, R-0.5, R-0.75, R-1.0, R-1.5, R-2.0, or R-2.5. 
( Ord. 16 10, 2015 ) 
ARTICLE 19 - Town Center (TC) District 

Sec. 16-19-10. - Intent. 
    The Town Center (TC) District is intended to provide for a mix of office, residential and supporting retail and service uses, as well as other related uses. The TC District should include areas at a scale sufficient to allow master planning of activity centers and should be located adjacent to Interstate 25 and related transit facilities. The TC District should be interconnected with transit stations, parks, open space, plazas and bicycle and pedestrian paths to deemphasize the use of automobiles. 
(Prior code 15.38.010, 15.52; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-19-20. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Offices, including general offices, medical and dental offices, pharmacies, computer facilities, warehousing and storage of any commodity when enclosed within a building, and research laboratories; 
(2)  Light assembly and manufacturing within general office space in a building not containing any residential uses, confined to one (1) floor per enterprise, not involving outdoor storage and provided that all activities producing noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare, air pollution, fire hazards and noxious emissions are confined entirely within the building, and any external effects resulting from such activities cannot be observed, felt, heard, smelled or otherwise perceived at the property line; 
(3)  Support uses, including retail and service establishments which are designed to service the daily needs of the Town Center concept; 
(4)  Accessory uses, including parking lots and parking structures (consistent with the ground coverage and open space requirements), parks, trails and open space, and transportation centers and systems; 
(5)  Theaters and recreation facilities; 
(6)  Public buildings and facilities; and 
(7)  Any other use consistent with the uses set forth in this Section. 
(Prior code 15.38.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 04 1, 2012) 
Sec. 16-19-30. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Public buildings and facilities other than general office; 
(2)  Public utilities; 
(3)  Dwelling units, including detached single-family dwelling units and multi-family dwelling units; and 
(4)  Light assembly and manufacturing requiring more than two (2) commercial truck (over twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds GVW) deliveries or pickups per week, or located in a building with residential uses. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 04 2, 2012; Ord. 22 4, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-19-40. - Rezoning. 
    To be eligible for rezoning to TC, the following eligibility requirements shall be met: 
(1)  Size. 
a.  The minimum gross land area of a parcel shall be two hundred fifty (250) contiguous acres with a minimum of sixty percent (60%) zoned other than residential at the time of the application. Such parcel may be divided by vehicular ways but shall be so located, dimensioned and arranged as to permit unified planning and development. 
b.  A parcel with less than two hundred fifty (250) acres in gross land area may be added to an existing area with TC zoning, if it is directly adjacent to an existing parcel with TC zoning. 
(2)  Transportation. A parcel being rezoned TC shall directly abut and be surrounded by major arterials and freeways existing and planned in the Comprehensive Plan and joint regional planning program regional plan. A parcel can be added to an existing area with TC zoning that directly abuts and is surrounded by major arterials and freeways existing and planned, if the parcel to be added is directly adjacent to an existing parcel with TC zoning. 
(3)  Utilities. The utility systems serving the proposed TC District shall have major service capabilities. All utilities shall be underground. 
(4)  Comprehensive Plan. The location of the TC District shall comply with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Prior code 15.52; Ord. 14 1, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-19-50. - Open space. 
(a)  A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the gross land area shall be open space. 
(b)  For the purposes of this Article, open space is the gross land area which is not devoted to building, parking structures, paved streets and parking area improvements, but includes such areas as pedestrian ways, courtyards and other landscaped exterior space other than medians, islands and peninsulas, whether public or private. 
(Prior code 15.38.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 04 3, 2012) 
Sec. 16-19-60. - Development standards. 
(a)  Building ground coverage shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the gross acreage in the TC District. 
(b)  Surface parking and the surface area of structure parking within the TC District shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the gross acreage in the TC District. Parking spaces shall be provided in quantities sufficient to contain all parking within the TC District boundaries without surface use of public streets. 
(c)  The NFA shall not exceed three (3) times the maximum building ground coverage. 
(d)  Lighting shall be designed and located so as not to produce excess glare or illumination beyond the exterior boundary of the TC District. 
(e)  Commercial vehicle (over twenty-six thousand [26,000] pounds GVW) deliveries shall be restricted to the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Prior code 15.38.040, 15.38.050, 15.38.070, 15.38.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-19-70. - Setbacks. 
    All structures shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from the exterior boundary of the TC District. 
(Prior code 15.38.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 20 - Light Industrial (LI) District 

Sec. 16-20-10. - Intent. 
    The Light Industrial (LI) District is intended to provide areas for research, warehousing, small product assembly, manufacturing and distribution with minimal dust, fumes, odors, refuse, smoke vapor, noise, lights and vibrations confined to the site upon which the principal use is located, and also to allow sexually oriented businesses subject to certain reasonable and uniform regulations enacted to promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Prior code 15.41.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-20-20. - Uses by right. 
    Uses by right are as follows: 
(1)  Accessory uses; 
(2)  Light industrial facilities; 
(3)  Vehicle body shops; 
(4)  Vehicle repair facilities; and 
(5)  Wholesale businesses. 
(Prior code 15.41.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 11, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-20-30. - Special uses. 
    Uses permitted in accordance with an SUP are as follows: 
(1)  Trade contractor offices; 
(2)  Accessory outdoor storage up to a maximum of 10% of the lot area; 
(3)  Distribution facilities; 
(4)  Government maintenance facilities; 
(5)  Manufacturing and processing industries not permitted as a use by right; 
(6)  Sexually oriented businesses, subject to the requirements set forth in this Code; 
(7)  Transportation facilities; 
(8)  Public buildings and facilities other than general office; and 
(9)  Public utilities. 
(Prior code 15.41.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 16 12, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-20-40. - Use regulations. 
(a)  All uses shall be operated within an enclosed structure. 
(b)  Dust, fumes, vapors, odors, refuse, noise, smoke, light, glare and vibrations shall be minimized and shall be confined to the site upon which the use is located. 
(Prior code 15.41.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-20-50. - Open space requirements. 
    The minimum open space on a parcel shall be thirty percent (30%). 
(Prior code 15.41.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-20-60. - Setbacks. 
    All structures shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Front setback: fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Side setback: fifteen (15) feet on interior lots, twenty-five (25) feet on corner lots. 
(3)  Rear setback: twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Prior code 15.41.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-20-70. - Height. 
    No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Prior code 15.41.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-20-80. - Sexually oriented business regulations. 
(a)  This Section shall apply to sexually oriented businesses, in addition to all other regulations set forth in this Article. 
(b)  Sexually oriented businesses shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any: 
(1)  Property zoned R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1, R-0.05 or TC; 
(2)  Single-family or multi-family dwelling; 
(3)  Place of worship, public park or library; 
(4)  Child care center; 
(5)  School serving persons under eighteen (18) years of age; or 
(6)  Any other sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any sexually oriented business and any place of worship, school, public park, dwelling or specific zone district shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest portion of the building used for the sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the place of worship, school or dwelling, or the nearest boundary of the public park or specific zone district. 
(d)  Sexually explicit advertisements or other promotional displays for sexually oriented businesses that are harmful to minors shall not be visible to minors from pedestrian ways, walkways or other public areas. 
(Prior code 15.41.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 21 - Site and Design Standards 
Division 1 - Site and Lighting Design 

Sec. 16-21-10. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Division is to create safe and attractive facilities, to minimize views of unattractive uses or activities through use of good design principles and the establishment of minimum requirements, to enhance the compatibility of dissimilar uses and to enhance property values. 
(b)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to all property in the City except single-family residential properties. 
(Prior code 15.43.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-20. - Development objectives. 
    To the greatest extent practicable, all development shall be designed to: 
(1)  Minimize adverse impacts on adjacent uses; 
(2)  Minimize disruption to the existing terrain, vegetation or other natural site features; 
(3)  Improve pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular circulation within and across the site; 
(4)  Minimize adverse impacts on views to the mountains and to Cherry Creek Reservoir; 
(5)  Reduce the visual impact of parking areas, screened storage areas and similar accessory areas and structures; 
(6)  Design buildings that are attractive and compatible with surrounding development in terms of forms, colors, materials and texture; 
(7)  Provide exterior lighting that meets the functional and security needs of the proposed land use without adversely affecting streets, adjacent properties or the community; and 
(8)  Provide for more identifiable and functional open space and landscaping. 
(Prior code 15.43.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-30. - General design. 
    The following general design elements are encouraged: 
(1)  Public or private outdoor gathering areas; 
(2)  Useable public spaces; 
(3)  Interesting streetscapes; 
(4)  Pedestrian ways to civic uses and amenities; 
(5)  Public art and public plazas; and 
(6)  Inviting street-level retail storefronts that are oriented toward pedestrians and provide visually interesting forms or displays for pedestrians. 
(Prior code 15.43.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-40. - Exterior building design. 
(a)  Materials. The City encourages the use of exterior building materials that are compatible with the surrounding area, such as: 
(1)  Office buildings: architecturally treated pre-cast concrete, brick, stone, granite, marble, ceramic tile, architectural metals or nonreflective glass. 
(2)  Retail buildings: brick, masonry, stucco, architectural metals and nonreflective glass. 
(b)  Additional elements. The City encourages the use of the following additional architectural components on the exterior of buildings: 
(1)  Decorative architectural treatments, including brick or stone on a portion or all of the faade, fenestrations, decorative trim and column treatments. 
(2)  Surface coatings with low reflective characteristics and earth tone colors. 
(3)  Consistent architectural design for all building faades (three-hundred-sixty-degree architecture). 
(c)  Neon. The use of neon is generally discouraged, but if it is appropriate given the nature of the surrounding area, it may be used in a limited fashion to subtly reinforce architectural themes and designs. 
(Prior code 15.43.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-50. - View preservation. 
    The City encourages building design and orientation that considers and respects views from other properties of the mountains and of Cherry Creek Reservoir. 
(Prior code 15.43.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-60. - Topography. 
    To the greatest extent practicable, all development shall conform to existing topography, including: 
(1)  Proper transitions to the adjacent sites and perimeter roadways; 
(2)  Preservation of natural features; and 
(3)  The use of site contouring to provide for screening or buffering and visual interest. 
(Prior code 15.43.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-70. - Climatic considerations. 
(a)  Areas of sufficient size and convenience for snow storage shall be provided on site. Pushing snow into public rights-of-way or landscape areas is prohibited. 
(b)  Roofs shall be designed to prevent snow shedding onto entryways and pedestrian ways, to the greatest extent practicable. 
(c)  Public spaces, pathways and entryways shall not be located on the north (shadow) side of a building, if possible. 
(Prior code 15.43.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-80. - Parking structure design. 
(a)  Location. Parking structures shall be located away from street frontages, unless the structure incorporates an exterior building with retail, office or residential uses. 
(b)  Height. Above-grade parking structures shall conform to the height limits of the underlying zoning district. Light poles, elevator shafts, mechanical equipment and required screening devices are excluded from height calculations. 
(c)  Access. To minimize conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians, a minimum stacking distance of forty (40) feet shall be provided between a control gate and the back edge of a sidewalk. 
(d)  Ramp slope design. 
(1)  Slopes on covered ramps shall not exceed twelve and one-half percent (12.5%). 
(2)  Slopes on uncovered ramps shall not exceed ten percent (10%). 
(3)  Ramp slopes exceeding ten percent (10%) shall have a fifteen-foot-long transition area at both the top and bottom of the ramp. The transition area slope shall be approximately one-half (1/2) of the slope of the main ramp. 
(4)  Single lane entrances shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet wide at the street, but the width may be reduced at an access control gate. 
(e)  General design. 
(1)  Parking structures shall be architecturally compatible with and shall utilize the same material finish as the other buildings on the property. 
(2)  Openings for parking structure faades shall be designed and constructed in accordance with applicable building codes. 
(3)  Sloped ramps shall not be visible from outside the parking structure. 
(4)  Full enclosure of any level of a parking structure is permitted only if all applicable building code requirements are met. 
(f)  Pedestrian considerations. The overall mass of a parking structure shall be designed on a pedestrian scale by: 
(1)  Fragmenting exterior walls to create the appearance of multiple structures; 
(2)  Manipulating the land form; 
(3)  Placing wall texture at eye-level; and 
(4)  Clustering small scale elements, such as planter walls and entry features, around entry points for people and vehicles. 
(g)  Screening. 
(1)  Mature landscaping shall be required to provide year-round concealment of forty percent (40%) of the structure faades from residential or street views. 
(2)  The bottom thirty-six (36) inches of the first floor faade shall be screened from residential and street views architecturally or with landscaping. 
(Prior code 15.43.090, 15.44.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-90. - Rooftop equipment. 
(a)  Mechanical, communication and similar equipment shall be integrated with the building and screened from view from adjacent properties or from public ways. The screening itself shall be designed to be an integral part of the building and shall match or be compatible with the building's material and color. New and replacement equipment shall be screened in addition to all equipment on the roof that is not already screened. 
(b)  Solar collection equipment visible from adjacent properties or public ways shall be designed to relate to the architectural style of the main building or buildings on the site and integrated into the building architecture, so that each solar collection panel is designed to incorporate at least one (1) of the predominantly visual horizontal and vertical elements of the main building or buildings on the site, such as the type of construction, material or color. 
(c)  Mechanical units may be located in a penthouse enclosure that is architecturally compatible and predominantly of the same material as the building. 
(d)  Vents and vent pipes located on the roof shall be painted to match the roof color or the color of the equipment screening enclosure. 
(Prior code 15.43.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-100. - Ground-mounted utilities. 
    Ground-mounted utilities, including without limitation backflow devices, generators, electrical transformers, telephone boxes, traffic control cabinets, gas valves, utility cabinets, vaults and similar structures, shall be located in a utility easement, placed underground when feasible, painted an earth tone color, and screened by vegetation from view of adjacent properties and public ways. 
(Prior code 14.43.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-110. - Ground-mounted mechanical equipment. 
    Ground-mounted air conditioning units shall be screened with landscaping. All other ground-mounted mechanical units shall be in an enclosure of sufficient height to screen the units, constructed to match the building design, material and color. The exterior of the enclosure shall be softened with landscape plantings as described in Section 16-21-250 of this Article. 
(Prior code 15.43.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-120. - Wall-mounted utilities and equipment. 
    Meters, panels and other similar appurtenances shall be painted to match the building color. Wall-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view of adjacent properties architecturally or with landscape plantings. 
(Prior code 14.43.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-130. - Site lighting. 
(a)  Lighting and photometric plans. 
(1)  Every application for a MDP, SDP, PUD plan, or SUP or an amendment thereto shall include a lighting and photometric plan that examines the degree to which exterior night lighting affects adjacent properties, considering the light source, level of illumination, hours of illumination and need for illumination. 
(2)  The photometric plan shall depict the anticipated light levels generated by all exterior lights across the site and ten (10) feet beyond the property lines. 
(b)  Lighting levels. 
(1)  Light levels measured five (5) feet beyond the property line of a commercial property shall not exceed two-tenths (0.2) foot-candle as a result of the on-site lighting. 
(2)  The following table specifies the recommended minimum and maximum lighting levels for outdoor areas used at night. 
Light Levels 
Area/ Activity Minimum
Foot-candles Maximum
Foot-candles Building entrances and exits 5 10 Parking areas 2 10 Parking structures 5 10 Loading areas 10 15 Pedestrian stairs and walkways 0.4 <0.2 at 5' across property line Under canopies 5 15 Pedestrian plazas 1.7 2  
(3)  Uniformity. Light levels in parking lots, parking structures, and pedestrian walkways shall not exceed a maximum foot-candle ratio difference of four to one (4:1) from the brightest areas to the darkest areas. 
(c)  Parking lot lighting. 
(1)  Light levels in parking lots shall not exceed a maximum foot-candle ratio difference of four to one (4:1) from the brightest areas to the darkest areas. 
(2)  A diagram showing the proposed light fixture design and height shall be provided on the lighting plan. The following table specifies the maximum height for light fixtures and poles, including a base or pedestal, measured from ground level to the top of the fixture. 
(3)  The style of light standards and fixtures shall be compatible with the style and character of the architecture on the property. Poles shall be anodized and painted a color to coordinate with other design elements on the property. 
(4)  The luminaire shall be a sharp cut-off type, with a flat lens, with a maximum lamp size of two hundred fifty (250) watts and either a high-pressure sodium or metal halide bulb. 
(5)  The bulb shall be recessed within the fixture and shall not be visible below the fixture head. Fixtures shall be oriented downward and shall minimize up-light, spill-light, glare and unnecessary diffusion onto adjacent properties or public ways. 
(6)  The light fixture shall be located so that it will not be obstructed by tree canopies. 
(7)  Light sources shall minimize contrast with the light produced on the property and from the property onto adjacent properties and public ways. Light sources shall produce an unobtrusive degree of brightness in both illumination levels and color rendition. 
(d)  The maximum height of parking lot and parking structure light poles is set forth in the following table: 
Light Pole Height 
Use Max.
Height
in Parking
Lot
(in feet) Max. Height
on Parking
Structure
(in feet) Special use in 
R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, 
R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, 
R-0.25, R-0.1, 
R-0.05 Districts 12 Parapet wall lighting only Office or retail use adjacent to residential use 18 12 Other retail use 25 18  
(e)  Pedestrian lighting on commercial properties. 
(1)  Pedestrian lighting on commercial properties may be either metal halide or high-pressure sodium, and shall not exceed seventy (70) watts per luminaire. Bollard lights are preferred for pedestrian walkways. 
(2)  Outdoor gathering areas shall utilize luminaires mounted no higher than twelve (12) feet above grade. 
(3)  Luminaires shall not conflict with tree canopies, sidewalks, utilities, road signs, fire hydrants or street furniture elements such as benches, bike racks and mailboxes. 
(f)  Canopy lights. 
(1)  Light fixtures mounted below canopies shall be recessed or flush-mounted with shields so that the lens of the fixture is not visible below the sides of the canopy. Light emitted by under-canopy fixtures shall be substantially confined to the ground surface directly beneath the perimeter of the canopy. 
(2)  No lighting, except that permitted by Subsection (c) hereof, shall be permitted on the top or sides of a canopy. 
(g)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  Light sources shall not shine directly onto abutting property and shall be concealed or shielded to the maximum extent feasible to minimize glare and unnecessary diffusion on adjacent properties and public ways. 
(2)  Light fixtures shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular travel or conflict with traffic signals. Neither direct nor reflected light from any light source shall create a traffic hazard to operators of motor vehicles on public roads. Colored lights shall not be used so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices or warning or emergency lights. 
(3)  Decorative uplighting of buildings is prohibited on commercial properties that are adjacent to residential properties. 
(4)  The lighting of private outdoor tennis courts, sport courts or recreation areas is prohibited on property zoned R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5 or R-0.25. 
(Prior code 15.47.020, 15.47.030, 15.47.040, 15.47.060, 15.47.070, 15.47.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-140. - Trash and recycling enclosures. 
(a)  External trash storage and recycling bins shall be located in an enclosure of sufficient height to conceal dumpsters, bins and compactors. 
(b)  Enclosures shall be constructed to match the building design, materials and colors. The gates to the enclosure shall be decorative and coordinate with the enclosure materials and colors. To enhance security, the gates may include narrow gaps allowing individuals to see into the enclosure. 
(c)  The exterior of the enclosure shall be softened with landscape plantings as described in Section 16-21-250. 
(Prior code 15.43.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-150. - Drainage ways and stormwater facilities. 
(a)  No structure shall be constructed, extended, converted or altered within a Special Flood Hazard Area without full compliance with the requirements of the Drainage Criteria Manual. 
(b)  Drainage ways and stormwater facilities shall be integrated into the overall site grading and landscaping plan, to the greatest extent practicable. 
(c)  Concentrated flows shall be piped underground unless surface flows are integrated into the site's landscaped areas. 
(d)  Outfall structures shall be designed to minimize their visibility through the use of landscape screening and grading. All remaining exposed surfaces shall have architectural details, such as colored patterned concrete or masonry or stone veneers. 
(e)  Trash racks and grates shall have high quality surface treatments. The use of deformed reinforcing steel bars (rebar) shall not be used to fabricate trash racks or grates. 
(Prior code 15.43.160; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-160. - Intersection sight distance. 
(a)  Landscaping, fences, utility equipment, wall or other structure wider than twenty (20) inches shall not intrude into the sight triangle at a height between thirty-six (36) and eighty-four (84) inches. Anything that obscures or blocks the visibility of oncoming traffic or any traffic control device or sign located at such intersection shall be prohibited and shall not be constructed or maintained in the area identified as the sight triangle. Parking shall not be allowed within the area of the sight triangle. 
(b)  On corner lots at uncontrolled intersections, no landscaping, fence, utility equipment, wall or other structure in excess of thirty-six (36) inches in height above the roadway, or which intrudes into the sight triangle at a height of less than eighty-four (84) inches or so as to obscure or block the visibility of any traffic control device or sign located at such intersection, shall be constructed or maintained within the triangular area bounded by intersecting property lines and a line connecting the point on each of the property lines which is twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the property lines. 
(Prior code 15.42.310; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-170. - Outdoor eating areas. 
(a)  No outdoor eating area shall be established in the City without a permit issued pursuant to Article 2 of this Chapter. 
(b)  An outdoor eating area shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The outdoor eating area shall be separated from any parking area, sidewalk or roadway by at least six (6) feet. 
(2)  Adequate parking shall exist for the additional seats, pursuant to Division 5 of this Article. 
(Prior code 15.42.501; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 2 - Landscaping 

Sec. 16-21-210. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Division is to require the preparation of landscape plans that contribute to visual quality and continuity within and between developments, provide screening and mitigation of potential conflicts between activity areas and site elements, ensure significant tree canopy shading to reduce heat build-up, enhance outdoor spaces and gathering areas, provide green space areas that support passive recreational uses, reduce erosion and stormwater runoff and mitigate air pollution. 
(b)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to all property in the City; provided, however, that property zoned R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5 and R-0.25 shall only be subject to Section 16-21-220 and Section 16-21-230. 
(Prior code 15.45.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-220. - Landscape plans. 
(a)  Required. Every application for a new or amended MDP, SDP, PUD, or SUP shall include a landscape plan. 
(b)  Objectives. A landscape plan shall: 
(1)  Protect existing trees, natural areas and topographical features, including maintaining wetland and other habitat areas and the character of drainage channels; 
(2)  Reinforce and extend existing patterns of outdoor spaces and vegetation where practicable; 
(3)  Support functional purposes, such as visual screening, creation of privacy, management of microclimate or drainage; 
(4)  Enhance the appearance of the development and the neighborhood; 
(5)  Respect natural contours; 
(6)  Complements the architecture of a development; 
(7)  Provide buffers between conflicting land uses; 
(8)  Create year round visual interest; 
(9)  Enhance the pedestrian environment; 
(10)  Allow for adequate security and surveillance; 
(11)  Avoid north side sun shadowing on driveways and sidewalks; 
(12)  Avoid reliance on excessive maintenance; and 
(13)  Incorporate water conservation materials and techniques through application of the following xeriscape landscaping principles: 
a.  Grouping of plants with similar water requirements together on the same irrigation zones; 
b.  Limiting high-irrigation turf and plantings to appropriate areas that are highly visible or frequently used; 
c.  Use of low-water demanding plants and turf where practicable; 
d.  Use of efficient irrigation systems; 
e.  Incorporation of soil improvements; 
f.  Use of mulch; 
g.  Provision of regular and attentive maintenance; and 
h.  Exclusion of artificial turf or plants, mulched beds or areas without landscape plant material (including gravel), paving of areas not required for walkways, plazas or parking lots, bare ground and weed-covered or -infested surfaces. 
(c)  Required elements. A landscape plan shall include all of the following: 
(1)  Site plan. A plan reflecting the layout of the site, showing existing and proposed buildings, parking areas and driveways, open space areas, walkways and other improvements, with circular symbols delineating existing and proposed trees and shrubs and stippling identifying ground covers, with circular symbols representing the canopy size of the tree or shrub at five (5) to seven (7) years from the time of planting, including a two-letter or three-letter abbreviation identifying the species type of individual plants or groups of the same species. 
(2)  Planting schedule. A table with a legend of the symbols used on the site plan for the proposed ground covers, trees, shrubs or vines, the two-letter or three-letter abbreviation and matching species name, the number of each species to be planted and the size of the plant material at the time of planting. 
(3)  Irrigation plan. A plan identifying the type and size of drip, spray head or subsurface irrigation method proposed for each area of the site. 
(4)  Elevation drawings. Elevation or cross-section drawings of proposed landscape screening of parking lots, parking structures, trash and mechanical equipment enclosures or buffers of residential land uses to adjoining nonresidential land uses. 
(Prior code 15.45.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-230. - Retaining walls. 
    Retaining walls shall be tiered if they are more than four (4) feet in height, and landscaping shall be used to break up the mass of the wall at each tier. 
(Prior code 15.43.150, 15.45.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-240. - Parking lot landscaping. 
    In addition to the general requirements of this Division, parking lot landscaping shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Islands. The interior of a parking lot in excess of twenty (20) spaces shall include a minimum of ten percent (10%) of interior landscaped islands to break up the expanse of asphalt, provide shade and provide pedestrian connections between the parking area and the building. Parking bays shall extend no more than fifteen (15) parking spaces without an intervening island or landscape peninsula. Landscaped end cap islands are required at the end of each interior row of parking spaces. Every island shall include at least one (1) canopy shade tree or ornamental tree, be of a width greater than eight (8) feet in its smallest dimension, include at least eighty (80) square feet of ground area per tree to allow for root aeration and have raised concrete curbs. Trees shall be located at least three (3) feet back from the curb and located to assure that their canopies do not interfere with parking lot and street light fixtures. 
(2)  Landscaped medians, islands and peninsulas shall not be considered open space. 
(3)  Screening. Parking lots with twenty (20) or more spaces shall be screened from adjacent uses and from the street. Screening from residential uses shall consist of a hedge, a berm or a fence or wall in combination with plant material, six (6) feet in height, and of sufficient year-round opacity to block at least ninety percent (90%) of light from vehicle headlights. Screening from the street and all nonresidential uses shall consist of an earthen berm, plant material, planter, fence or wall or a combination of such elements, each of which shall have a minimum height of thirty-six (36) inches above the level of the street or an adjacent property. Such screening shall extend a minimum of seventy percent (70%) of the length of the street frontage of the parking lot and also seventy percent (70%) of the length of any boundary of the parking lot that abuts a nonresidential use. Openings in the required screening shall be permitted for such features as access ways or drainage ways. 
(4)  Intersection sight distance. All landscaping shall comply with Section 16-21-160 and the Greenwood Village Design and Construction Standards. 
(Prior code 15.04.480, 15.45.030, 15.45.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-250. - Buffering and screening. 
(a)  Buffering. At least one (1) of the following landscape buffering techniques shall be required between conflicting uses to mitigate the conflicts: 
(1)  Separation and screening with plant material, including the planting of dense stands of evergreen trees, canopy shade trees, ornamental trees or shrubs. 
(2)  Integration of plantings, including the incorporation of trees, vines, planters or other plantings into the architectural theme of the buildings and their outdoor spaces to subdue differences in architecture and bulk and to avoid harsh edges. 
(3)  Establishing privacy by establishing vertical landscaping elements to screen views into or between windows and defined outdoor spaces where privacy is important, such as where larger buildings are proposed next to side or rear yards of smaller buildings. 
(4)  Visually integrating fences and walls, including the provision of plant material in conjunction with a screen panel, arbor, garden wall, privacy fence or security fence, to avoid the visual effect created by unattractive screening or security fences. 
(5)  Landform shaping, such as the use of berms or other grade changes to alter views, subdue sound, change the sense of proximity and channel pedestrian movement. 
(6)  On properties with unusual site conditions, other buffering techniques that will accomplish the mitigation of conflicting uses, as approved by the Director. 
(b)  Screening. 
(1)  Trash and mechanical enclosures. To soften the appearance of trash and mechanical enclosures and provide a transition to surrounding landscaped areas, evergreen trees or upright evergreen shrubs shall be planted around the exterior of trash enclosures and mechanical enclosures, except the gate areas necessary for access. 
(2)  Loading and service areas. Evergreen trees shall be planted between a loading or service area and an adjacent public way or property so as to screen from view the loading or service area from the adjacent public way or property. A screen wall may be used in lieu of landscape screening. 
(3)  Small utility boxes, HVAC units and other similar equipment enclosures. Upright evergreen shrubs shall screen from view the utility box, HVAC unit or other similar equipment enclosure from adjacent properties and public ways. 
(Prior code 15.45.040, 15.45.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-260. - Plant materials, quality and installation. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The selection of plant materials shall be based on climate and site conditions. All plants shall be certified by a landscape architect as A-Grade or No. 1 Grade, free of defects, and of normal health, height, leaf density and spread appropriate to the species, as defined by American Association of Nurserymen standards. 
(2)  Landscaping shall be installed according to sound horticultural practices in a manner designed to encourage quick establishment and healthy growth. 
(3)  Trees, shrubs, groundcovers, vines and sod areas shall be irrigated with drip or subsurface systems when possible. Native grass areas shall be irrigated until fully established. 
(b)  Coverage material types. 
(1)  Xeriscaping. Plant materials shall be water-conserving (xeriscape) varieties. 
(2)  Turf grass. High-use areas shall be planted with irrigated turf grass. Turf in isolated areas of less than five (5) feet in width is discouraged. 
(3)  Native grass. Nonirrigated short grass, prairie grasses or other adapted grasses may be established in remote, low-use, low-visibility areas, including detention ponds. Such areas shall be irrigated until fully established, unless a waiver that includes a weed management plan is approved. 
(4)  Perennial beds. Shrub and ground cover planting beds shall be separated from turf grass with edging and shall have open surface areas covered with mulch. 
(5)  Annuals. Annual planting beds shall be used in highly visible areas or areas with frequent pedestrian use. 
(6)  Inorganic material. Rock, bark mulch and other inorganic material may be used in limited decorative ways. 
(c)  Trees. 
(1)  Tree canopy. Developments shall establish groves and belts of trees along all public streets, in and around parking lots and in all landscape areas that are located within fifty (50) feet of a structure, to establish at least a partial urban tree canopy. The groves and belts may be combined or interspersed with other landscape areas to accommodate views and functions, such as active recreation and storm drainage. 
(2)  Minimum planting. A minimum tree canopy is required, but does not limit additional tree plantings. Trees shall be planted in public rights-of-way adjacent to the development by at least one (1) of the following methods: 
a.  In locations where the sidewalk is separated from the street by a parkway or tree-lawn at least five (5) feet wide, canopy shade trees shall be planted at between twenty-five-foot to forty-foot spacing, dependent on the tree species mature canopy size. If the tree-lawn is less than five (5) feet wide, the trees shall be placed on the inside of the sidewalk. 
b.  In locations where the sidewalk is attached to the street, canopy shade trees shall be established in an area ranging from three (3) feet to seven (7) feet behind the sidewalk at the spacing intervals as required in Subparagraph a. hereof. 
c.  In locations where the sidewalk is adjacent to the street and the sidewalk is ten (10) feet or more in width, or extends from the curb to the property line, canopy shade trees shall be established in planting cutout areas of at least sixteen (16) square feet at thirty-foot to forty-foot spacing. 
(3)  Minimum species diversity. To prevent uniform insect or disease susceptibility and eventual elimination of the species at maturity on a development site or in the adjacent area or district, extensive monocultures are prohibited, and the following species diversity is required: 
Species Diversity 
Number of Trees
on Site Maximum Percentage
of 1 Species 5-19 80% 20-39 50% 40-59 33% 60 or more 25%  
(4)  Prohibited species. The following tree species shall not be planted in public rights-of-way: 
a.  Box Elder ( Acer negundo ); 
b.  Silver Maple ( Acer saccharinum ); 
c.  Tree of Heaven ( Ailanthus altissima ); 
d.  Cultivars of catalpa; 
e.  Mulberry ( Morus ); 
f.  Poplar ( Populus ); 
g.  Willow ( Salix ); 
h.  Siberian Elm ( Ulmus pumila ); and 
i.  Russian Olive ( Elaeagnus angustifolia ). 
(5)  Minimum tree sizes. To ensure survivability and a high growth rate, the following minimum tree sizes shall be required, except in drainage channels: 
Minimum Tree Sizes 
Type Minimum Size Canopy shade tree 3"-3.5" caliper * balled and burlapped or equivalent Evergreen tree 8'-10' height balled and burlapped or equivalent ** Ornamental deciduous tree 2"-2.5" caliper * balled and burlapped or equivalent Upright juniper 7-gallon Shrubs 5-gallon Vines 1-gallon  
* Caliper size is measured 6 inches above the root ball. 
** Pion pine, bristlecone pine, Bosnian pine and any tree with a mature height of less than 18 feet shall be a maximum of 6 feet in height. 
(6)  Existing trees and shrubs. Depending on quality and health, and as practicable, existing trees and shrubs shall be preserved in the modification of a site, and may be credited for required landscaping based on the size and species of the tree or shrub preserved. 
(Prior code 15.45.030, 15.45.060, 15.45.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-270. - Maintenance. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Trees and vegetation, irrigation systems, fences, walls and other landscape elements shall be considered as elements of the project in the same manner as parking, building materials and other site details. Landscaping shall be maintained free from disease, pests, weeds and litter and shall be periodically trimmed to avoid obstruction of traffic signs or signals. 
(2)  Structures such as fences and walls shall be repaired and replaced periodically to maintain a structurally sound condition. Maintenance responsibility shall be clarified on approved MDP, SDP, PUD plan, or SUP documents. 
(3)  A landscape element that dies or is removed shall be promptly replaced with a plant of the same or similar species and size in compliance with an approved plan. 
(b)  Residential maintenance. In the R-2.5, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25 and R-0.1 Districts, the following additional requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Front yard landscaping, consistent with an approved landscape plan, shall be installed within one (1) year of issuance of a building permit for construction or remodeling of the principal building. 
(2)  Parking of motor vehicles on grass or other ground cover intended to be a part of a landscaped area is prohibited. 
(c)  The determination as to whether maintenance complies with this Section shall be made by the Director, considering the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether the condition of the landscaping is consistent with adjacent properties; and 
(2)  Whether the condition of the landscaping may, for any reason, pose a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Prior code 15.45.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-280. - Berms. 
(a)  Applicability. This Section shall apply to all berms constructed or maintained in the City except berms that qualify as noise-attenuating structures. 
(b)  Permit required. No new berm shall be constructed until a landscaping permit has been issued by the Director. 
(c)  General standards. Every berm shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No berm shall exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(2)  No berm shall have a slope steeper than three (3) feet in the horizontal plane for each one (1) foot in the vertical plane (3:1 slope). 
(3)  Berms shall be constructed solely of soil and shall not contain concrete, brick, tires or other similar materials. 
(4)  To provide visual relief, berms exceeding ten (10) feet in length shall be curvilinear and shall vary in height. 
(5)  All berms shall be designed so as not to disturb existing drainage patterns, unless otherwise approved by the Director. 
(d)  Landscaping. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, all berms shall be landscaped so that the berm coordinates with adjacent landscaping, subject to the following: 
(1)  At least fifty percent (50%) of the berm area shall be landscaped with live plant material, which may include nonirrigated native grasses. 
(2)  For every thirty (30) linear feet, there shall be planted at least one (1) tree and two (2) shrubs. When calculating the required number of trees and shrubs, fractions shall be rounded to the next greater whole number. Required trees and shrubs may be exchanged for one another, with one (1) tree equaling five (5) shrubs. 
(3)  For berms in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, LI, MC, TC, R-0.1 and R-0.05 Districts, as well as new single-family subdivisions, the following tree sizes shall be required: 
a.  Deciduous shade trees: minimum caliper of three and one half (3.5) inches' 
b.  Deciduous ornamental trees: minimum caliper of two (2) inches; and 
c.  Evergreen trees: minimum height of ten (10) feet. 
(4)  To provide visual relief, trees and shrubs shall be planted on the top and side slopes of the berm in a natural pattern. 
(5)  Berms in the R-2.5 or R-2.0 District may, as an alternative to the landscaping requirements of this Subsection, be landscaped with low water-use plant material, but only if at least fifty percent (50%) of the berm perimeter is adjacent to an area landscaped with low water-use plant material. 
(6)  All landscaping shall be maintained to ensure the health and appearance of plant material. 
(7)  The following berms shall be exempt from the landscaping requirements of this Subsection (d): 
a.  Berms of less than one (1) foot in height; 
b.  Berms with a slope of less than five (5) feet in the horizontal plane for each one (1) foot in the vertical plane (5:1 slope); and 
c.  Berms in residential zone districts which are not visible from a public or private street or trail, or which are located at least fifty (50) feet from a public or private street or trail. 
(Prior code 15.45.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 3 - Fences, Decorative Monuments, Decorative Walls and Noise-Attenuating Structures 

Sec. 16-21-310. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. It is the City's policy to keep fencing at a minimum and to further the open space feeling. There are areas within the City in which little or no fencing is desired or required, while in other areas the local needs may dictate the use of fences. In lieu of fencing, berms or plantings of shrubbery and trees are encouraged. 
(b)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to all fences, decorative monuments, decorative walls and noise-attenuating structures except retaining walls and pedestrian protection barricades around construction sites. Any provision of an approved PUD plan, SDP, subdivision plat or floodplain regulation that conflicts with any provision of this Division shall supersede the conflicting provision of this Division. 
(Prior code 15.48.010, 15.48.020, 15.48.030, 15.48.080, 15.48.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-320. - Height. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Division, no fence, wall or monument shall exceed six (6) feet in height. Where a fence is constructed on a retaining wall or berm, the combined height of the berm, retaining wall and fence shall not exceed six (6) feet. 
(b)  Fence posts and columns may exceed the maximum allowed height of the fence by no more than nine (9) inches. 
(c)  When topography or construction requirements so dictate, a fence may exceed any height limitation imposed by this Division by up to six (6) inches. 
(Prior code 15.48.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-330. - Location. 
(a)  No fence shall be located in the area from the midpoint of the principal building to the front property line, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  In the R-0.25 and R-0.1 Districts, a fence that does not extend beyond a point five (5) feet back from the front of the principal building to the front property line; 
(2)  In the R-2.5 District, a fence that does not exceed four (4) feet in height and twenty-five percent (25%) opacity; 
(3)  In the R-2.5 District, a gate that does not exceed six (6) feet in height and twenty-five percent (25%) opacity; 
(4)  In the R-2.5 zone district, in a front yard which is permanently used as a pasture for horses, a fence that does not exceed six (6) feet in height and twenty-five percent (25%) opacity; 
(5)  Decorative walls and decorative monuments, pursuant to this Division; 
(6)  Fencing on commercial properties, pursuant to this Division; and 
(7)  Noise-attenuating structures, pursuant to this Division. 
(b)  Chain link fences shall only be located from the midpoint of the principal building to the rear property line. 
(Prior code 15.48.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-340. - Design. 
(a)  Materials. Permanent fencing or walls used to separate properties or as a landscape accent shall be constructed of high quality materials, such as: 
(1)  Decorative wood fencing with brick or stone columns; 
(2)  Wrought iron fencing; 
(3)  Masonry; 
(4)  Split face block; or 
(5)  Concrete with an enhanced surface treatment. 
(b)  Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall be constructed of stone, brick, split face block or concrete with an enhanced surface treatment. Wall segments over four (4) feet in height shall be tiered and landscaped. 
(Prior code 15.43.150; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-350. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  The following are prohibited in the City: 
(1)  Barbed wire fences; and 
(2)  Fences, decorative monuments or noise-attenuating structures which obstruct the sight distance of traveling motorists at roadway intersections or driveway entrances. 
(b)  No lighting shall be installed on top of, integrated within or be attached to a fence. 
(c)  No privately owned fence or decorative monument shall be erected on City-owned property except entry walls and decorative monuments pursuant to this Division. 
(Prior code 15.48.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-360. - Fence standards. 
(a)  Commercial fences. Fences on commercial property which abut a public right-of-way shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the property line or back of curb, whichever results in the greater setback. 
(b)  Chain link fences. Chain link fences shall be vinyl-coated and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height; provided that chain link dog run fences and chain link temporary construction fences do not have to be vinyl coated and may exceed four (4) feet in height. 
(c)  Dog run fences. Dog run fences shall be located within twenty (20) feet of the principal building, shall comply with all applicable principal building setbacks and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(d)  Tennis and sport court fences. A fence enclosing a tennis court or sport court shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The fence shall be either dark or earth tone colored with matching fittings and posts; 
(2)  The fence shall not exceed ten percent (10%) opacity, with the exception of fabric screening material or a retaining wall used to partially or fully enclose a tennis court or sport court; 
(3)  The fence shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height; and 
(4)  The fence shall be considered to be a component of the tennis or sport court. 
(e)  Stallion enclosures. A fence enclosing a stallion shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The fence shall be constructed of a stable and durable material, such as pipe, post and board, post and mesh, post and smooth wire, post and rubber-nylon, post and rail, or PVC fence planking, with all corner posts anchored in concrete. 
(2)  The fence shall be six (6) feet in height. 
(3)  The fence shall enclose a minimum area of twenty-four (24) feet by sixty (60) feet. 
(f)  Temporary construction fences. A temporary fence enclosing a construction site shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The height of the fence shall not exceed eight (8) feet; 
(2)  The fence shall not be placed in a public right-of-way without a public right-of-way permit; 
(3)  The fence shall be removed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or Completion; and 
(4)  The fence shall not display commercial speech. 
(g)  Swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. 
(1)  Fence or wall enclosures. 
a.  Every swimming pool, hot tub or spa not equipped with a safety cover meeting the requirements of Paragraph (2) hereof shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall: 
1.  Located not less than four (4) feet from the swimming pool, hot tub or spa; 
2.  With a minimum vertical height of not less than four (4) feet for a single-family residential swimming pool; and not less than six (6) feet for a public pool, community pool, private club pool, homeowners association pool or multi-family complex pool; 
3.  With a maximum vertical clearance from the ground to the bottom of the fence or wall of two (2) inches; 
4.  With no gaps or voids which allow passage of a sphere equal to or greater than four (4) inches in diameter; 
5.  With any pedestrian access gate opening away from the swimming pool, hot tub or spa and equipped with a self-closing, self-latching device placed no lower than four (4) feet above the ground; and 
6.  With any gates other than pedestrian access gates equipped with lockable hardware or padlocks and locked at all times when not in use. 
b.  An existing wall or portion of a building may serve as one (1) or more sides of the enclosure. 
(2)  Safety covers. 
a.  A swimming pool not enclosed by a fence or wall in compliance with Paragraph (1) hereof shall be equipped with an approved power safety cover that meets or exceeds current ASTM standards. 
b.  A hot tub or spa not enclosed by a fence or wall in compliance with Paragraph (1) hereof shall be equipped with an approved manual safety cover that meets or exceeds current ASTM standards. 
c.  Safety covers shall be closed at all times when the swimming pool, hot tub or spa is not in use. 
(Prior code 15.48.100, 15.48.104; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-370. - Decorative walls and decorative monuments. 
(a)  Applicability. This Section shall apply to all decorative walls and decorative monuments on properties zoned R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 and R-0.05. In addition to this Section, decorative walls and decorative monuments shall be subject to all regulations governing fences in this Division which do not conflict with this Section. 
(b)  Location. Decorative walls and decorative monuments may be located in the front yard, subject to the requirements of this Section. 
(c)  General standards. All decorative walls and decorative monuments located in the front yard shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Architectural compatibility. A substantial portion of the materials of the decorative wall or decorative monument shall match the principal structure on the same property in type of material and color. 
(2)  Lighting. Lighting may be integrated within or be attached to the decorative wall or decorative monument. A pre-fabricated light fixture attached to a wall or monument may exceed the allowed height of the decorative wall or decorative monument by no more than eighteen (18) inches. If the lighting is integrated within the structure, the light shall comply with the maximum permitted height of the structure. 
(3)  Height. Where a decorative wall or decorative monument is constructed on a berm, the overall height of the wall or monument shall be measured to include the height of the berm. The combined height of the berm and decorative wall or decorative monument shall not exceed the maximum allowed height for the decorative wall or decorative monument. 
(d)  Courtyard walls. Courtyard walls located in the front yard shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Maximum height: forty-eight (48) inches; 
(2)  Maximum length. The total length of all courtyard walls shall not exceed one-third (?) of the length of that building elevation with which the courtyard is contiguous; 
(3)  Setbacks and length. Courtyard walls shall not extend into a required side setback for the principal structure; shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line; and shall extend outward from the structure no more than twenty (20) feet from the primary wall in the location where the courtyard is contiguous with the residential structure. 
(e)  Wing walls. Wing walls located in the front yard shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Maximum height: forty-eight (48) inches; 
(2)  Maximum length. An individual wing wall shall not exceed six (6) feet in length, and the combined total length of all wing walls on a lot shall not exceed one-third (?) of the length of that building elevation upon which the wing wall is located; 
(3)  Setbacks. Wing walls shall meet all principal building setbacks. 
(f)  Decorative monuments. Decorative monuments located in the front yard shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  In the R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0 and R-0.75 Districts: 
a.  Maximum number: four (4), one (1) of which may incorporate a mailbox, and no more than two (2) per driveway entrance; 
b.  Maximum height: sixty (60) inches; and 
c.  Maximum footprint: nine (9) square feet. 
(2)  In the R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 and R-0.05 Districts: 
a.  Maximum number: two (2), one of which may incorporate a mailbox; 
b.  Maximum height: forty-eight (48) inches; and 
c.  Maximum footprint: four (4) square feet per monument. 
(3)  Location. Decorative monuments shall be located: 
a.  Within ten (10) feet of a driveway; 
b.  Within five (5) feet of a walkway; and 
c.  At least two (2) feet from a street edge or curb. 
(g)  Entry walls. Entry walls shall be permitted in the R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0 and R-0.75 Districts if such walls meet the following standards: 
(1)  Maximum number: four (4), and no more than two (2) per driveway entrance; 
(2)  Maximum height: forty-eight (48) inches, except that entry walls with a sloped transition to a decorative monument may be a maximum of five (5) feet in height for not more than fifty percent (50%) of the length of the wall. 
(3)  Maximum length: 
a.  In the R-2.5 and R-2.0 Districts: ten (10) feet; 
b.  In the R-1.5 and R-1.0 Districts: eight (8) feet; 
c.  In the R-0.75 District: six (6) feet; and 
d.  In any zone district, the total length of all entry walls parallel to the street shall not exceed one-third (?) of the lot frontage on which the walls are located. 
(4)  Location. Entry walls shall be located: 
a.  Within ten (10) feet of a driveway; 
b.  Within five (5) feet of a walkway; and 
c.  At least two (2) feet from a street edge or curb. 
(h)  Public rights-of-way. Entry walls and decorative monuments may be located in a public right-of-way, subject to the following: 
(1)  Entry walls and decorative monuments shall not be located on the paved portion of a roadway, or on the portion customarily used for travel by motor vehicles if the roadway is unpaved, or on the sidewalk. 
(2)  Entry walls and decorative monuments located in the public right-of-way shall be subject to removal by the City at any time when removal is necessary for a public improvement, or to protect the public health, safety or welfare, and such removal shall not require compensation to the property owner. 
(3)  The property owner assumes all risk and liability associated with the placement of entry walls and decorative monuments in the public right-of-way. 
(4)  By permitting the placement of entry walls and decorative monuments in the public right-of-way, the City does not waive any protections or immunities it has or may in the future have under the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act, Section 24-10-101, et seq., C.R.S. 
(5)  The City shall mark plans submitted as part of a permit application for an entry wall or decorative monument that will be located in the public right-of-way with a notation that the property owner assumes all risk and liability for such entry wall or decorative monument. 
(Prior code 15.48.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-380. - Noise-attenuating structures. 
(a)  Eligibility. 
(1)  Noise-attenuating structures may be constructed on residential properties abutting public rights-of-way where noise thresholds and other requirements set forth by this Article have been met. 
(2)  With prior approval of the City, noise-attenuating structures may be constructed on the public right-of-way line where noise thresholds and other requirements set forth by this Article have been met. 
(b)  Noise thresholds. 
(1)  A noise-attenuating structure may be constructed if the proposed structure will reduce the LEQ by at least five (5) dB(A) during the period of the highest noise level conditions, measured at a point on the property five (5) feet above the ground adjacent to the principal building on the property. The duration of the test to determine whether the proposed noise-attenuating structure reduces the LEQ shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) minutes. 
(2)  A noise-attenuating structure may be constructed at locations where the LEQ equals or exceeds sixty-five (65) dB(A) during any fifteen-minute period within the one (1) hour of the day that the property where the LEQ is measured experiences the highest noise levels. The hour of peak noise levels shall be determined by the Department of Public Works, in consultation with the applicant, based on traffic studies of the adjacent roadway and other roadway vehicle-related noises, exclusive of road construction or repair operations affecting noise levels in the area. An application for a noise-attenuating structure may also be made by adjacent homeowners for the construction of the structure on or adjacent to properties which do not meet the noise level standards set forth in this Subsection if the noise-attenuating structure is a continuous structure and if at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the properties abutting the public right-of-way where the noise-attenuating structure is to be constructed meet the noise thresholds set forth in this Subsection. 
(3)  In determining whether fifty-one percent (51%) of the properties meet the LEQ requirements of this Section, a licensed acoustical engineer retained by the applicant shall establish a sampling procedure which identifies typical property conditions, in terms of distance from the public right-of-way to principal structures and traffic levels. The acoustical engineer shall conduct noise level testing at properties typifying each prototype situation for fifteen-minute intervals during the hour of peak noise levels during at least one (1) day; which day shall be chosen by mutual consent of the Department of Public Works and the applicant. 
(4)  To demonstrate that the reduction in LEQ will be achieved, the applicant shall submit a stamped report from a licensed acoustical engineer including a model of the anticipated noise reduction and analyzing the reflective characteristics of the wall material and the possible impacts on adjacent properties of reflective noise. The cost of such report shall be paid by the applicant. 
(5)  In the event the report of the acoustical engineer reveals that the proposed noise-attenuating structure will not meet the requirement of a five-dB(A) reduction of noise level as set forth in this Section, the applicant shall not re-apply for the construction of any noise-attenuating structure on the same property for a period of one (1) year from the date of receipt by the City of the report of the acoustical engineer. 
(c)  Design standards. 
(1)  Height. 
a.  Except when facing an interstate highway or a principal arterial, berms and wall panels measured together shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
b.  Berms or walls, measured together, which face an interstate highway or a principal arterial shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
c.  Columns may be twelve (12) inches higher than panels but not greater in cross-sectional area than five (5) square feet. 
d.  A combination of a wall on a berm shall be permitted, but the combined height of wall and berm shall not exceed eight (8) feet or twelve (12) feet in height, as applicable. 
e.  If topography or construction requirements so dictate, noise-attenuating structures may exceed the height limitations of this Section by up to twelve (12) inches. 
(2)  Location. 
a.  No noise-attenuating structure shall be constructed in such a manner as to obstruct the sight distance of traveling motorists at roadway intersections or driveway entrances. 
b.  No spread footing, post, column or berm shall be placed over an existing utility structure. 
c.  No noise-attenuating structure may encroach into a drainage or utility easement if the structure either impedes drainage or access to utilities, and in no instance shall the structure encroach by more than thirty (30) inches of the public right-of-way line. 
d.  Noise-attenuating structures in the right-of-way must be at least ten (10) feet away from the paved portion (including curb and gutter or the nearest outer edge of the earthen ditch to the public right-of-way line) of the roadway. 
e.  Noise-attenuating structures shall be designed in compliance with the Greenwood Village Drainage Criteria Manual, as amended. 
f.  No noise-attenuating structure shall be constructed in violation of the provision of any approved subdivision plat or PUD. 
(3)  Additional requirements. 
a.  Walls shall be constructed of: brick; masonry other than cinder block; concrete in combination with brick; or concrete masonry block, such that both the aesthetic character of the wall design shall be significantly consistent with the existing environment and the quality of materials shall not detract from the existing streetscape. Sample materials or accurately colored materials brochures or color renderings should be provided with application for any noise-attenuating wall construction that qualifies as set forth by this chapter. 
b.  Constructed with wall columns located no farther apart than seventy-five (75) feet; 
c.  Walls and berms shall be designed, and the design stamped, by a registered professional engineer; and 
d.  Walls on private property shall be set back from the traveled portions of streets and sidewalks so as to provide an adequate pedestrian corridor for safe and convenient passage and to avoid the creation of narrow passageways between the wall and the street. This provision may include the requirement for the dedication of land for public easement. 
e.  Berms shall be landscaped at a minimum with natural grasses. Plantings of shrubs and trees may be placed on berms without regard to overall height limitations for noise-attenuating structures. Organic topsoil shall be installed as the top course of the berm to facilitate vegetation. 
(d)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Noise-attenuating structures located on private property shall be maintained by the property owner or the homeowners' association, as applicable. 
(2)  Noise-attenuating structures located on City-owned property or public rights-of-way shall be maintained by the City unless otherwise set forth in an agreement with the City. 
(3)  Noise attenuating structures must be properly maintained. Failure to do so may result in an abatement of nuisance action under Chapter 7 of the Greenwood Village Municipal. 
(f)  Participation in funding. 
(1)  In the event that the City approves or funds the addition of a new street or traffic lane abutting a residentially-zoned area within the City, the City shall conduct an acoustical study to determine whether the new street or traffic lane warrants the construction of a noise-attenuating structure to alleviate the noise to abutting households as set forth in this section. 
(2)  If the criteria for a noise-attenuating structure as set forth in this section are met, the City may pay for and construct the noise-attenuating structure provided that at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the property owners abutting the new street or lane desire the structure and that all necessary construction and maintenance easements can be obtained. 
(Prior code 15.48.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 3 1, 2014; Ord. 15 2, 2015 ) 
Division 4 - Signs 

Sec. 16-21-410. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  The intent of this Division is: 
(1)  To provide a reasonable system for controlling visual communication, whether attached to, painted on or displayed from a building or structure, meant to attract attention to, announce or promote an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business by means of letters, words, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, designs, colors, symbols, fixtures, images, illuminations or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an announcement, direction or advertisement; 
(2)  To encourage signs which are well-designed and pleasing in appearance, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, employing variety and good design relationships; 
(3)  To encourage a desirable urban character which has a minimum of visual clutter; 
(4)  To enhance the economic value of the community and each area thereof through the regulation of such matters as size, location, design and illumination of signs; 
(5)  To direct persons to various activities and enterprises for public convenience; 
(6)  To encourage signs which are compatible with adjacent land uses; 
(7)  To reduce possible traffic and safety hazards; and 
(8)  To provide on-site identification for enterprises. 
(b)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to all signs in the City. 
(Prior code 15.46.010; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-420. - General regulations. 
(a)  Illumination. 
(1)  Sign illumination shall not create a hazardous glare for pedestrians or vehicles on adjacent properties or public ways. 
(2)  Sign illumination shall be turned off at 10 PM or one hour after close of business, whichever is later. 
(3)  The light source, whether internal to the sign or external, shall be shielded from view and diffused through an external translucent surface if contained within the sign itself. This shall not preclude the use of exposed neon when approved as part of a Planned Sign Program or FDP. 
(4)  Sign illumination for externally illuminated signs shall utilize focused light fixtures that do not allow light or glare to shine above the horizontal plane of the top of the sign or onto any adjacent properties or public ways. 
(5)  Signs shall not be illuminated in Residential districts other than neighborhood identity signs or as approved in a PSP or SUP. 
(6)  Internally illuminated signs, including monument signs, wall signs and projecting signs are encouraged to have dark backgrounds with light lettering, unless otherwise approved in a PSP. 
(b)  Design, construction, location and maintenance. 
(1)  Monument sign base designs shall be compatible with the design, materials, and colors of buildings on the site. 
(2)  Wall signs shall be comprised of flush-mounted individual letters and logos. Logos shall not exceed one-third ( 1/3 ) of the total sign area. 
(3)  Wall signs shall be designed so that they are integral with the architecture of the building. 
(4)  Signs shall be constructed of new, durable materials, designed to withstand expected wind pressures and erected so as not to sustain damage and deterioration from the elements. No sign shall contain iridescent, florescent or "day-glo" colors. All signs shall be maintained in good condition and kept rust-free. The City shall have the authority to order the repair, replacement, alteration or removal of a sign which is not in conformance with this Sign Code by reason of safety, health, or public welfare, or by reason of inadequate maintenance, damage, fading, cracking, tearing, dilapidation, or obsolescence. 
(5)  No sign shall be erected at a street intersection so as to create a traffic hazard by obstructing vision, or at a location where it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with an authorized traffic sign. 
(6)  Each ground sign shall be located in a distinct landscape area around the sign base, which is of a shape, design and size (equal to at least twice the total sign area) that will provide a compatible setting for the sign. The planted landscaped area shall be irrigated and maintained on a reasonable and regular basis. This requirement does not apply if the sign will be located within a hardscape area approved with a PSP, SUP, FDP, SDP, MDP or PUD. 
(c)  Exposed raceways and conduit. 
(1)  Raceways shall only be permitted when other methods of attachment are not feasible. 
(2)  Exposed raceways shall be as thin and narrow as possible, shall be finished to match the background wall, and shall not extend in width or height beyond the area of the sign's lettering or graphics. 
(3)  Conduit shall be concealed from public view. 
(d)  For purposes of this division, the area of a sign shall be determined by the exterior boundary of the message and logo areas, including any attendant background accent materials/colors intended to accent the sign message, which creates the smallest continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the display surface with eight (8) or fewer connected lines. 
(Prior code 15.46.020; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-430. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  The following are specifically prohibited: 
(1)  Spinners; 
(2)  Search lights; 
(3)  Light bulb strings, except temporary decoration or displays customarily associated with national, local, or religious celebrations; 
(4)  Signs painted on or affixed to benches; 
(5)  Animated, flashing or moving signs where any part of the message or sign itself changes position or color by movement; 
(6)  Inflatable signs; 
(7)  Roof-mounted signs projecting above the highest point of the roof line, parapet, or fascia of the building, or signs on walls enclosing mechanical equipment; 
(8)  Building-mounted cabinet signs; 
(9)  Pole signs mounted on one or more uprights, supports or braces, other than signs of a municipality, county, state, special district or the federal government, that are permanently placed on and anchored in the ground independent from any building or other structure; 
(10)  A-frame signs other than sandwich board signs used for traffic control, the design and location of which have been approved in advance by the Director of Community Development; 
(11)  Changeable copy or changeable color signs, any portion of which provides for temporary or changeable type, copy, logo, color, or any other graphic, by manual or electronic means, including electronic message displays with a fixed or changing display, but not including time and temperature signs, live data regarding public transportation, scoreboards, or gasoline price signs; 
(12)  Off-site signs that announce, direct attention to, identify or advertise a service, business, location or activity that is not located on the same premises unless approved by a PSP; 
(13)  Signs on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless the vehicle is regularly moved in the normal day-to-day operations of an on-site business; 
(14)  Signs permanently affixed to a parked vehicle, if the vehicle is parked solely for the purpose of displaying the sign; 
(15)  Signs located in an area that solely serves as a service entrance to a building or tenant space, with the exception of directional signs providing directions necessary or convenient for visitors or clients coming onto a premises; 
(16)  Signs on umbrellas displayed in outdoor eating or outdoor dining areas; and 
(17)  Signs in or interfering with an intersection, except for authorized traffic signs. 
(Prior code 15.46.030; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-440. - Signs in public rights-of-way. 
    No sign shall be located within or project over a public right-of-way without a revocable license agreement approved by the City Manager. Notwithstanding the foregoing, pedestrian-oriented blade signs that project perpendicular from a structure or hangs beneath a canopy or arcade may project over a public sidewalk when expressly permitted by a PSP, SUP, FDP, SDP, MDP or PUD. 
(Prior code 15.46.040; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-450. - Signs allowed without a permit. 
    The following signs shall be allowed under this Division without a permit unless specifically prohibited by a PSP, SUP, FDP, SDP, MDP or PUD: 
(1)  Memorial plaques. 
(2)  Signs of the city, county or state, special district or the federal government, including traffic control devices, way finding, legal notices and warnings at railroad crossings. 
(3)  Signs required by governmental order, rule or regulation not exceeding ten (10) square feet per lot. 
(4)  Scoreboards without commercial speech and temporary signs within a ball park or other recreational facility that cannot be seen from a public street or adjacent property. Illuminated scoreboards must be turned off when fields are not in use. 
(5)  In Residential, A and O Districts, not more than one flagpole and two (2) flags up to fifteen (15) square feet in sign area per flag, mounted no higher than twenty (20) feet, provided that the flags do not contain commercial speech directing attention to a business commodity, service, entertainment or attraction. 
(6)  In the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, TC, LI and MC Districts, not more than three (3) flagpoles, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  No flag shall contain commercial speech directing attention to a business commodity, service, entertainment or attraction; 
b.  No flag shall, when fully unfurled, extend over the property boundary onto an adjoining property or public right-of-way; 
c.  No flag or flagpole shall be erected or maintained so as to allow a flag at rest to reach a height less than ten (10) feet above the ground; 
d.  No flag shall be mounted higher than fifteen (15) feet above the maximum height of the building or structure on which the flag will be flown; 
e.  No flag or flagpole shall exceed the following dimensions: 
Flagpole Height (ft) Flag Size (ft) 20' 3'  5' 25' 4'  6' 30' 5'  8' 35' 6'  10' 40' 6'  10'  
(7)  In the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, TC, LI and MC Districts, one temporary project announcement sign for construction sites denoting architectural, engineering or construction firms engaged in work on a construction site and/or announcing future use of property not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. Such signs shall be and set back at least twenty (20) feet from the curb or the edge of pavement if no curb exists. removed within ten (10) days of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or a Certificate of Completion for any building on the property. 
(8)  Signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in sign area per sign displayed for the direction, information or convenience of the public, including signs which identify the location of rest rooms, public telephones, freight entrances or the like, signs which restrict or prohibit parking or other activities, and which do not contain commercial speech directing attention to a business commodity, service, entertainment or attraction. 
(9)  Signs placed by or at the direction of a utility showing the location of underground facilities. 
(10)  Temporary ground-mounted real estate signs in R (residential), O and A Districts, as follows: one (1) unlighted sign per lot advertising the sale or lease of the lot on which the sign is located, not exceeding six (6) square feet in sign area, not exceeding three (3) feet in height. Real estate signs must be removed within ten (10) days following the sale or lease of the property. 
(11)  Temporary ground-mounted real estate signs in B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, MC, TC and LI Districts, as follows: one (1) unlighted sign per street frontage of the entire assemblage advertising the sale or lease of the premises on which the sign is located, not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in total sign area, nor exceeding four (4) feet in height. Real estate signs must be removed within ten (10) days following the sale or lease of the property. 
(12)  Up to two (2) temporary signs of up to one (1) square foot in sign area on a motor vehicle for sale. 
(13)  Window signs applied to or attached to a window, or located within two (2) feet of the interior of a window in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, MC, TC and LI Districts, subject to the following: 
a.  Window signs shall not be permitted if prohibited by an applicable PSP, SUP, FDP, SDP, MDP or PUD. 
b.  Window signs shall provide direction and notification to pedestrians and customers in the parking lot of the commercial business, rather than motor vehicles on adjacent streets. 
c.  The area of window signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the windows on the building elevation on which the sign is located. 
d.  Window signs may be located on the front of the building where a public entrance is located or on windows facing parking areas or sidewalks. 
e.  Luminous tube window signs are permitted, but "Day-Glo," fluorescent, or reflective color window signs are prohibited. 
(14)  One (1) wall sign displaying the address number of the building on which it is located, with a sign area not to exceed six (6) square feet. 
(15)  Political and ideological signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in sign area in residential areas, and not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in business zones. 
(16)  Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization, for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, provided that such signs do not exceed six (6) square feet in sign area and are removed within ten (10) days after the election or event to which they pertain. 
(17)  Temporary signs naming maintenance or construction companies performing work on the property, while the work is occurring, not exceeding four (4) square feet in sign area per sign, in the Residential, A and O Districts, or six (6) square feet in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, MC, TC and LI Districts. 
(Prior code 15.46.050; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-460. - Signs allowed with a permit. 
(a)  The following signs shall be allowed with a permit issued pursuant to this Division: 
(1)  Display structures for pedestrian viewing, which may include enclosed display or bulletin-type advertising stands which may or may not serve other purposes, such as kiosks and the like, and may serve as an additional structural element to visually enhance pedestrian ways, landscaped areas or parking areas, excluding bus stop benches or structures, subject to the following: 
a.  Display structures shall be located only where other structures are allowed; 
b.  The sign area shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet; and 
c.  All display structures on a single site shall be designed to achieve a harmonious pattern throughout the site. 
(2)  Non-commercial courtesy signs identifying the individual or group which contributes to the maintenance of landscaped area on which the sign is erected, with a maximum sign area of four (4) square feet. 
(3)  Directional signs larger than six (6) square feet in sign area providing directions necessary or convenient for visitors or clients. 
(4)  Signs for area identification in connection with an area of not less than ten (10) acres, without commercial speech directing attention to a business commodity, service, entertainment or attraction. Such signs or displays shall blend with their surroundings in size, location and design. 
(5)  Banners, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Banners shall not be permitted if specifically prohibited or otherwise restricted by a PSP, SUP, SDP, MDP or PUD plan. 
b.  Each individual business may display one (1) banner for up to fifteen (15) days at a time, on up to three (3) separate occasions per calendar year. 
c.  The sign area of a banner shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet. 
d.  Banners shall be attached at all corners to a wall of a building. 
e.  Banners shall be located no higher than the first floor of a building. 
f.  Banners shall not be permitted on any residential dwelling. 
g.  Banners shall be composed of weather-proof lightweight flexible material, not including paper or cardboard, and maintained in good condition. 
h.  Businesses or entities installing, repairing or replacing previously approved signs or involved in construction activities that necessitate removal of previously approved signs may display one banner on the property in a location and for a period of time approved by the Director. Such banner shall not be counted towards the yearly limit set forth in Subsection (b), hereof. 
(6)  Signs approved by a PSP, SUP, SDP, MDP or PUD. 
(7)  Signs in accordance with the following tables: 
Wall Signs 
District Sign Type Maximum Sign Area Dimensions Number Allowed R-.05, R-.1 1 sq. ft. per dwelling unit up to 15 sq. ft. No requirements 1 per multi-family residential complex B-1 
Office Building Sign parallel to building 1 sq. ft. per 5 ft. building frontage to 20 sq. ft. 24" maximum letter height; shall not exceed parapet height, maximum width 2/3 of wall to which it is mounted 1 per building B-1 
Commercial Building Sign parallel to building 1 sq. ft. per 5 ft, building frontage, to 20 sq. ft. per tenant 24 " maximum letter height, maximum width 2/3 of storefront; not to exceed parapet height 1 per tenant with direct access to the building exterior B-2 
B-3 
B-4 Sign parallel to building 1 sq. ft. per 2.5 ft. building frontage, to 30 sq. ft. per tenant 24" maximum letter height, maximum width 2/3 of storefront; not to exceed parapet height 1 per tenant with direct access to the building exterior Pedestrian oriented blade sign 6 sq. ft. per tenant 3' maximum height and width; 8.5' minimum clearance above grade 1 per tenant with direct access to the building exterior MC 
Office Building Sign parallel to building Up to 100 sq. ft. per tenant, not to exceed 10% of wall area, whichever is less 3' maximum height or 5' if sign mounted higher than 50'; maximum width ? of wall to which it is mounted, shall not exceed parapet height maximum 4 signs per building, 1 per building faade, 1 per tenant maximum MC Single-Use Commercial Building Sign parallel to building Up to 100 sq. ft. 3' maximum height, maximum width 2/3 of wall to which it is mounted, shall not exceed parapet height 1 per building faade with customer access MC Multi-Use Commercial Building Sign parallel to building Up to 100 sq. ft. per tenant 3' maximum height, maximum width 2/3 of storefront, shall not exceed parapet height 1 per tenant per building faade with customer access; 2 for corner units Pedestrian oriented blade sign 6 sq. ft. per tenant 3' maximum height and width; 8.5' minimum clearance above grade 1 per tenant with direct access to the building exterior TC Sign parallel to building 1 sq. ft. per 5 ft. building frontage to 20 sq. ft. 24" maximum letter height, maximum width 2/3 of wall to which it is mounted 1 per building  
Monument Signs 
District Use Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height (in feet) Including Base Minimum Setback (in feet) From Curb (must be located outside of public right-of-way) Number Allowed R Single- and Multi-Family Residential 1 sq. ft. per dwelling unit, to 30 sq. ft. 4' 20' 1 per street frontage B-1 Office Building 1 sq. ft. per 5 ft. building frontage, to 30 sq. ft. per sign 4' 20' 1 per street frontage Multi-Building Office Development (Directory) 8 sq. ft., 4 in. copy height maximum 4' 20' 1 per building, located near primary building entrance B-1 Commercial Single-Use Building 1 sq. ft. per 5' building frontage, to 30 sq. ft. 4' 20' 1 per street frontage Commercial Multi-Tenant Building 1 sq. ft. per 2.5 ft. building frontage to 30 sq. ft. 10' 20' 1 per street frontage B-2 
B-3 
B-4 Single-Tenant Building 1 sq. ft. per 2.5 ft. building frontage, to 30 sq. ft. per sign 15' 20' 1 per street frontage 25' in I-25 corridor N/A 1 Multi-Tenant Building 1 sq. ft. per 2.5 ft. building frontage, to 66 sq. ft. per sign 15' 20' 1 per street frontage 25' in I-25 corridor N/A 1 MC Office Building 1 sq. ft. per 2.5 ft. building frontage to 50 sq. ft. 4' 10' 1 per street frontage Multi-Building Office Development (Directory) 8 sq. ft., 4 in. copy height maximum 4' 20' Commercial Building 50 sq. ft. per sign 15' 10' 1 per street frontage 32' in I-25 corridor N/A 1 TC Single- or Multi-Tenant Building 1 sq. ft. per 2.5 ft. building frontage, to 30 sq. ft. 4' 10' 1 Multi-Building Office Development (Directory) 8 sq. ft., 4 in. copy height maximum 4' 20' 1 per building, located near primary building entrance LI 1 sq. ft. per 2.5 ft. building frontage to 30 sq. ft. per sign 4' 10' 1  
(8)  Murals without commercial speech on construction fences. 
(b)  Based on the results of those reviews, the Director shall take final action on the Sign Permit application and either approve, approve with conditions, or deny such application. The Director shall act upon a request for a Sign Permit within ten (10) days of submittal of a Complete Application. 
(Prior code 15.46.060; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-470. - Planned Sign Program. 
(a)  Description. A PSP is voluntary, and is intended to provide an applicant with an alternative to the sign regulations in this Chapter. A PSP is intended to encourage the maximum incentive and latitude to achieve variety and good design. Signs may be allowed in any zone district as part of a PSP, notwithstanding the fact that such signs do not conform to the specific regulations in this Chapter. Exceptions to the regulations contained in this Chapter may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the number of signs, height, location, sign area and illumination. 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  The applicant shall notify landowners by mail of the date, time and place of the hearing in accordance with Section 16-2-270. 
(2)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the completed application, along with the concerns of the public and the criteria for review, and shall deny, approve or approve with conditions at a public hearing to be held within ninety (90) days of submittal. 
(3)  Once a PSP is approved for an area, prior to permits being issued, signs for that area shall be reviewed to ensure compliance with the PSP. 
(c)  Signs Affixed to Buildings. The sign area for any sign affixed to a building shall not exceed ten percent of the building facade upon which such sign is located. 
(d)  Signs Affixed to Buildings Below Canopy. Any sign located beneath a canopy, arcade, marquee or other similar building projection shall not contain more than three square feet in sign area and shall be located on a building frontage proximate to an entrance to the building in regular use by the general public. 
(e)  Ground signs. 
(1)  Ground signs within the I-25 corridor shall not exceed the height necessary for the sign to be legible for motorists traveling on I-25. If highway and light rail infrastructure do not provide a visual impediment, then a ground sign shall meet the height standard for the applicable zone district. A request for a deviation from the ground sign height standard for the applicable zone district should include adequate documentation, such as photo-simulations and cross-sections, demonstrating the need for the deviation from the height standard for motorists to reasonably view the signs from I-25. 
(2)  Monument signs with architecturally compatible bases are encouraged in order to avoid a top-heavy appearance of the sign. 
(3)  Landscaping shall be proposed to minimize the visual impact of the base of ground signs. 
(4)  Joint tenant co-location of signage shall be incorporated, if applicable. 
(f)  Amendments. 
(1)  Description. An amendment to a PSP is required for any change, including without limitation changes in area, height, location, materials, letter style, color, illumination, or sign shape. 
(2)  Submittal requirements and steps. The submittal requirements and steps for an amendment to a PSP shall be the same as the original PSP. 
(3)  Review criteria. In reviewing an amendment to a PSP, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the PSP criteria set forth above. 
(4)  Where a PSP is silent with regard to sign types, an amendment to a PSP is required for signs requiring a permit except for temporary banners. 
(g)  Conditions. The Planning and Zoning Commission may impose appropriate and reasonable, least restrictive conditions on the approval of any PSP or amendment, including but not limited to conditions which alter sign configurations, reduce sign area, relocate signs or require other design modifications in order to address a legitimate governmental concern of health, safety, welfare or facilitating the orderly growth and expansion of the Village. 
(h)  Expiration/Lapse. 
(1)  A PSP shall lapse and have no further effect if no signs have been erected in compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit within one (1) year after the date of the PSP approval, or upon redevelopment of the property, unless the scope of redevelopment is limited and the decision-making body agrees that the PSP can remain in effect. 
(2)  The City Manager shall not refund any permit fees paid under this section if any PSP lapses or expires pursuant to this Subsection. 
(Prior code 15.46.070; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-480. - Legal nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Continuance. A legal nonconforming sign may be continued in operation and maintained after the effective date of the ordinance which caused the sign to become nonconforming, and a legal nonconforming sign which becomes nonconforming due solely to an action by the City that results in an alteration of the property boundary, may be continued in operation and maintained. 
(b)  Abandonment. Abandonment of a legal nonconforming sign shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such sign. 
(c)  Destruction or hazard. The right to maintain a legal nonconforming sign shall terminate if the sign is destroyed by any cause or becomes a safety hazard. 
(d)  Alteration. The right to maintain a legal nonconforming sign shall terminate immediately when the sign copy, size, illumination, configuration, height or setback is altered in any manner. 
(Prior code 15.46.080; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-485. - Abatement of signs relating to inoperative functions. 
    Signs pertaining to enterprises or occupants that are no longer using a property shall be removed from the premises within thirty (30) days after the associated enterprise or occupant has vacated the premises. Other signs of a temporary nature shall be removed within ten (10) days following the event or other purpose served by the sign. Any such sign not removed within the required period shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to a summary abatement by the director of community development and planning and the expense of such abatement shall be a lien against the property on which the sign was maintained and a personal obligation of the property owner. Such property owner shall first be served a notice to abate the nuisance and shall be given the opportunity for a hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. If, after such opportunity for a hearing, the Commission orders the Director to remove the sign, he or she shall have authority to enter upon the property to remove the sign constituting the nuisance. 
(Prior code 15.46.090; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-490. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or allow upon any property over which they own, manage, lease or control, any sign which is not permitted pursuant to the provisions of this sign code. Each day during which the illegal erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use continues is deemed a separate offense and punishable in accordance with Section 1-28-010. Additionally, unauthorized signs on public property may be confiscated by the City and held pending notification of the owner by the City. The owner may obtain said signs from the City Manager upon payment of a confiscation and storage charge in an amount established by the City Council. 
(Prior code 15.46.100; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-495. - Variances. 
    Applications for a variance from the terms of this Chapter shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission as an application for a PSP. 
(Prior code 15.46.110; Ord. 22 1, 2011; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 5 - Parking and Loading 

Sec. 16-21-510. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Division is to regulate the parking and loading of vehicles on public and private property in the City and thereby: 
(1)  Protect the public safety; 
(2)  Mitigate potential adverse impacts of parking on adjacent properties; 
(3)  Create a quality appearance for off-street parking areas; and 
(4)  Protect the appearance and value of the community. 
(b)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to: 
(1)  A new structure or newly established use; 
(2)  The expansion of any structure or use; and 
(3)  A change of use or manner of operation that would result in a requirement for more parking or loading spaces than the existing use. 
(Prior code 15.44.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-520. - General provisions. 
(a)  Permit required. A permit shall be required to: 
(1)  Construct a new parking lot; 
(2)  Resurface, reconfigure and then restripe an existing parking lot with or without changes to the configuration of drive aisles and parking spaces, but not including changes to the configuration of parking lot median, islands or peninsulas when such resurfacing complies with the Drainage Criteria Manual; or 
(3)  Restripe or reseal an existing parking lot with changes to the configuration of drive aisles or the number of parking spaces, but no changes to the configuration of parking lot medians, islands or peninsulas. 
(b)  Location. Except as otherwise expressly authorized by this Division, all parking spaces required by this Division shall be located on the same site that they are intended to serve. 
(c)  Storage prohibited. All parking spaces required by this Division shall be used exclusively for parking, and not for the storage of shopping carts or merchandise, or for the storage or repair of vehicles or equipment, except as allowed under an approved outdoor sale and storage permit. 
(d)  Maintenance. The property owner shall maintain parking spaces in good condition and free of potholes, weeds, dust, trash and other defects. Parking spaces shall remain clearly marked, and parking lots shall be periodically swept and cleaned. 
(e)  Snow removal. Snow shall be removed from a parking lot in a timely manner and stored in an infrequently used area of the parking lot. 
(Prior code 15.44.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-530. - Minimum off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Motor vehicles. The following table contains the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces for motor vehicles: 
Off-Street Parking for Motor Vehicles 
Use Spaces Bar 1 per 150 sq. ft. NFA Catering facility 1 per 300 sq. ft. NFA Car wash 1.5 per bay, plus 1 per employee Child care center 1 per 375 sq. ft. NFA + 1 per facility vehicle Detached single-family dwelling 3 per dwelling unit + 0.5 per unit for guests if on-street parking is not available Drycleaners 1 per 250 sq. ft. NFA Equipment rental center 2 per 1,000 sq. ft. NFA Furniture/flooring showroom 1.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. NFA Garden or building supply center 1 per 300 sq. ft. NFA General retail/Grocery store 1 per 200 sq. ft. NFA Golf course/Country club 4 per golf hole + 1 per employee on maximum shift Group care facility or assisted living facility 1 per 4 beds + 1 per 2 employees on maximum shift Hotel or motel 1 per sleeping room for first 100 rooms, + 1 per every 2 rooms > 100, + 1 per 2 employees on maximum shift + 1 per 400 sq. ft. NFA public meeting area and restaurant Indoor recreation facility 1 per 300 sq. ft. NFA Light industrial facility 1 per 250 sq. ft. NFA of office, 1 per 500 sq. ft. of other areas Mailing center 1 per 200 sq. ft. NFA Medical or dental clinic 1 per 200 sq. ft. NFA Multi-family dwelling unit 2 per dwelling unit, plus 0.25 guest spaces per unit, if on-street parking is not available Nursery/greenhouse 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. NFA Office 1 per 250 sq. ft. NFA Personal service center 1.5 per service chair or bed Pharmacy 1 per 300 sq. ft. NFA Place of worship 1 per 4 seats in sanctuary Radio and television studio 1 per 300 sq. ft NFA Recreation facility 1 per 300 sq. ft. NFA Repair service center 1 per 400 sq. ft. NFA Restaurant - fast food 1 per 75 sq. ft. NFA Restaurant - other than fast food 1 per 100 sq. ft. NFA School Grades K-6: 1 per class + 1 per office + parking for buses 
Grades 7-9: 2 per class + 1 per office + parking for buses 
Grades 10-12: 1 per staff member + 1 per 4 students + parking for buses Self-storage facility Min. 3 spaces per office, or 1 space per 100 units, whichever is greater Shopping center 1 per 200 sq. ft. NFA Swimming pool, or similar use 1 per 100 sq. ft. of water surface area Theater 1 per 4 seats Trade contractor office 1 per 500 sq. ft. NFA University or college 1 per 300 sq. ft. NFA Vehicle dealership 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office/sales/showroom area + 1 per bay Vehicle fueling station 1 per pump + 1 per shift employee Vehicle repair facility 1 per employee + 2 per bay Vehicle rental facility 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office area + 1 per vehicle available for rental on premises Veterinary clinic 1 per 300 sq. ft. NFA Warehousing facility 1.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. NFA  
(b)  Parking for persons with disabilities. 
(1)  Required spaces for persons with disabilities count toward fulfilling automobile parking requirements. 
(2)  The following table establishes the minimum number of required spaces for persons with disabilities for nonresidential uses: 
Total Spaces Spaces for Persons
With Disabilities 1-25 1 26-50 2 51-75 3 76-100 4 101-150 5 151-200 6 201-300 7 301-400 8 401-500 9 501-1,000 2% of total 1,001 + 20 + 1 for each 100 over 1,000  
(3)  The following table establishes the minimum number of required spaces for persons with disabilities for attached single-family and multi-family dwelling units: 
Total Dwelling Units Spaces for
Persons With
Disabilities 1-6 0 7-14 1 15-21 2 22-28 3 29-35 4 36-42 5 Each additional 6 units 1  
(c)  Bicycles. 
(1)  The following table establishes the minimum number of required bicycle parking spaces: 
Use Bicycle Parking Spaces Attached single-family and multi-family dwelling unit 1 per 4 dwelling units/none if garages are provided Retail, personal service center, office, motel/hotel, light industrial facility 1 per every 12,000 NFA (minimum of 2) Park or recreation facility 1 per every 20 vehicle spaces (minimum of 2) Parking lot or structure 1 per every 20 vehicle spaces (minimum of 2) School 2 per classroom  
(2)  Off-street bicycle parking spaces may be provided indoors or outdoors in a lighted area and shall be a minimum of two (2) feet wide and six (6) feet long, and shall include a permanently anchored bike rack or locker with a coin-operated lock which permits the attachment of a user-supplied lock, to allow the frame and both wheels to be secured. 
(3)  Trees, fences, light poles, benches or other outdoor furnishings shall not be designated or used as bicycle parking. 
(4)  Bicycle lockers shall either be enhanced with an architectural design treatment or be screened from street view with a decorative wall or landscaping. 
(Prior code 15.43.140, 15.44.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 22 5, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-21-540. - Parking adjustments. 
(a)  Deviations from number of spaces. 
(1)  When reviewing an MDP, SDP, PUD plan, SUP, or amendment thereto, the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council, whichever has the final authority over the application, may grant requests to deviate from the number of off-street parking spaces required by this Division. In all other cases, the Director may grant requests to deviate from the required number of off-street parking spaces required by this Division. 
(2)  In determining whether to approve a deviation, the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Director may consider the following: 
a.  A transportation demand management program, recorded with the Arapahoe County Clerk and Recorder, promoting carpools, van pools, employee passes for transit service, staggered work hours or other similar provisions, and containing the following information: the projected effectiveness of the transportation management techniques to be used, such as telecommuting, vanpools, carpools, market-based strategies; or bicycling support facilities, such as secure bike parking and changing areas; the proximity of public transportation facilities serving a significant portion of employees and customers; and evidence that employees and customers utilize vehicle transportation alternatives on a regular basis. 
b.  A demonstration of the parking occupancy rates of morning, afternoon and evening peaks on the seven (7) different days of the week, over the span of two (2) consecutive, typical weeks. 
c.  A showing of improved pedestrian connections with surrounding land uses and multi-modal connections and overall walkability, including: sidewalks, crosswalks and paths; pedestrian shortcuts, such as mid-block paths and connections between parcels; ramps for wheelchairs, walkers, strollers and handcarts; street furniture, such as benches; pedestrian security measures, such as lighting and visibility; proximity to transit corridors, stops or stations; and the presence of a captive market for associated uses, such as guests of a hotel patronizing the hotel's restaurant, located within a maximum walking distance of five hundred (500) feet. 
(b)  Nonspecified uses. When the off-street parking requirements for a particular use are not specifically identified in Section 16-21-530, the Director shall: 
(1)  Review the characteristics of the proposed use and, based on parking requirements of similar uses, assign the off-street parking requirement for the proposed use; or 
(2)  If necessary, require a parking study identifying the probable generation and timing of vehicle trips to and from the use, based on actual experience, a professional engineer's analysis or existing studies undertaken by such organizations as the American Planning Association, the Institute of Transportation Engineers or the Urban Land Institute. 
(c)  Off-site parking. Required parking for a nonresidential development may be located off-site if: 
(1)  The parking is located within three hundred (300) feet of the building entrance via direct pedestrian access. 
(2)  An agreement ensuring the perpetual use of such off-site parking is executed by the property owners after approval by the City Attorney. 
(d)  Shared parking. Requests to share parking facilities that have intermittent or seasonal uses with nonconflicting parking demands shall require the submittal of an executed agreement ensuring the perpetual use of such parking approved by the City Attorney, and a parking study including consideration of the following: 
(1)  The viability of shared parking given the land uses proposed on site and adjacent to the site, the size of each use, the type of operation, space utilization based occupancy factors, and the twelve-hour to twenty-four-hour parking demand characteristics of each use, as well as weekly and monthly variations in parking demand; 
(2)  The minimum number of shared spaces based on the peak parking demand for each hour over a twelve-hour and twenty-four-hour period, beginning on the highest peak hour, on the highest peak day of the week, and month of the year; 
(3)  The number of reserved or fee-based parking spaces; and 
(4)  Reasonable walking distances. The following are examples of reasonable walking distances between the shared parking facility and the land uses intended to be served: 
Adjacent
Up to 100 ft. Short
Up to 800 ft. Medium
Up to 1,200 ft. Long
Up to 1,600 ft. Persons with disabilities 
Loading areas 
Emergency services 
Convenience store Medical or dental clinic General retail 
Restaurant 
Employee parking 
Indoor recreation facility 
Place of worship Overflow parking lots  
(Prior code 15.44.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-550. - Parking lots. 
(a)  Construction. Except in the R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75 and R-0.5 Districts, parking lots and associated driveways, access drives, wheel stops, sidewalks and other elements shall be designed and constructed based upon a geotechnical report establishing subgrade and surface materials. Areas used for storage of motor vehicles shall have permanent, all-weather surfaces, such as concrete or asphalt. Parking lot design shall ensure proper storm water drainage in accordance with the Drainage Criteria Manual. 
(b)  Obstructions. Parking lots shall be designed so that a parked vehicle does not overhang a public right-of-way, sidewalk or trail. A permanent curb, bumper, wheel stop or similar device shall be installed to protect the public right-of-way, sidewalk or trail from vehicular overhangs and to protect any structure from vehicular damage. 
(c)  Sight visibility triangle. The parking lot shall comply with Section 16-21-160. 
(d)  Vehicular access. Vehicular access shall include the following: 
(1)  Provisions for reducing the number of access points onto an arterial or collector street and consolidating access points with abutting properties through access management techniques, such as joint and cross access easements or other negotiated means; 
(2)  Entrance drives readily recognizable to the first-time visitor; 
(3)  Entrance drives of sufficient length and designed so that vehicles entering the property do not block traffic on the street; 
(4)  Direct access to all parking spaces shall be interior to the lot; 
(5)  Adequate emergency vehicle access to the building; and 
(6)  Reduction of potential points of conflict between vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians within the site by distinguishing these areas through changes in paving patterns, landscape design and signage. 
(e)  Pedestrian and bicycle access. Pedestrian and bicycle access shall include the following, to the greatest extent practicable: 
(1)  Detached sidewalks along the street frontages; 
(2)  Connecting walkways across the development to walkways on abutting properties; 
(3)  Sidewalk or trail connections consistent with the City's Parks, Trails and Open Space Master Plan; 
(4)  Sidewalk connections between the street and parking areas, between parking areas and buildings, and between the street and buildings; 
(5)  Sidewalk connections between buildings and from buildings to plazas and open space areas; 
(6)  Curb cuts and access ramps; 
(7)  Bus shelters and benches adjacent to transit stops; 
(8)  Connections to transit stations; and 
(9)  Benches and other amenities to encourage the creation of activity areas. 
(f)  Vehicle stacking requirements. 
(1)  Vehicle stacking distance shall be measured from the point of service and within a designated drive aisle. 
(2)  The required stacking distance may be distributed between accesses serving the site, provided that a minimum stacking distance of twenty (20) feet is provided at each access point. 
(3)  The minimum required vehicle stacking distances are as follows: 
Type of Facility Distance Drive-up financial institution 100' per window or station Drive-up restaurant 180' per window Drive-up dry cleaner 60' per window Drive-up pharmacy 60' per window Car wash 60' per wash bay Vehicle fueling station 40' per pump + 20' for each additional pump in bay Parking structure 40' per entry driveway  
(g)  Striping and signage. 
(1)  Parking spaces, drive aisles, approach lanes and maneuvering areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows, striping, lines and signs to facilitate traffic movement and safety. 
(2)  Parking spaces shall be clearly marked with a single white stripe, four (4) inches in width. 
(3)  Double striping may be used to demarcate parking spaces to allow the drivers to center their vehicles between the inner lines. 
(4)  Compact car and bicycle parking spaces shall be clearly identified on signs or by pavement markings. 
(5)  Fire lanes shall be clearly delineated with red striping "No Parking - Fire Lane" signs. 
(6)  Areas for parking lot stormwater detention shall be signed accordingly. 
(h)  Shopping cart storage. Parking lots for stores using shopping carts shall contain adequate shopping cart storage areas designated and integrated into parking lot design. Cart corrals are discouraged. Shopping cart storage areas shall not contain commercial speech. 
(i)  Landscaping. Parking lots shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs on the interior and perimeter pursuant to Division 2 of this Article. 
(j)  Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall comply with Division 1 of this Article. 
(k)  Pedestrian connections. Parking lots shall be designed to integrate pedestrian access through the parking lot with walkways, raised pedestrian crossings, striping and bollards. 
(Prior code 15.43.030, 15.43.040, 15.44.050, 15.44.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-560. - Off-street parking space standards. 
(a)  Compact spaces. 
(1)  Dimensions. The dimensions of a compact parking space and access aisle shall comply with the following standards, and also with the illustration contained in Appendix G: 
Description 0 45 60 90 Space width 8' 8' 8' 8' Space length 20' 17' 16' 16' Space length 8' 17' 18' 16' One-way drive aisle width * 13' 15' 20' 20' Two-way drive aisle width 20' 20' 24' 24'  
* If functioning as a fire lane, lane width shall meet local fire control agency standards. 
(2)  Number. A maximum of ten percent (10%) of the total parking spaces in a parking lot may be compact spaces. 
(b)  Standard spaces. 
(1)  Dimensions. The dimensions of a standard parking space and access aisle shall comply with the following standards, and also with the illustration contained in Appendix G: 
Description 0 45 60 90 Space width 8' 9' 9' 9' Space length 22' 20' 18' 18' Space length 8' 20' 21' 18' One-way drive aisle width * 13' 15' 20' 20' Two-way drive aisle width 20' 20' 24' 24'  
* If functioning as a fire lane, lane width shall meet local fire control agency standards. 
(2)  Design. Parking spaces and access aisles shall comply with the following: 
a.  Both sides of a parking space shall be at the same angle; 
b.  No vehicle shall protrude into a drive aisle; 
c.  The perimeter of the parking lot and interior islands shall be marked with concrete wheel stops or curb; and 
d.  The minimum length of a parking space adjacent to a landscaped island or walkway may be reduced by up to two (2) feet for vehicle overhang, if suitable ground cover is placed an equivalent distance behind the curb and a walkway of seven (7) feet in width is provided. 
(c)  Spaces for persons with disabilities. 
(1)  Each space shall be eight (8) feet in width, by eighteen (18) feet in length and striped to provide a five-foot-wide access aisle. Two (2) adjacent spaces may share the five-foot-wide access aisle. 
(2)  Not less than one (1) in every eight (8) spaces shall be served by a van access aisle eight (8) feet in width at a minimum. The vertical clearance at such spaces shall be one hundred fourteen (114) inches at accessible passenger loading zones and along at least one (1) vehicle access route to such areas from site entrances. Such spaces may be grouped on a single level of a parking structure. 
(3)  Each space shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or other approved material; designed so that slope, measured in any direction, does not exceed a one-foot rise to a forty-eight-foot run (1:48). Access aisles shall be at the same level as the spaces they serve. 
(4)  The location of spaces shall be as close as possible to principal entrances using the shortest possible accessible route without crossing drive aisles, unless no alternative exists, in which case the drive aisle crossing location should be marked with a crosswalk. A route located behind parked cars is prohibited. Multi-building developments and shopping centers shall disperse spaces to ensure easy access and minimize the travel distance. 
(5)  Spaces shall be identified with a sign with the symbol of accessibility that is in conformance with the MUTCD. Van-accessible spaces shall have an additional sign reading "Van-Accessible" mounted below the symbol of accessibility sign. The bottom of the sign shall be a minimum of sixty (60) inches above the ground. Spaces shall also be painted with a symbol, which shall be maintained in a legible condition at all times. 
(Prior code 15.44.060, 15.44.070, 15.44.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-570. - Off-street loading. 
(a)  Number of spaces. Every business, hotel, motel or commercial, industrial, and multi-family dwelling unit shall provide the following off-street loading spaces, at a minimum: 
NFA Spaces Required Up to 25,000 1 25,001 to 40,000 2 40,001 to 100,000 3 100,001 to 160,000 4 160,001 to 240,000 5 240,001 to 320,000 6 320,001 to 400,000 7 Each 90,000 over 400,000 1  
(b)  Minimum size. An off-street loading area shall have a minimum area of five hundred twenty-five (525) square feet, with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet, a minimum length of thirty five (35) feet, and a vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet. 
(c)  Access and circulation. 
(1)  An off-street loading space shall be designed with reasonable means of vehicular access from the street or alley to ensure minimal interference with on-site and off-site traffic movements. 
(2)  An off-street loading space shall be independently accessible so that no loading space blocks another loading space. 
(3)  Off-street loading spaces shall not block required fire lanes. 
(d)  Multiple buildings. Off-street loading spaces for more than one (1) building may be provided in a common terminal if off-street connections between the building and terminal are provided. 
(e)  Screening. Off-street loading spaces shall be screened from view from adjacent residential properties. 
(f)  Loading docks and service areas. Loading docks and service areas shall be screened on all sides from adjacent streets and properties with landscape and building elements, except where an opening is required for access. If access is possible only on a side that is visible from a public street, a removable or operable screen shall be provided. 
(g)  Night operations. Loading operations for a use which customarily receives goods between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and is located adjacent to a property used for residential purposes shall be fully enclosed and shall comply with Section 16-21-250 of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 15.43.130, 15.44.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 22 6, 2015 ) 
Sec. 16-21-580. - Recreational vehicles and recreational trailers. 
(a)  Recreational vehicles and recreational trailers may be parked or stored in a R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75 or R-0.5 District if: 
(1)  The vehicle or trailer is located in a side or rear yard, outside of the accessory structure setbacks required by the zone district; and 
(2)  The vehicle or trailer is concealed from view of a public street or adjacent residential dwelling unit: 
a.  Within a completely enclosed structure, such as a garage; 
b.  Behind a fence of sufficient height to screen the vehicle or trailer, but in compliance with applicable height limitations; or 
c.  Behind a mature hedge, or similar dense vegetation, of sufficient height to completely screen the vehicle or trailer from view of adjacent streets or properties; and 
d.  Not covered with a temporary covering such as a tarp, fabric, plastic or similar covering. 
(b)  Recreational vehicles and recreational trailers shall not be parked or stored on any property not containing a single-family dwelling. 
(c)  A recreational vehicle or recreational trailer may be parked on a public street for not more than twenty-four (24) hours for the purpose of loading and unloading. 
(d)  A recreational vehicle or recreational trailer used as a dwelling and not owned by the property owner may be parked on a single-family residential property with permission of the property owner or occupant or on the adjacent street and used for temporary human occupancy for no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
(Prior code 15.44.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 6 - Height Measurement 

Sec. 16-21-610. - General provisions. 
    When a provision of this Chapter requires that the height of a structure be measured, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Until December 31, 2012, an applicant may choose to use any of the following as the basis for determining existing grade for the purpose of measuring the height of a structure: 1998 Contours as set forth in the City of Greenwood Village Topographic Survey Map; 1965 USGS contours; or a grading plan previously approved by the City as part of an MDP, SDP, PUD plan, FDP, or plat. As of January 1, 2013, only the following shall be used as a basis for determining existing grade for the purposes of measuring the height of a structure: a grading plan approved by the City as part of a MDP, SDP, PUD plan, FDP, or plat; or the 1998 contours; and if no approved grading plan is in place, 1998 contours shall be used. 
(2)  Using the bases listed in Subsection (1) hereof, structure height is the average vertical distance of the four (4) corners of a structure to the highest point of the roof ridge, parapet wall, flashing, church steeple or attached ceremonial feature. 
(3)  For buildings in a R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1, and R-0.05 District, chimneys or appurtenances for ventilation, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet on the largest face and integrated into the architecture of the building, may extend up to three (3) feet above the building, without increasing the measured building height. 
(4)  For buildings in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, MC, TC or LI District, structures enclosing elevators, stairs and mechanical equipment may extend above the building one (1) foot for each three (3) feet of horizontal distance to the nearest wall, up to a maximum of eight (8) feet, without increasing the measured building height, except if the building is within six hundred sixty (660) feet of any property zoned R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 or R-0.05, in which case no extension beyond the applicable height limitation is permitted. 
(Prior code 15.02.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-620. - Exceptions. 
(a)  No provision of this Chapter shall restrict the height of a chimney below the height necessary to ensure the efficient operation of such chimney; and 
(b)  Antennae, transmission towers and other structures for use in connection with police and fire communications facilities may be constructed and maintained up to three hundred (300) feet in height. 
(Prior code 15.42.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-21-630. - Improvement location certificates. 
(a)  Upon the completion of a foundation for any building construction in the City, the owner of the property on which the foundation is located, or his or her agent, shall submit to the Director an improvement location certificate prepared by a Colorado-registered land surveyor showing the distance from each property line to the nearest point of the foundation and the elevation of the highest point of the foundation above USGS sea level. No construction of the building above the foundation shall be permitted until the improvement location certificate has been submitted to and approved by the Director. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building constructed in the City, the owner of the property on which the building is located, or his or her agent shall submit to the Director an improvement location certificate prepared by a Colorado-registered land surveyor showing the elevation above USGS sea level of the highest point of the building. No certificate of occupancy for the building shall be issued until the improvement location certificate has been submitted to and approved by the Director. 
(Prior code 15.58.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 22 - Accessory Structures and Uses 

Sec. 16-22-10. - Setbacks and location. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, an accessory structure with a footprint greater than fifty (50) square feet shall comply with the following setbacks, regardless of whether a building permit is required for such structure: 
Accessory Structure Setbacks 
District Minimum Setback (in feet) Front Rear Side R-2.5 100 50 25 R-2.0 100 50 25 R-1.5 50 25 20 R-1.0 50 25 20 R-0.75 40 15 10 R-0.5 25 15 10 R-0.25 25 15 10 R-0.1 20 5 5 R-0.05 20 5 5  
(b)  No accessory structure with a footprint greater than fifty (50) square feet shall be located in a front yard. 
(c)  Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, any accessory structure in a rear yard or side yard with a footprint less than or equal to fifty (50) square feet shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the property line, regardless of whether a building permit is required for such structure. An accessory structure in a front yard with a footprint less than or equal to fifty (50) square feet shall comply with the applicable front yard accessory structure setback in the zone district in which the property is located. 
(d)  On any property subject to a plat or PUD where the plat or PUD fails to specify accessory structure setbacks, the applicable setbacks shall be either the setbacks established by this Section or the setbacks established on the plat or PUD for primary structures, whichever is less. 
(e)  In the R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 and R-0.05 Districts, for accessory structures greater than eight and one-half (8.5) feet in height, the setback shall be determined by the following formula: for each additional foot of height over eight and one-half (8.5) feet, an additional four (4) feet of setback on all sides shall be required. 
(Prior code 15.82.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-20. - Lot coverage. 
    Accessory structures shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of a rear yard or thirty percent (30%) of a side yard. 
(Prior code 15.82.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-30. - Permit required. 
(a)  A permit is required for an accessory structure or building with a footprint greater than fifty (50) square feet but less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet. The procedures for accessory structure permit applications are set forth in Article 2 of this Chapter. 
(b)  A building permit shall be required for an accessory structure or building with a footprint of one hundred twenty (120) square feet or greater. 
(c)  If an accessory structure or building is erected without the permit required by this Section, the City may conduct a special investigation prior to the issuance of such a permit. An investigation fee in an amount to cover the City's costs shall be assessed in addition to the applicable permit fee, whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. 
(Prior code 15.82.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-40. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Permanent outside toilets, water closets and privies are prohibited accessory structures. 
(b)  No accessory building shall be used as a dwelling unit, other than for temporary guests or persons employed on the property on which the accessory building is located. 
(Prior code 15.82.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-50. - Detached garages. 
    Detached garages shall comply with the applicable principal building setbacks for the zone district in which the property is located. 
(Prior code 15.82.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-60. - Decks. 
(a)  A deck twelve (12) inches or less in height shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from the property line. 
(b)  A deck greater than twelve (12) feet in height shall comply with the principal building setbacks for the zone district in which the property is located. 
(c)  A deck greater than twelve (12) inches in height, but less than twelve (12) feet in height shall be subject to the accessory structure setbacks set forth in Section 16-22-10. 
(Prior code 15.82.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-70. - Patios. 
(a)  A patio in a front yard shall comply with the front setback for accessory structures for the zone district in which the property is located. 
(b)  A patio in a side yard or rear yard shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the property line. 
(Prior code 15.82.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-80. - Outdoor kitchens. 
    An outdoor kitchen shall comply with the applicable accessory structure setbacks set forth in Section 16-22-10. 
(Prior code 15.82.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-90. - Swimming pool equipment. 
    Pumps, filters and other equipment associated with a swimming pool shall comply with the applicable accessory structure setbacks set forth in Section 16-22-10. 
(Prior code 15.82.090; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-100. - Hot tubs. 
    Hot tubs shall comply with the applicable accessory structure setbacks set forth in Section 16-22-10. 
(Prior code 15.82.100; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-110. - Play structures. 
    A play structure shall be located in a side yard or rear yard, and shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the property line. 
(Prior code 15.82.110; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-120. - Skateboard structures. 
    A skateboard structure shall not exceed forty (40) inches in height, and the footprint of a skateboard structure shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. 
(Prior code 15.82.120; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-130. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Home occupations are permitted so that small businesses may function without incurring high overhead costs and persons can legally perform limited business activities within a residence. Such uses are regulated as follows in order to assure that there will be no negative impacts on adjacent residential uses/areas; 
(1)  Locating a home occupation within a residential dwelling unit shall not result in an alteration to the residential appearance or character of the principal structure, use or parcel on which it is located; 
(2)  Merchandise, products or other materials shall not be displayed in such a manner as to be visible from outside the dwelling. No materials used in conjunction with the home occupation shall be stored outdoors, except for family child care homes in which case rear yard storage of playground equipment, swing sets, toys, and other items associated with outdoor activity related to a family child care home is allowed; 
(3)  There shall be no on-premises signs advertising the home occupation; 
(4)  A resident engaged in a home occupation shall not engage in activity which creates commercial traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, inconsistent with the residential character of the neighborhood; 
(5)  The home occupation shall not result in the production of any noise, vibration, light, dust, odor, fumes, smoke, or other similar effects detectable outside the dwelling unit by the sense of normal human beings; 
(6)  The use shall be conducted only within the dwelling unit, which may include a detached garage, if required off-street parking spaces are provided; 
(7)  A home occupation allowed as a use by right in residential areas must be conducted only by family members residing in the home. Home occupations employing a person other than immediate family may only employ one (1) individual who is not a family member so long as parking needs for such employee are met on-site; 
(8)  Parking related to the home occupation shall be confined to the street frontage of the lot in questions, the driveway and the garage/carport. The home occupant may park no more than one motor vehicle used in the business upon the premises or confined to the street frontage of the lot in question; provided that any such vehicle does not exceed a one-ton chassis. In instances where the home is used as an office for business conducted off-premises, such as a home improvement contractor, lawn care service, etc., storage of materials, tools, equipment, trailers, trucks or vans used in the business shall not be permitted upon the premises from which the home occupation operates except as otherwise provided herein. 
(9)  Customers or clients of the home occupation may come to the home only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The customer hours do not apply to in-home child care; 
(10)  No motor vehicle service, repair, maintenance, reconstruction, restoration, cleaning, sale, or storage shall be conducted as a home occupation. This shall not be interpreted to preclude any of these activities for vehicles owned and used by the residents of the home as their personal automobiles; 
(11)  Storage of dangerous, combustible or volatile materials to be used in conjunction with the home occupation shall not be permitted; 
(12)  No mechanical equipment shall be used except as permissible for purely domestic or household purposes; 
(13)  The principal structure within which the home occupation is located shall comply with all applicable building and fire codes; 
(14)  The operator of any home occupation shall obtain all necessary sales and use tax licenses and all other licenses and permits required to operate; and 
(15)  The provision of family child care services of two or more children shall require the prior written approval of any homeowners' association having jurisdiction over the property in questions. 
(b)  A home occupation which is found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this Section or other applicable requirements of this Code, shall cease operations until the violation has been corrected. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-22-140. - Marijuana. 
(a)  Intent, authority and applicability. 
(1)  Intent. It is the intent of this Section to prohibit certain land uses related to marijuana, and in furtherance of its intent, the City Council makes the following findings: 
a.  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Section 12-43.3-101, C.R.S., clarifies state law regarding the scope and extent of Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution. 
b.  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code specifically authorizes the governing body of a municipality to "vote to prohibit the operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers' licenses." 
c.  The Colorado Medical Marijuana Code specifically authorizes a municipality "to prohibit the operation of medical marijuana centers, optional premises cultivation operations, and medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers' licenses...based on local government zoning, health, safety and welfare laws for the distribution of medical marijuana." 
d.  Article XVIII,  16 of the Colorado Constitution specifically authorizes a municipality "to prohibit the operation of marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana product manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities, or retail marijuana stores through the enactment of an ordinance." 
e.  Based on careful consideration of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution, Article XVIII,  16 of the Colorado Constitution and the potential secondary effects of the cultivation, sale, distribution, manufacturing, consumption and dispensing of marijuana or marijuana-infused products, such land uses have an adverse effect on the health, safety and welfare of the City and its inhabitants. 
(2)  Authority. The City's authority to adopt this Section is found in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Section 12-43.3-101, C.R.S.; Article XVIII,  16 of the Colorado Constitution, the Local Government Land Use Control Enabling Act, Section 29-20-101, C.R.S.; Section 31-23-101, C.R.S. (municipal zoning powers); Sections 31-15-103 and 31-15-401, C.R.S. (municipal police powers); Section 31-15-501, C.R.S. (municipal authority to regulate businesses); and the Greenwood Village Home Rule Charter. 
(3)  Applicability. This Section shall apply to all property within the City. To the extent that the City is required to allow the cultivation of medical marijuana or marijuana for personal use under state law, the rules set forth herein shall apply. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to permit marijuana dispensaries of any kind otherwise prohibited by this or any other Chapter. If the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article XVIII,  14 of the Colorado Constitution, or Article XVIII,  16 of the Colorado Constitution are declared unlawful in violation of federal law, nothing in this Code shall be deemed to permit the cultivation, possession or use of marijuana for medical or any other purpose. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to provide a defense to the prosecution of offenses under the Federal Controlled Substances Act occurring in the City. 
(b)  Prohibitions regarding marijuana cultivation, manufacture, testing, consumption or retail sale. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated or permit to be operated a medical marijuana center, an optional premises cultivation operation or a medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing facility in the City. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to operate a marijuana cultivation facility, marijuana product manufacturing facility, marijuana testing facility, retail marijuana store or marijuana club within the City. 
(3)  It is unlawful to grow medical marijuana or marijuana for personal or medicinal use anywhere in the City other than in an enclosed, locked space within a detached single-family residential property or single-family residential garage or in a detached accessory structure under the ownership of the person cultivating the marijuana or with the written permission of the property owner. Enclosed means having a roof and all sides closed to the weather with walls, windows or doors. 
(4)  It is unlawful to cultivate marijuana inside a residential dwelling in an area exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet or exceeding a height of ten (10) feet. This limit applies regardless of the number of qualified patients or caregivers or persons otherwise allowed to possess and grow marijuana for personal use residing in the residence. The cultivation area shall be a single, locked area and shall not be accessible to anyone under the age of twenty-one (21). In no event may more than twelve (12) marijuana plants be cultivated, grown or produced on a residential property. 
(5)  It is unlawful to cultivate marijuana in a detached accessory structure that is greater than fifty (50) square feet or more than ten (10) feet in height or in an attached or detached garage in an area that is greater than thirty-two (32) square feet. Any garage or accessory structure used for the cultivation of marijuana, including all walls, doors, and the roof, shall be constructed with a firewall assembly of Type X drywall meeting the minimum building code requirements for residential structures. Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, a permit is required for an accessory structure used for growing marijuana and it must meet setback requirements of structures greater than fifty (50) square feet. In no event may more than twelve (12) marijuana plants be cultivated, grown or produced on a residential property. 
(6)  It is unlawful to use any lighting for the indoor cultivation of marijuana other than light-emitting diodes (LEDs), compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) or fluorescent lighting. All high-intensity discharge (HID) lighting, including but not limited to mercury-vapor lamps, metal-halide (MH) lamps, ceramic MH lamps, sodium-vapor lamps, high-pressure sodium (HPS) lamps and xenon short-arc lamps, are prohibited. 
(7)  It is unlawful to use gas products (e.g., CO 2 , butane) for indoor marijuana cultivation or processing. 
(8)  It is unlawful to use a kitchen, bathroom or primary bedrooms for the indoor cultivation of marijuana. 
(9)  It is unlawful to cultivate marijuana in any structure without complying with applicable building and fire codes, including plumbing and electrical, and all applicable zoning codes, including but not limited to lot coverage, setback and height requirements. 
(10)  Any indoor marijuana cultivation area shall include a ventilation and filtration system designed to ensure that odors from the cultivation are not detectable beyond the property line for detached single-family residential dwelling, and designed to prevent mold and moisture and otherwise protect the health and safety of persons residing in the residence. This shall include, at a minimum, a system meeting the requirements of the current, adopted edition of the International Residential Building Code. 
(11)  It is unlawful to store chemicals used for marijuana cultivation inside of the habitable areas of the residence or within public view from neighboring properties and public rights-of-way. 
(12)  It is unlawful for any marijuana cultivation activity to adversely affect the health or safety of the nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration or other impacts; or be hazardous due to the use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes, or from other actions related to the cultivation. 
(Prior code 15.42.520; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 42 1, 2012; Ord. 1 2, 2013; Ord. No. 20 ,  1, 10-16-2017) 
Sec. 16-22-150. - Outdoor equestrian mirrors 
(a)  Outdoor equestrian arena mirrors constructed after passage of this ordinance shall comply with applicable accessory structure setbacks. 
(b)  Outdoor equestrian arena mirrors constructed after passage of this ordinance must be screened from neighboring properties with landscaping throughout the entire year. 
(c)  Outdoor equestrian mirrors constructed after passage of this ordinance shall be equipped with mounted wind-resistant blinds of a neutral color that must be lowered when a rider is not in the arena for more than one (1) hour. 
( Ord. 01 ,  1, 2019) 
Sec. 16-22-160. - Short term rentals. 
(a)  Allowed use. Short term rentals are an allowed accessory use in all primary residences or lawful inhabitable accessory structures within the City. 
(b)  Requirements. Such use shall be regulated as follows in order to assure that there will be no negative impacts on adjacent residential uses/areas: 
(1)  Short term rentals must comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, including, but not limited to, the Greenwood Village Municipal Code. 
(2)  Traffic associated with the short-term rental, either vehicular or pedestrian, may not be inconsistent with the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(3)  No signage or alteration to the residential appearance or character of the dwelling unit used as a short term rental is allowed. 
(4)  No noise, vibration, light, dust, odor, fumes, smoke, or other similar effects associated with the short term rental can be detectable outside the dwelling unit. 
(5)  Parking needs must be accommodated by the street frontage of the lot or in the driveway or carport. 
(6)  The provider of the short term rental must obtain all necessary lodging, sales and use tax licenses and all other licenses, permits, and permissions required to operate. 
(7)  No meals shall be prepared for or served to the short term tenants by the provider of the short term rental. 
(8)  Use of a short term rental unit for any commercial or large social events or gatherings, such as weddings, is prohibited. 
(9)  The occupancy of a short term rental shall not exceed the total number of unrelated persons that are otherwise permitted to occupy property as a family in accordance with this chapter. 
(c)  Short term rental of non-principal residences prohibited. It shall be unlawful to offer property as a short term rental that is not the primary dwelling unit or habitable accessory structure of the property's owner or lease holder. Short term rental units must be the property owner's or lawful lease holder's principal residence and the property owner or tenant must be a natural person or the beneficiary of a trust whose name appears on the deed to the property on which the dwelling unit to be rented is located. Primary residence may be documented by at least two (2) of the following: motor vehicle registration, driver's license, Colorado state identification card, voter registration, tax documents, or a utility bill. A person can only have one (1) primary residence at one (1) time. For purposes of application to short term rentals "person or persons" shall not include any corporation, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, or other similar legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 07  3, 4-15-2019) 
ARTICLE 23 - Communications Facilities 
Division 1 - Telecommunications Facilities[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09 ,  6, adopted June 19, 2017, repealed div. 1,  16-23-10-16-23-70 and enacted a new div. 1, as set out herein. Former div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the prior Code 15.72.010 and Ord. 32, adopted in 2011. 

Sec. 16-23-10. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  The intent of this Division is: 
(1)  To ensure that telecommunications facilities minimize adverse visual impacts through careful design, appropriate siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(2)  To encourage the location of telecommunications facilities in non-residential areas; 
(3)  To minimize the visual impact of telecommunications facilities in the community; 
(4)  To encourage the joint use of new and existing telecommunications facility locations through collocation; 
(5)  To enhance the ability to provide telecommunications services to the city quickly, effectively and efficiently; 
(6)  To protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(7)  To avoid damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through careful engineering and locating of towers; and 
(8)  To encourage small wireless facilities located in the city's rights-of-way to utilize existing structures before erecting a freestanding facility in accordance with Titles 29 and 38, C.R.S. 
(b)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to all telecommunications facilities except a tower or antenna owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or used exclusively as a receive-only facility. 
(Ord. No. 09 ,  6, 6-19-2017; Ord. 03  3, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 16-23-20. - Type of approval required. 
(a)  Administrative approval is allowed for applications for building-mounted telecommunication facilities, and all pole-mounted or freestanding small wireless facilities in all zone districts and right-of-way that meet the criteria set forth in this article. 
(b)  City Council approval is required for applications for any new telecommunications tower, alterations of an existing telecommunications tower that does not qualify as an eligible facility request, and exceptions to the criteria set forth in this article for small wireless facilities and building-mounted telecommunications facilities. 
(c)  Micro wireless facilities. 
(1)  No application is required for installation, placement, operation, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on provider-owned cables or lines that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with national safety codes. 
(2)  A right-of-way permit is required if the installation, placement, operation, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities: 
a.  Involves working within a highway travel lane or requires the closure of a highway travel lane; 
b.  Disturbs the pavement or a shoulder, roadway, or ditch line; 
c.  Includes placement on limited access rights-of-way; or 
d.  Requires any specific precautions to ensure the safety of the traveling public; the protection of public infrastructure; or the operation of public infrastructure; and such activities either were not authorized in or will be conducted in a time, place or manner than is inconsistent with, the approval terms of the existing permit for the facility or structure upon which the micro wireless facility is attached. 
(Ord. No. 09 ,  6, 6-19-2017; Ord. 03  4, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 16-23-30. - Administrative approval. 
(a)  Within ninety (90) days of receipt of an administrative review application for telecommunications facilities and free-standing small wireless facilities in the right-of-way deemed complete by the Director, the Director shall determine whether the proposed application conforms to the design and development standards set forth in this article. An applicant and the Director may mutually agree in writing than an application may be processed in a longer period. 
(b)  Within sixty (60) days of receipt of an application for a small wireless facility to be attached to an existing structure in the right-of-way in accordance with design and development guidelines, the Director shall determine whether the proposed application conforms to the development standards set forth in this article. An applicant and the Director may mutually agree in writing that an application may be processed in a longer period, but in order to suspend the review period due to incompleteness, the city must provide written notice to the applicant within ten (10) days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application. 
(c)  Expiration. If construction of an approved facility is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days of approval, the approval shall expire. If there is an appeal, the one-hundred-eighty-day period shall not begin until the appeal is finally resolved. 
(Ord. No. 09 ,  6, 6-19-2017; Ord. 03  5, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 16-23-40. - Neighborhood input meeting. 
(a)  Applicability. A neighborhood input meeting (NIM) must be held prior to submittal of an application for any telecommunications facility that requires City Council review. This section does not apply to the review of small wireless facilities or facilities that are otherwise subject to administrative review, nor to requests made to City Council to grant an exception to design or development guidelines. 
(b)  Exceptions. The Director may waive the requirement for a NIM if not more than one (1) year has elapsed since the date of a NIM for the same or similar request for which an application was deemed complete by the Director. 
(c)  Notice. The applicant shall send written notice via first-class United States mail to all property owners within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundary lines of the property that is the subject of the application, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the NIM. Notice materials will be provided to the applicant. The applicant shall provide an affidavit of notice in substantially the form provided in Appendix B. 
(d)  Attendance. At least one (1) representative of the applicant and at least one (1) representative of the city shall attend the NIM. 
(Ord. No. 09 ,  6, 6-19-2017; Ord. 03  6, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 16-23-50. - City council approval. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all applications for towers and for applications for building-mounted facilities that require exceptions to code criteria. 
(b)  The City Council shall base its decision regarding a telecommunication facility on whether the proposed facility meets the applicable requirements of this Article and federal and state law. If approved, the applicant may apply for a building permit. 
(c)  A decision on an application deemed complete by the Director shall be rendered within one hundred fifty (150) days. An applicant and the Director may mutually agree in writing that an application may be processed in a longer period. 
(d)  Expiration. If construction of an approved facility is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days of approval, the approval shall expire. If there is an appeal of the City Council's decision, the one-hundred-eighty-day period shall not begin until the appeal is finally resolved. 
(e)  Modifications. Authority is delegated to the Director to make administrative modifications to a previously approved facility for the sole purpose of correcting an administrative or clerical error, such as correction of inaccurate legal descriptions, inaccurate topographic information and other technical information, or to add or replace approved equipment with current technology that is otherwise in conformance with this Division. 
(Ord. No. 09 ,  6, 6-19-2017; Ord. 03  7, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 16-23-60. - Telecommunications towers. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to telecommunications towers, excluding small wireless facilities. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Setbacks. A tower shall not be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any residential dwelling. 
(2)  Height. A tower shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height in any residentially occupied area or residentially zoned district or open space zoned district, or fifty (50) feet in height in any commercially zoned district. 
(3)  Design standards. 
a.  The tower shall be designed to be compatible with surrounding buildings and structures and existing or planned uses in the area, subject to any FAA regulations. 
b.  The tower shall be finished in a neutral color to reduce visual obtrusiveness, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA. 
c.  All towers shall, to the extent feasible from a technological or engineering perspective, accommodate collocation of other telecommunications facilities. 
d.  Support facilities shall be placed in a flush-to-grade underground equipment vault. 
e.  Signage. Signs shall be limited to those signs required for cautionary or advisory purposes only. 
f.  Illumination. Towers shall not be artificially illuminated unless required by the FAA or other governmental regulation. 
(4)  Screening. If deemed necessary by the Director due to aesthetic impacts, the area around the tower shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the base of the facility. 
(Ord. 03  8, 4-15-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03  8, adopted April 15, 2019, in effect, repealed  16-23-60 and enacted a new  16-23-60. Former  16-23-60 pertained to development standards and derived from Ord. No. 09 , adopted June 19, 2017. 
Sec. 16-23-61. - Freestanding small wireless facilities. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to towers that meet the definition of freestanding wireless facilities. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  The shared use of an existing freestanding small wireless facility is preferred to the construction of a new facility. An application to locate a new freestanding small wireless facility shall include evidence that it is, from a technological or engineering standpoint, unable to collocate with an existing telecommunications facility, streetlight, traffic signal, or other structure within a reasonable distance, regardless of the municipal boundaries of the site. The telecommunications provider must demonstrate that the proposed facility cannot be accommodated on existing facilities due to one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
a.  Existing facilities are not of sufficient height within the geographic area to provide coverage or capacity in the least intrusive means possible based on the applicant's technical and radio frequency needs; or 
b.  Existing facilities do not have sufficient structural strength or space to support applicant's proposed facility within design guidelines; or 
c.  The planned equipment, if collocated, would cause radio frequency interference with other existing or planned equipment, or exceed radio frequency emission standards that cannot be reasonably prevented; or 
d.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing or replacement facilities unsuitable for collocation. 
(2)  Height. The freestanding small wireless facility shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height in any residentially zoned district, open space zoned, or commercial district, or thirty (30) feet in height in commercially zoned districts. 
(3)  Design standards. A freestanding small wireless facility shall be of a design adopted by the city that allows for the deployment of wireless services, and considers wireless providers' technological and engineering requirements. 
(4)  Siting. Freestanding small wireless facilities may not be located within six hundred (600) feet of other vertical infrastructure. When located along a residential street frontage, the facility must be placed in front of a common lot line between adjoining residential properties, or on the corner formed by two (2) intersecting streets. 
(5)  Support facilities. Support facilities shall be concealed within the pole, in existing above ground cabinets, or placed in a flush-to-grade underground equipment vault. 
(Ord. 03  9, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 16-23-62. - Pole-mounted small wireless facilities. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to small wireless facilities co-located with other uses, including but not limited to, streetlights and traffic signals. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Applicants are encouraged to locate small wireless facilities within an existing utility, traffic signal, or street light pole, or on replacement streetlight poles or traffic signals, provided the applicant is authorized by the owner of the existing pole to construct a new utility pole, traffic signal, or street light. 
a.  Replacement of existing streetlights for facilities is encouraged before using traffic signals or erecting a tower or freestanding small wireless facility. 
b.  Use of traffic signals for facilities is allowed provided the traffic signal can adequately support the facilities and the facilities can be placed in such a manner that the function of the signal will not be impaired. 
(2)  Interference. No telecommunication facility may be located or maintained such that it disrupts or interferes with the use of any rights-of-way by the city, the general public, or other person authorized to use or be present upon the right-of-way. Interference includes any use that disrupts vehicular or pedestrian traffic, any interference with public utilities, and any other activity that will present a hazard to public health, safety or welfare. 
(3)  Design standards. The facility must be incorporated into the pole or placed as an extension of the pole as opposed to attached to the outside of the pole. New poles, streetlights, and traffic signals shall be of a design adopted by the city that allows for the deployment of a wireless services and considers wireless providers' technological or engineering requirements. 
(4)  Height. The facility shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height in residentially zoned district or open space zoned district, or forty (40) feet in height in any commercially zoned district. 
(5)  Support facilities. Support facilities shall be concealed within the pole, in existing above-ground cabinets, or placed in a flush-to-grade underground equipment vault or within approved design standard treatments adopted by the City. 
(Ord. 03  10, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 16-23-63 - Building-mounted facilities. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all telecommunications facilities that are located on roofs or exterior walls of building. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Height. 
a.  Under no circumstance shall a facility located on the roof extend more than seven (7) feet above the roof line of the building, as measured from the top of the parapet. 
b.  Wall-mounted facilities shall not extend above the roof line of the building if the roof is pitched, or above the height of existing facilities and equipment on the roof if the roof is flat. 
(2)  Design standards. 
a.  Each facility, including support facilities, shall be screened from public view, colored to match the building to which it is attached or architecturally integrated with the building to which it is mounted. 
b.  Antennae and support facilities shall be mounted as flush as possible to the building, and in no case shall antenna extend more than two (2) feet above the building wall. 
c.  Antennae, support structures, screening, and all accessory equipment shall not exceed a total of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total surface area of the roof per facility. 
(3)  Support facilities. Support facilities shall be located inside the building or architecturally integrated to/with the building to the extent practicable, or grouped as closely together as technically possible, and not exceed four hundred (400) square feet of area per building-mounted facility. 
(Ord. 03  11, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 16-23-64 - Request for exceptions. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies when an applicant requests an exception to development or design standards for freestanding small wireless facilities, pole-mounted small wireless facilities, or roof-mounted telecommunications facilities. 
(b)  City Council review. 
(1)  If an application fails to meet development standards other than for siting for freestanding small wireless facilities (Section 16-23-60(b)(4)), an applicant may request that City Council grant an exception therefrom where an applicant can demonstrate that, from a technological or engineering standpoint, adhering to development standards and design guidelines will materially inhibit the provision of service. 
(2)  If an application fails to meet siting requirements for free-standing wireless facilities set forth in Section 16-23-61(4), an applicant may request that City Council exempt an application from this requirement if the City Council finds that 
a.  The application proposes to replace existing vertical infrastructure located within six hundred (600) feet of other vertical infrastructure; 
b.  The applicant demonstrates through technical network documentation that the minimum separation requirement cannot be satisfied for technical reasons; or 
c.  The City Council determines, when considering the surrounding topography; the nature of adjacent uses and nearby properties, and the height of existing structures in the vicinity, that placement of a freestanding small wireless facility at a distance less than six hundred (600) feet from other vertical infrastructure in the public right-of-way will meet the intent of reducing visibility and visual clutter of small wireless facilities. 
(c)  Notice. Where a request for an exception to development standards in a residential neighborhood is made, notice of the meeting date and time shall be provided to households located within five hundred (500) feet on the same street as the proposed facility or all adjacent streets if the location is at an intersection. 
(Ord. 03  12, 4-15-2019) 
Sec. 16-23-70 - Application review fees and permits. 
(a)  Fees in the amount as those allowed under 4 U.S.C. Sec. 224, as amended, may be charged for locating telecommunication facilities and small wireless facilities on city-owned property within the city's rights-of-way. 
(b)  A right-of-way permit is required prior to placing any approved facility in the city's right-of-way, or prior to performing work in the city's right-of-way for a facility on private property. 
(c)  Application review fees must be paid before an application is considered complete. In addition to review fees, a deposit toward actual costs of consultant review may be required for applications requiring review outside the expertise of staff. 
(d)  Once approved, it is the applicant's duty to maintain a copy of its permit. 
(Ord. 03  12, 4-15-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03  12, adopted April 15, 2019, in effect, repealed  16-23-70 and enacted a new  16-23-70 as set out herein. Former  16-23-70 pertained to right-of-way use fees and derived from Ord. No. 09 , adopted June 19, 2017. 
Sec. 16-23-80. - Eligible facilities requests. 
(a)  Requests for modifications to a previously approved existing telecommunications tower, pole-mounted facility, building-mounted facility, or support facility that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such facilities involving: (i) collocation of new equipment, (ii) removal of equipment, or (iii) replacement of equipment, shall considered a use by right subject to administrative review. 
(b)  The following modifications do not qualify as eligible facility requests and require review as for a new application: 
(1)  For towers in the right-of-way, the modification increases the height by more than ten percent (10%) or by the height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater. For other facilities, the modification increases the height of the structure by more than ten percent (10%) or more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater; or 
(2)  The modification involves adding an appurtenance to the body of a tower that would protrude from the edge by more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater. For other facilities or support facilities, the modification involves adding an appurtenance that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet; or 
(3)  The modification for any eligible facility involves the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or 
(4)  For freestanding small cell facilities or pole-mounted facilities in the rights-of- way, the modification involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure; or 
(5)  Involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent (10%) larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure; or 
(6)  The modification entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site or impairs the concealment elements; or 
(7)  The modification does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the structure or support facilities, unless the non-compliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation that would not exceed the thresholds identified in paragraphs (i) through (vi) of this section; or 
(8)  The modification does not comply with the generally applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes or with other laws codifying objective standards reasonably related to health and safety, or it does not comply with any relevant Federal requirements. 
(c)  Review period. Within sixty (60) days of the date on which an applicant submits an application deemed complete by the Director and qualifying for approval under this section, the Director shall approve the application unless it determines that the application is not covered by this subsection. The sixty-day review period may be suspended only by mutual agreement of the city and the applicant. 
(1)  To suspend the review period due to incompleteness, the city must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application; 
(2)  The review period begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental written submission in response to the city's notice of incompleteness; and 
(3)  Following a supplemental submission, the city will notify the applicant within ten (10) days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The review period is suspended in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in paragraph (1). In the case of a second or subsequent notice of incompleteness, the city may not specify missing information or documents that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness. 
(4)  In the event the city fails to act on an eligible facilities request seeking approval within the review period (accounting for any suspension), the request shall be deemed granted. The deemed grant becomes effective when the applicant notifies the city in writing after the review period has expired (accounting for any suspension) that the application has been deemed granted. 
(5)  If the city determines that the applicant's request is not an eligible facilities request as delineated in this section, the presumptively reasonable timeframe under section 332(c)(7), as prescribed by the FCC's shot clock order, will begin to run from the issuance of the city's decision that the application is not a covered request. To the extent such information is necessary, the city may request additional information from the applicant to evaluate the application under section 332(c)(7) reviews. 
(Ord. No. 09 ,  6, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 16-23-90 - Compliance with applicable law. 
(a)  Compliance with applicable law. Notwithstanding approval of an application for any telecommunication facility or eligible facility as described herein, all work done pursuant to an approved application must be completed in accordance with all applicable building and safety requirements as set forth in city code and any other applicable regulations. In addition, all applications shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Any permit or license issued by a local, state or federal agency with jurisdiction; 
(2)  Easements, covenants, conditions and/or restrictions on or applicable to the underlying real property; 
(3)  Be maintained in good working condition and to the standards established at the time of application approval; and 
(4)  Remain free from trash, debris, litter, graffiti, and other forms of vandalism. Any damage shall be repaired as soon as practicable, and in no instance more than ten (10) calendar days from the time of notification by the city or after discovery by the owner or operator of the site. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any graffiti on facilities located in the rights-of-way or on other city-owned property may be removed by the city at its discretion, and the owner and/or operator of the facility shall pay all costs of such removal within thirty (30) days after receipt of any invoice from the city. 
(Ord. No. 09 ,  6, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 16-23-100 - Abandonment. 
    A telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days shall be considered abandoned and the permit shall expire. The owner of any abandoned telecommunications facility shall remove the same within ninety (90) days of the date of abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 09 ,  6, 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 16-23-110 - Appeal. 
(a)  Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity deeming itself aggrieved by a decision of the Director under this Division may appeal the decision to the City Council within thirty (30) days after issuance of the written decision. 
(b)  The City Council shall hear the matter within sixty (60) days and determine whether the Director's decision was supported by the evidence presented to the Director, and then either affirm the decision, reverse the decision or affirm the decision with conditions. The ruling of the City Council shall be final, subject to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 09 ,  6, 6-19-2017) 
Division 2 - Satellite Dish Antennae 

Sec. 16-23-210. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Division is: 
(1)  To allow the use of satellite dish antennae in the City subject to certain standards; 
(2)  To protect the safety of the residents of and visitors to the City by regulating, to the extent allowable under federal law, the location of satellite dish antennae; and 
(3)  To regulate the visual impact of satellite dish antennae in a nondiscriminatory manner, consistent with the City's regulation of other similar appurtenances. 
(b)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to the location of satellite dish antennae anywhere in the City. 
(Prior code 15.84.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-23-220. - Radio frequency emissions. 
    Satellite dish antennae shall comply with the standards promulgated by the FCC regarding radio frequency emissions. 
(Prior code 15.84.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-23-230. - Standards. 
(a)  A satellite dish antenna exceeding eighteen (18) inches in diameter shall: 
(1)  Not exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter; 
(2)  Be of a color compatible with the surrounding environment; 
(3)  Comply with applicable accessory structure setbacks; 
(4)  Comply with applicable accessory structure height limits; 
(5)  Be screened from view; 
(6)  Be located in the rear yard of a lot; and 
(7)  Not be located within ten (10) feet of a public right-of-way. 
(b)  A satellite dish antenna eighteen (18) inches in diameter or less shall: 
(1)  Be of a color compatible with the building or structure to which it is attached; 
(2)  Comply with the building height limit of the underlying zone district; and 
(3)  Be located on the side wall of a building or structure, rather than on the roof. 
(c)  Any of the standards set forth in this Section which have the effect of precluding reception of an acceptable quality video programming signal or unreasonably increasing the cost of installation, maintenance or use of a satellite dish antenna shall not be enforceable. 
(Prior code 15.84.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-23-240. - No permit or fee required. 
    No permit or fee shall be required for location of a satellite dish antenna in the City, unless the satellite dish antenna exceeds the maximum height permitted in the underlying zone district, in which case a height variance is required. 
(Prior code 15.84.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-23-250. - Automatic stay. 
    No fines or other penalties for a violation of this Division shall accrue or be enforced while a related proceeding is pending before the FCC. 
(Prior code 15.84.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 3 - Fixed Wireless Antennae 

Sec. 16-23-310. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Division is: 
(1)  To allow the use of fixed wireless antennae in the City subject to certain standards; 
(2)  To protect the safety of the residents of and visitors to the City by regulating, to the extent allowable under federal law, the location and installation of fixed wireless antennae; and 
(3)  To regulate the visual impact of fixed wireless antennae in a nondiscriminatory manner, consistent with the regulation of other similar appurtenances. 
(b)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to the location of fixed wireless antennae anywhere in the City. 
(Prior code 15.86.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-23-320. - Radio frequency emissions. 
    Fixed wireless antennae shall comply with the standards promulgated by the FCC regarding radio frequency emissions and safe installation. 
(Prior code 15.86.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-23-330. - Standards. 
(a)  A fixed wireless antenna installed on a building shall comply with the following design and installation standards: 
(1)  The antenna shall not exceed the minimum height necessary to achieve an acceptable level signal. The antenna shall comply with the building height limit of the underlying zone district. If the antenna will extend more than twelve (12) feet in height above the roofline of the building on which it is installed, it shall be installed by professional personnel trained in the proper methods of installation of such antennae. 
(2)  The mast or pole on which the antenna is mounted shall be colored to match the color of the building or roof to which it is attached, except if the mast or pole is installed higher than the roofline, then the mast or pole shall be painted a grey or white color. 
(3)  The antenna shall be located on the side or rear of the building, rather than the front, unless the antenna is flush-mounted so that the antenna protrudes no more than twelve (12) inches out from the building wall. 
(b)  A fixed wireless antenna installed on the ground shall comply with the following design and installation standards: 
(1)  The antenna shall comply with the applicable accessory structure setbacks. 
(2)  The antenna shall comply with the applicable accessory structure height limits. 
(3)  The antenna shall not be located within ten (10) feet of a public right-of-way. 
(4)  The antenna shall be located within the rear yard. 
(5)  The mast or pole on which the antenna is mounted shall be of a color compatible with the surrounding environment. 
(6)  The antenna shall be located so as to reduce the visual impact of the antenna on surrounding properties to the fullest extent possible. 
(7)  The installation shall be performed by professional personnel trained in the proper methods of installation of such antennae. The mast or pole on which the antenna is mounted shall be installed in such a way as not to constitute a safety hazard. 
(c)  Any of the standards set forth in this Section which has the effect of unreasonably delaying or preventing the use of a fixed wireless antenna, unreasonably increasing the cost of installing a fixed wireless antenna, or precluding a person from receiving or transmitting an acceptable quality signal from a fixed wireless antenna, and which is not a legitimate safety restriction, shall not be enforceable. 
(Prior code 15.86.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 24 - Temporary Uses and Structures 

Sec. 16-24-10. - Special events. 
(a)  A special event permit shall be required for a special event in any of the following zone districts, other than public civic and cultural events on City-owned property authorized by the City Council: B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, MC, TC, LI, A or O. 
(b)  A special event using a tent shall also require a tent permit, pursuant to Section 16-24-20. 
(c)  A special event shall last no longer than three (3) consecutive days; provided that, if a tent is being used, one (1) additional day shall be allowed to erect the tent and one (1) additional day shall be allowed to dismantle the tent. 
(Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-24-20. - Tents. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, no tent shall be erected in the City without a tent permit. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Tents may be erected by the City without a tent permit in any zone district, on public property or on private property with the consent of the property owner, for public civic and cultural events on City-owned property and authorized by the City Council, for any length of time. 
(2)  Tents may be erected without a tent permit in the following zone districts: R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 and R-0.05. 
(c)  Time. Tents may be erected for no more than three (3) consecutive days, on no more than four (4) occasions in a calendar year. One (1) additional day shall be allowed to erect the tent and one (1) additional day shall be allowed to dismantle the tent. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a tent may remain erected for longer than three (3) consecutive days in compliance with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  No sale, stocking or display of merchandise shall be allowed in the tent. 
(2)  The tent shall be designed so as to minimize the visual impact to adjacent properties. 
(3)  In addition to the parking spaces otherwise required on the site, sufficient vehicle parking spaces for the tent shall be provided either on-site or off-site. 
(4)  The tent may remain erected for no longer than the time frame stated in the permit, which shall not be longer than ninety (90) days. After the expiration of the ninety-day period, the permittee may request an extension of time, which may only be approved by the City Council. The City Council may determine the length of the extension and may place reasonable conditions on the extension. 
(d)  General requirements. All tents shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Appearance. The tent shall be of a high quality appearance and shall be clean and free from defects. 
(2)  Size. The size of the tent shall be limited by applicable setbacks, parking requirements and potential impacts on adjacent properties. 
(3)  Height. The maximum height of a tent shall not exceed the maximum height for principal buildings in the underlying zone district or as stated on the MDP, SDP, PUD plan, or SUP for the property. 
(4)  Access. The seating and contents of the tent shall be arranged to provide for appropriate access to and egress from the tent. Egress points shall not be blocked. Roping or guying supporting the tent shall be designated by appropriate warning signs or devices. 
(5)  Fire code. The tent shall comply with applicable fire codes and be approved by the South Metro Fire Rescue Authority. 
(6)  Security. Tents and their contents shall be secured during the night hours. 
(7)  Traffic. Tents shall be placed so as not to impede or diminish on-site traffic circulation. 
(8)  Setbacks. Appropriate setbacks for each tent shall be established by the Director at the time of permitting and shall be stated on the permit. 
(9)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for every tent and, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, all temporary electrical wiring used in the tent shall be approved by the State Electrical Inspector. 
(e)  Emergencies. As deemed appropriate by the Director, tents may be erected without a tent permit for emergency purposes or for the coordination and conduct of emergency activities. 
(Prior code 15.80.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-24-30. - Mobile food service. 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  Mobile food service is permitted in all zone districts with a mobile food service permit, provided that a mobile food service permit shall be valid for one (1) location only. 
(2)  Mobile food service shall be conducted more than three hundred (300) feet from any property zoned R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 or R-0.05 used for a school. 
(3)  No mobile food service shall be located so as to obstruct a public sidewalk or the traveled portion of the public right-of-way. 
(4)  No mobile food service shall operate from a public parking space adjacent to any public street. 
(b)  Expiration. A mobile food service permit shall be valid through December 31 of the year in which it was issued. 
(c)  Litter. The permittee shall remove any litter which is deposited by any person within twenty-five (25) feet of the location designated on the permit, and the permittee shall carry a suitable container for the placement of such litter. 
(Prior code 15.42.512, 15.42.513; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 34 2, 2012) 
Sec. 16-24-40. - Outdoor sales and storage. 
(a)  Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided in this Section or in an approved MDP, SDP, or PUD plan, no person shall store, sell or display any items, goods, merchandise, seasonal merchandise or personal property, nor shall any owner or proprietor allow or maintain an outdoor dining or eating area, outdoors. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Nothing in this Section shall prohibit garage or yard sales in the following zone districts, subject to all applicable rules and regulations: TC, R-2.5, R-2.0, R-1.5, R-1.0, R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 and R-0.05. 
(2)  The outdoor storage and display of vehicles or equipment for sale, lease or rent on paved areas which do not constitute open space, by commercial entities regularly engaged in the business of the sale, lease or rental of such vehicles or equipment in accordance with all applicable regulations of this Chapter, is allowed without a permit. 
(3)  Twenty-pound propane tanks may be stored outside without a permit, provided that: 
a.  The tanks are stored in a locked storage container; 
b.  There is not more than one (1) storage container per business establishment; 
c.  The storage container does not exceed fifty (50) cubic feet in area or six (6) feet in height, complies with all applicable fire and safety codes, is painted a color similar to the principal building and is located to allow at least three (3) feet of clearance for pedestrian traffic; and 
d.  Sign area on the storage container is limited to one (1) square foot. 
(4)  Retail merchandise may be stored outside without a permit, provided that: 
a.  The display consists of single items representative of stock stored and sold indoors and there are no racks or collections of multiple and similar items, such as racks of clothes, bicycles or books; 
b.  All items are placed indoors at the close of business each day; 
c.  The display is limited to twenty (20) square feet in area; and 
d.  The display does not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and the width of clear space for pedestrians is at least three (3) feet. 
(5)  Outdoor sales by charitable organizations are permitted without a permit if written documentation of charitable status and written permission of the property owner are provided to the Director prior to the outdoor sale. 
(c)  Permit required. 
(1)  The following activities are permitted on developed properties within the B-2, B-3, B-4, MC and TC Districts with a permit issued pursuant to this Subsection: 
a.  Outdoor display, sales and storage activities; 
b.  Establishment and use of an outdoor eating area; 
c.  Display and sale of seasonal merchandise; and 
d.  Use of semi-trailers or similar containers for temporary storage of seasonal merchandise. 
(2)  The Director shall establish application procedures for the issuance of a permit and regulations governing the activities subject to a permit. If the Director finds that the permit application complies with such regulations, the Director shall issue a permit for such activities for a period not to exceed one (1) year. 
(3)  A permit shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Display and sale of seasonal merchandise shall be limited to a period of twenty-six (26) weeks during any calendar year, which twenty-six (26) weeks may be utilized continuously or in intervals. 
b.  Sidewalk sales may be held by any individual retail establishment on a maximum of four (4) separate occasions per calendar year, with each separate occasion extending for a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days. A sidewalk sale shall be conducted only by the retail establishment located on the property and shall only include merchandise that is regularly offered for sale inside that retail establishment. 
c.  An unobstructed portion of sidewalk measuring not less than six (6) feet shall be continuously maintained for pedestrian access and no point of access or egress from any property or any individual unit within any property shall be blocked at any time. 
(4)  A permit authorizing the use of semi-trailers or similar containers for temporary storage of seasonal merchandise shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Use of semi-trailers or similar containers shall be limited to single retail establishments having not less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area; 
b.  The maximum number of semi-trailers or similar containers shall be four (4). 
c.  Semi-trailers or similar containers shall be located behind or on the side of the principal building in a location that minimizes visual impact on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. 
d.  Use of semi-trailers or similar containers shall be in conjunction with the sale of seasonal merchandise for a period not to exceed eighteen (18) weeks. 
e.  Semi-trailers or similar containers shall not be parked or placed on the site on a continuing basis and shall not interfere with the normal loading and unloading of merchandise. 
(5)  Christmas tree sales. Christmas tree sales are permitted with a permit issued pursuant to this Section on vacant lots in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 and MC Districts from the fourth Thursday in November through December 31 of the same year. 
(Prior code 15.42.500, 15.42.510; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 25 - Nonconforming Uses and Structures 

Sec. 16-25-10. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  A nonconforming use shall not be expanded or enlarged; provided, however, that normal maintenance of a structure containing a nonconforming use shall not be considered expansion or enlargement of the nonconforming use. 
(b)  A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use at any time. If such change occurs, the former nonconforming use may not be reestablished. 
(c)  A nonconforming use which is not actively and continuously used for a period of six (6) months shall be deemed abandoned and may not be reestablished. Intent to resume the nonconforming use shall not affect abandonment. 
(d)  If ownership of property changes as a result of a sale for a tax or special assessment owed, and a treasurer's deed is issued, any nonconforming use on such property shall be discontinued. 
(Prior code 15.66.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-25-20. - Nonconforming structures. 
(a)  The nonconforming portion of a nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged, expanded or replaced. A structure conforming as to use but nonconforming as to height, setback, or coverage may be altered providing the alterations do not increase the height, footprint or mass of the nonconforming portion of the structure or otherwise violate any provision of this Code. 
(b)  If a nonconforming structure is damaged by fire, explosion or other natural calamity, the structure may be restored to its original condition, provided that the cost of restoration does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value of the structure. If the cost of restoration does exceed fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value of the structure, the structure shall not be restored. 
(c)  The BOAA may grant variances to this Section. 
(Prior code 15.66.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-25-30. - Nonconforming fences and decorative monuments. 
(a)  This Section shall apply to nonconforming fences and decorative monuments in lieu of Section 16-25-20. 
(b)  A nonconforming fence or decorative monument shall not be enlarged or expanded. 
(c)  If an existing nonconforming fence or decorative monument is in need of structural repairs, the fence or decorative monument may be repaired so as to be restored to its original condition if the repairs do not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total length of the fence or total area of the decorative monument within any one-year period. 
(d)  If an existing nonconforming fence or decorative monument is damaged by fire, explosion or other natural calamity, the fence or decorative monument may be restored to its original condition in its original location. 
(e)  Fences located in the R-0.25 or R-0.1 District and in place on June 1, 2003, pursuant to a valid permit, whether originally issued by the City or Arapahoe County, and fences in place on June l, 2003, in any zone district without a permit but in compliance with applicable regulations at the time of installation, may remain in place even though they do not comply with this Chapter. Any such nonconforming fence may be repaired, replaced or rebuilt in its existing location at its existing height, despite the fact that the existing location or height may not comply with this Chapter. During replacement, rebuilding or repair, the style of such nonconforming fence may change, but the length and height of such nonconforming fence may not be enlarged unless the fence is brought into compliance with this Chapter. 
(f)  The BOAA may grant variances to this Section. 
(Prior code 15.66.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 26 - Subdivisions 
Division 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 16-26-10. - Intent and applicability. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this Article is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City by: 
(1)  Encouraging the orderly development of the City; 
(2)  Promoting orderly and innovative community design; 
(3)  Providing the proper arrangement of streets in relation to existing or planned streets and ensuring that streets facilitate safe, efficient and pleasant driving, walking and biking; 
(4)  Promoting parks, trails and open spaces to meet the recreational needs of City residents; 
(5)  Establishing adequate and accurate records of land subdivision; 
(6)  Providing for adequate, safe and efficient public utilities and improvements; and 
(7)  Ensuring compliance with this Chapter and the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Applicability. This Article shall apply to all property within the City, and no subdivision of property shall be made except in compliance with this Article. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 2 - Documentary Requirements 

Sec. 16-26-210. - Preliminary plat. 
    A preliminary plat drawing shall include all applicable or staff required data from the Preliminary Plat Application Checklist and this Chapter. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.40.040-15.40.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-26-220. - Final plat. 
(a)  Plat drawing. A final plat drawing shall include all applicable or staff required data from the Final Plat Application Checklist and this Chapter. 
(b)  Standards. The final plat shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The plat shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a land surveyor registered in the State. 
(2)  Lengths shall be shown to the nearest hundredth of a foot and bearings shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. 
(3)  An accurate and complete monumented land survey pursuant to Section 38-51-102(13), C.R.S., shall be made of the land to be subdivided, including a traverse of boundaries when computed from field measurements on the ground, with a minimum unadjusted ratio of closure of one (1) part in fifteen thousand (15,000). 
(4)  The perimeter survey description of the subdivision shall include at least one (1) tie to an existing section monument of record and a description of monuments. The survey shown shall not have an error greater than one (1) part in ten thousand (10,000). 
(5)  Bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary lines shall be indicated outside the boundary line, not inside, with the lot dimensions. 
(6)  The surveyor shall rehabilitate or upgrade any section or quarter section corner used to control the survey of the subdivision as required by the rules promulgated by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Professional Land Surveyors. 
(Prior code Title 14, 15.40.040-15.40.200; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-26-230. - Engineering plans and specifications. 
(a)  A final plat shall be accompanied by engineering plans and specifications in compliance with this Section and other applicable standards referenced by this Article. 
(b)  Construction plans and profiles. The plans and profiles shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State, shall be twenty-four (24) inches high by thirty-six (36) inches wide and provide the following information: 
(1)  The horizontal to vertical scales chosen to best depict the aspects of the design; 
(2)  Minimum horizontal scale of 1" = 100'; 
(3)  Minimum vertical scale of 1" = 10'; 
(4)  The typical road geometric and structural cross-section shown on each plan sheet; 
(5)  Public right-of-way lines and widths, road names, lot lines, tangent lengths and bearings, curve radii, delta angles, curve lengths, chord lengths and bearings, stationing at all beginnings of curves and ends of curves, intersections, structures, angles, curb lines, cross pans, traffic control devices, islands, striping, signs, drive cuts and curb returns and radii, in accordance with approved standards and standard engineering practice; 
(6)  Water, sewer, sanitary sewer and any other utilities, such as irrigation ditches; 
(7)  Ground lines, grade lines of curb and gutter or centerline of street elevation at point of intersection of vertical curves, intersections and other critical points, structures and all other features required to enable construction in accordance with approved standards; and 
(8)  Signature blocks for all utility and service providers, unless otherwise provided in agreement form. 
(c)  Structure details. Data regarding construction of major structures and road appurtenances, such as bridges, culverts, gutters, drives, walks and cross pans; detail shall include orientation line and grade, cross-sections, dimensions, reinforcement schedules, materials and quality specification. 
(d)  Sewage collection and water supply distribution plans, profiles and specifications. The plans, profiles and specifications shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be accompanied by written approvals from the applicable water and sanitation district. 
(e)  Final drainage plans and reports. Based upon the approved preliminary drainage plan, a final report shall be submitted in accordance with the Drainage Criteria: 
(1)  Cross-sections of each water carrier showing high water elevations for one-hundred-year run-off and adjacent features that may be affected thereby; 
(2)  Written approvals from other affected agencies, such as FEMA, Arapahoe County and ditch companies; 
(3)  Supporting calculations for run-offs, times of concentration and flow capacity, with all assumptions clearly stated with proper jurisdiction when needed or requested; and 
(4)  Erosion control plans, when required to be submitted as a result of preliminary plan review. 
(f)  Final grading plan. The final grading plan shall be twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and illustrate existing and proposed contours (maximum two-foot contour) and lot and block grading details. 
(g)  Soils reports. The soils reports shall detail special foundation requirements (shall be submitted after overlot grading is complete) and pavement design (may be submitted prior to building permit). Two (2) copies of a soil study in accordance with the requirements of the Drainage Criteria. 
(h)  Final street lighting plan. The final street lighting plan shall be prepared in conjunction with the electric utility and the City. The plan shall specify the number, kind and approximate location of all street lights and comply with the Design and Construction Standards manual. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-26-240. - Subdivision improvement agreement. 
    The subdivision improvement agreement required for approval of a final plat shall be in the form set forth in Appendix 16-J and shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney prior to execution. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-26-250. - Vacation map. 
    A vacation map shall include all applicable data from the Vacation Application Checklist. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-26-260. - Lot line adjustment. 
    A lot line adjustment shall include all applicable data from the Lot Line Adjustment Application Checklist and any other information deemed necessary by the Director. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-26-270. - Vacation of interior lot line. 
    A vacation of an interior lot line shall include all applicable data from the Vacation of Interior Lot Line Application Checklist and any other information deemed necessary by the Director. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-26-280. - Certified survey map. 
    A certified survey map shall include all applicable data from the Certified Survey Map Application Checklist and any other information deemed necessary by the Director. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 14 4, 2010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-26-290. - Administrative subdivision approval. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall be applicable only to those properties within the R-0.1 zone district upon which a duplex residential structure is fully constructed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  Any undivided parcel or lot within the R-0.1 zone district upon which is lawfully constructed a duplex residential structure may be subdivided into separate lots or parcels by the owner thereof upon submission to the Director of a subdivision plat identifying the separate lots or parcels created thereby. Such subdivision plat shall: 
(1)  Create a separate legal description for each individual lot or parcel upon which is to be located each duplex unit; 
(2)  Identify the location of each existing duplex unit upon each such newly created separate lot or parcel; 
(3)  Identify the newly created property line separating the previously existing lot or parcel into separate lots or parcels; 
(4)  Bear the stamp of a licensed land surveyor; 
(5)  Conform to any other requirements established by the director of community development and approved by resolution by the City Council; and 
(6)  Be accompanied by a jointly executed agreement between the owners regarding maintenance of a common appearance of the exterior of the entire building. 
(c)  Any subdivision plat which conforms to the requirements of subsection (b) hereof shall be approved by the Director. Any subdivision plat which does not conform to the requirements of subsection (b) hereof shall be returned to the owner for modification and correction. Upon approval by the Director, the subdivision plat shall be recorded and shall be effective as of the date of such recordation. 
(d)  Nothing contained herein shall authorize any owner of any property to construct, repair, reconstruct or maintain any duplex residential structure in any manner which is not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or any other provision of the Greenwood Village Code or any regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Prior code 15.22.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 3 - Urban Design Principles 

Sec. 16-26-310. - Applicability and design principles. 
(a)  Applicability. This Division shall apply to all property within the City and no subdivision of property shall be made except in compliance with this Article. 
(b)  Minimum standards. At a minimum, all lots shall conform to all of the following Urban Design Principles: 
(1)  The City shall be designed as a group of integrated neighborhoods with appropriate residential, commercial, and public facilities. The neighborhood, as a planning unit, is intended as an area principally for residential use. Where appropriate, space for religious, recreational, educational, and shopping facilities shall be provided and designed as an integral part of each neighborhood at a scale commensurate with the size and needs of the neighborhood; 
(2)  Minimum standards for development are contained in this Chapter, the Drainage Criteria Manual, the Building Code, and in these regulations. However, the City of Greenwood Village Comprehensive Plan expresses policies designed to achieve an optimum quality of development in the urban area. If only the minimum standards are followed, as expressed by the various resolutions and codes regulating land development, a standardization of development will occur. This will produce a monotonous urban setting. Subdivision design shall be of a quality to carry out the purpose and spirit of the policies and special reports expressed in the City of Greenwood Village Comprehensive Plan (and amendments thereto) and in these regulations; 
(3)  The layout of lots and blocks shall provide desirable settings for making use of natural contours and maintaining existing views, affording privacy for the residents and protection from adverse noise and vehicular traffic. Natural features and vegetation of the area shall be preserved if at all possible; 
(4)  Tree masses and large individual trees shall be preserved. The system sidewalks and roadways and the lot layout shall be designed to take advantage of visual qualities of the area; 
(5)  Pedestrian ways shall be separated from roadways used by vehicular traffic. Sidewalks shall be designed to provide all residential building sites with direct access to all neighborhood facilities, including schools, parks and playgrounds, churches, and shopping areas; 
(6)  Tracts subdivided into large parcels which offer the possibility of further subdivision, shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets and logical further subdivision; 
(7)  Steep land, unstable land, and areas having inadequate drainage shall be noted on the preliminary plat and unless acceptable provisions are made for eliminating or controlling problems which may endanger health, or property, shall not be platted for residential occupancy; 
(8)  When a public water system is used, fire hydrants of Denver Thread Type, spaced with maximum separation of twelve-hundred (1,200) feet between hydrants and served by six (6) inch or larger mains, shall be required; 
(9)  Telephone lines and electric lines and other like utility services shall be placed underground. The subdivider shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of this subsection, and shall make the necessary arrangements including any construction or installation charges with each of the serving utilities for the installation of such facilities and shall be subject to all other applicable County and State regulations. Transformers, switch boxes, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, ducts, standard street lighting (as required), overhead electric transmissions and distribution feeder lines, overhead communication long distance trunk and feeder lines, and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground utilities may be placed above ground. Such facilities shall be placed within easements or public streets, as herein provided, or upon private easements or rights-of-way for particular facilities. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to existing facilities within subdivisions platted prior to the adoption of these regulations when replatted or amended; 
(10)  When a tract is subdivided into building lot(s) or parcel(s) which are large enough to accommodate further subdivision, such lot(s) or parcel(s) shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and opening of future streets and appropriate re-subdivision, with provision for adequate utility easements and connectors for such re-subdivision; 
(11)  Where a street will eventually be extended beyond the plat but is temporarily dead-ended, an interim turnaround may be required; and 
(12)  Dedication of half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and provided that the City Council finds it will be practical to obtain the dedication of the other half of the street right-of-way. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Division 4 - Lot, Block, Street and Utility Design 

Sec. 16-26-410. - Lot design. 
(a)  Applicability. The width, depth, shape and orientation of lots within a subdivision shall be designed for the type of use contemplated. 
(b)  Minimum standards. At a minimum, all lots shall conform to all of the following standards: 
(1)  No lot shall be platted in areas subject to flooding except in conformance with this Code. 
(2)  Every lot shall front a public street or private street with an easement guaranteeing public access; provided that a residential lot shall not front or obtain direct access from an arterial street. When driveway access from an arterial street is necessary for several adjoining residential lots, such lots shall be served by a combined access drive which shall be platted as a permanent access easement. 
(3)  The depth and width of a lot shall be adequate to provide the necessary private service and parking facilities required by the type of use contemplated. 
(4)  Lots shall be designed to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. 
(5)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where they are needed to provide for separation of residential development from major streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting and screening easement of at least ten (10) feet shall be provided along the portion of the lots abutting such a traffic arterial or other use where screening is required. 
(6)  Where possible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street line or at right angles to the tangent to the curve of the street line. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-26-420. - Block design. 
(a)  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Topography; 
(2)  Convenient and safe access and circulation; 
(3)  Applicable zoning standards regarding lot dimensions; 
(4)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; and 
(5)  Availability, location and capacity of utility service and utility system design and capacity. 
(b)  Residential blocks shall not exceed one-quarter (1/4) mile in length unless approved by the City Council. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 16-26-430. - Street design. 
(a)  Applicability. All streets, based on their classification, shall meet the minimum street design standards in this Section and the Greenwood Village Design and Construction Standards. 
(b)  Arrangement and location. 
(1)  The arrangement of streets shall be planned with due regard to existing roads, future road plans, topography, soil conditions, drainage and erosion, convenience and aesthetics and in accordance with this Code. 
(2)  The street layout shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient traffic flow, fire protection or provision of utilities. 
(3)  Streets shall be designed to safely accommodate all potential users, including vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians and persons with disabilities. 
(4)  If adjacent property is undeveloped and a street must dead-end temporarily, a temporary cul-de-sac may be required. 
(5)  All streets shall intersect at substantially right angles with each other. 
(6)  Streets shall be located to ensure adequate access for private and emergency vehicles and to enhance the subdivision design. 
(7)  Streets shall follow contours so as to avoid steep grades or construction of retaining walls. 
(8)  Streets shall be located to avoid horizontal or vertical alignment problems, such as: 
a.  Blind spots; 
b.  Traffic signals and intersections at or near the crest of hills; 
c.  A combination of steep grades and curves with intersections of streets or intersections of streets and driveways; 
d.  Poor sight distances at intersections, including line-of-sight restrictions due to vegetation, topography or other natural features; and 
e.  Other identifiable safety hazards. 
(c)  Streets in the following zone districts shall include curb, gutter, sidewalk and pavement: R-0.75, R-0.5, R-0.25, R-0.1 and R-0.05. 
(d)  At the time of development, unless otherwise determined by the City Council approval, all new single-family residential streets shall meet the minimum street design standards in order to be dedicated for use by the public and accepted by the City for ongoing maintenance at the end of the applicable warranty period. 
(e)  New subdivisions with gravel streets are prohibited. 
(f)  New subdivisions shall provide both bicycle and pedestrian facilities which facilitate movement between residential areas and activity areas, such as public buildings, schools, shopping areas, playgrounds, open space and recreation areas. Such facilities shall be constructed concurrently with the development. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 06 1 , 2016) 
Sec. 16-26-440. - Street classification. 
    All streets according to their classification shall comply with the Greenwood Village Design and Construction Standards manual. 
(Prior code Title 14; Ord. 321, 2011) 
APPENDIX 16 
APPENDIX 16-A - AFFIDAVIT OF POSTING 
STATE OF COLORADO  ) 
) ss. 
COUNTY OF ARAPAHOE  ) 
The undersigned, being first duly sworn, deposes and says: 
1. That attached hereto is a photograph of a sign which was posted on the following described property which is the subject of the application: 
Address:_________________________________________ 
Legal Description: Lot _____ Block ________ 
Subdivision: _____________________ 
2. That said sign was posted at the following location(s) on the subject property: _______________ ___________________________________________. 
3. That said sign was posted and was legible from the adjacent public street(s) for a period of at least fifteen (15) consecutive days prior to the date of the hearing specified on said sign. 
4. That the undersigned agrees to remove said sign no more than three (3) days following the hearing specified on said sign. 
_______________________________________ 
Applicant's Name (Printed) 
_______________________________________ 
Applicant's Signature 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this _______ day of ______________________, 20_____, by _____________________________________________. 
_______________________________________ 
Notary Public 
(SEAL) 
My commission expires: ____________________. 
APPENDIX 16-B - AFFIDAVIT OF MAILING 
STATE OF COLORADO  ) 
) ss. 
COUNTY OF ARAPAHOE  ) 
The undersigned, being first duly sworn, deposes and says: 
1. That the undersigned has filed a land development application relating to the following property: 
Address:_________________________________________ 
Legal Description: Lot _____ Block ________ 
Subdivision: _____________________ 
2. That a public hearing on the application has been scheduled before the __________________ on ___________________, 20____. 
3. That attached hereto is a correct list of the names and addresses of all lot owners within one thousand (1,000) feet of such property, as required by the Greenwood Village Municipal Code. 
4. That, at least fifteen (15) consecutive days prior to the date of the public hearing, I mailed to said lot owners by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the application. 
5. That attached hereto are receipts for the certified mailing. 
_______________________________________ 
Applicant's Name (Printed) 
_______________________________________ 
Applicant's Signature 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this _______ day of ______________________, 20_____, by _____________________________________________. 
_______________________________________ 
Notary Public 
(SEAL) 
My commission expires: ____________________. 
APPENDIX 16-C - NOTICE BY MAIL - CITY COUNCIL HEARING 
Date: ________________ 
_________________________________________ 
Name of Property Owner 
_________________________________________ 
Mailing Address 
_________________________________________ 
City, State, Zip Code 
_________________________________________ 
Physical Address 
Please be informed than on _________________________________ at 7:00 p.m., a PUBLIC HEARING will be held before the GREENWOOD VILLAGE CITY COUNCIL at Greenwood Village City Hall, 6060 South Quebec Street, Greenwood Village, CO 80111. 
Approval is being requested for the following application(s): 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Please find a copy of the application and site plan enclosed. You may contact the Greenwood Village case manager ___________________________ at (303) 486- ______ or the applicant if you have any questions. Please feel free to appear at the public hearing referenced above or send written comments to the Greenwood Village case manager prior to the hearing. 
_________________________________________ 
Name of Applicant 
_________________________________________ 
Mailing Address of Applicant 
_________________________________________ 
City, State, Zip Code 
_________________________________________ 
Telephone 
APPENDIX 16-D - NOTICE BY MAIL - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 
Date: ________________ 
_________________________________________ 
Name of Property Owner 
_________________________________________ 
Mailing Address 
_________________________________________ 
City, State, Zip Code 
_________________________________________ 
Physical Address 
Please be informed than on _________________________________ at 7:00 p.m., a PUBLIC HEARING will be held before the GREENWOOD VILLAGE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION at Greenwood Village City Hall, 6060 South Quebec Street, Greenwood Village, CO 80111. 
Approval is being requested for the following application(s): 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Please find a copy of the application and site plan enclosed. You may contact the Greenwood Village case manager ___________________________ at (303) 486- ______ or the applicant if you have any questions. Please feel free to appear at the public hearing referenced above or send written comments to the Greenwood Village case manager prior to the hearing. 
_________________________________________ 
Name of Applicant 
_________________________________________ 
Mailing Address of Applicant 
_________________________________________ 
City, State, Zip Code 
_________________________________________ 
Telephone 
APPENDIX 16-E - NOTICE BY MAIL - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS 
Date: ________________ 
_________________________________________ 
Name of Property Owner 
_________________________________________ 
Mailing Address 
_________________________________________ 
City, State, Zip Code 
_________________________________________ 
Physical Address 
Please be informed than on _________________________________ at 6:30 p.m., a PUBLIC HEARING will be held before the GREENWOOD VILLAGE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS at Greenwood Village City Hall, 6060 South Quebec Street, Greenwood Village, CO 80111. 
Approval is being requested for the following application(s): 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Please find a copy of the application and site plan enclosed. You may contact the Greenwood Village case manager ___________________________ at (303) 486- ______ or the applicant if you have any questions. Please feel free to appear at the public hearing referenced above or send written comments to the Greenwood Village case manager prior to the hearing. 
_________________________________________ 
Name of Applicant 
_________________________________________ 
Mailing Address of Applicant 
_________________________________________ 
City, State, Zip Code 
_________________________________________ 
Telephone 
APPENDIX 16-F - NOTICE BY MAIL - NEIGHBORHOOD INPUT MEETING 
Date: ________________ 
_________________________________________ 
Name of Applicant 
_________________________________________ 
Mailing Address 
_________________________________________ 
City, State, Zip Code 
_________________________________________ 
Physical Address of Proposal 
A neighborhood input meeting is being held on _________________________________ at ____:00 p.m., in the Community Room at Greenwood Village City Hall, 6060 South Quebec Street, Greenwood Village. We are conducting this meeting, prior to submitting our application to the City, in order to provide you with an opportunity to review our proposed project. We encourage your attendance at this meeting so that your opinion may be heard before we make formal application. 
We are proposing the following: 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________________________ 
A site location map and plan of the proposal are located on the reverse side of this letter. 
Should you have any questions prior to the meeting you may contact _______________________ at _________________. 
_______________________________________ 
Name of Applicant 
APPENDIX 16-G - PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS 

Vehicular Overhang : The space dimensions indicated above may be modified with respect to vehicular overhang, except that compact vehicle spaces may not be reduced in depth to a dimension that is less than the required depth indicated above. 
A - Angle of Parking 
B - Space Width 
C - Space Length 
D - Space Depth 
E - Curb Length 
F - Two-Way Drive Aisle Width 
G - One-Way Drive Aisle Width 
* When an overhand is allowed to reduce stall depth, aisle width must be increased to 22 feet. 
APPENDIX 16-H - SUBDIVISION PLAT STANDARD NOTES 
Streets and Roadways 
1. The roadways shown on this plat will not be maintained by the City of Greenwood Village until and unless the City of Greenwood Village accepts such streets. Until such time, the owners, developers and/or subdividers, their successors and assigns in interest shall be responsible for street maintenance. 
2. Emergency access for police, fire and other emergency vehicles is hereby granted over and across all streets and roadways shown on this plat, both public and private. 
3. The property owner is responsible for maintenance and upkeep of all private roadways, parking areas and easements. 
4. The private roadways shown on this plat are not in conformance with the City of Greenwood Village design and construction standards for public streets and will not be maintained by the City. 
Drainage Facilities 
1. The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of all drainage facilities on the property, including maintaining the specified storm water detention/retention volumes, maintaining outlet structures, flow restriction devices and facilities needed to convey flow to said basins. It is agreed that the City of Greenwood Village shall have the right to enter the property to inspect said facilities at any time. If these facilities are not properly maintained, the City may provide necessary maintenance and assess all associated costs to the property owner. 
2. The City of Greenwood Village does not assume liability for drainage facilities designed and certified by others. 
3. Perpetual easements are granted to the City for drainage purposes in the locations shown hereon and shall be continually maintained by the owner(s) of each lot. In no event shall structures be allowed in the easements, pursuant to the City of Greenwood Village's stormwater and drainage regulations and standards and all terms and conditions of record, as those regulations, standards terms and conditions exist at the time of the City of Greenwood Village approval of this document and as amended from time to time. 
Public Easements 
All public easements shown on this plat burden and run with the land described for the benefit of the public. 
Flood Zones 
The Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) for the City of Greenwood Village, Community Panel Number _____________ published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and dated ______________, indicate that the property shown on this plat lies in an area determined to be outside of the 500-year floodplain. 
APPENDIX 16-I - SUBDIVISION PLAT STANDARD CERTIFICATES 
Certificate of Dedication and Ownership 
Know all men by these presents that __________________________________, being the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder of certain lands in Greenwood Village, Colorado, described as follows: _______________________________________________________; containing __________ acres more or less, has by these presents laid out, platted and subdivided the same into lots and blocks, as shown on this plat, under the name and style of _______________________________ and do hereby dedicate to the public the streets, easements and open space for the purposes shown herein. 
Executed this _____ day of _______________, 20____. 
_____________________________________ _____________________________________ 
Owner Mortgagee or lienholder 
STATE OF COLORADO  ) 
) ss. 
  COUNTY OF ARAPAHOE  ) 
The foregoing certificate of dedication and ownership was acknowledged before this _________ day of ______________, 20_____, by _________________________________. 
_______________________________________ 
Notary Public 
My commission expires: ____________________. 
Certificate of Owner's Attorney 
I, _________________________________ an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Colorado, certify that I have examined the final plat and, in my opinion, said plat is in compliance with the applicable land use regulations of the City of Greenwood Village. 
____________________________________________ 
Owner's Attorney 
Certificate of City Attorney 
I, __________________________________ City Attorney of Greenwood Village, Colorado, hereby certify that I have examined the within plat and, in my opinion, said plat complies with the applicable land use regulations of the City of Greenwood Village. 
____________________________________________ 
City Attorney 
Surveyor's Certificate 
I, _____________________________, a Registered Professional Land Surveyor in the State of Colorado, hereby certify that the survey represented by this plat was made under my supervision and the monuments shown thereon actually exist and this plat accurately represents said survey. 
______________ ______________________________ _________________ 
Date    Surveyor        Seal 
City Council Certificate 
Approved by the City Council of the City of Greenwood Village. 
Witness my hand and the corporate seal of the City of Greenwood Village this ______ day of ____________________, 20_____. 
___________________________ 
Attest: Mayor 
________________________________ 
City Clerk 
Clerk and Recorder's Certificate 
This plat was filed for record in the office of the Clerk and Recorder of Arapahoe County at _________________ ____ .m. on the _______ day of _____________________, 20____, in Book _____________, Page ___________, Map _________________, Reception _______________. 
County Clerk and Recorder 
By _______________________________________ 
APPENDIX 16-J - SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT 
    THIS SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT ("Agreement") is made this _____ day of _______________, 20_____, by and between the City of Greenwood Village, Colorado, a Colorado home rule municipality, (the "City") and ________________ ("Developer"), a _________________. 
    WHEREAS, Developer is the owner of certain real property located in the City, more particularly described in Exhibit A attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference (the "Property"); 
    WHEREAS, on _______________, 20_____, the City Council, after holding all necessary public hearings and having received a recommendation of approval from the Planning Commission, approved the final plat for the Property, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit B and incorporated herein; and 
    WHEREAS, the approvals cited above are contingent upon the express condition that all duties created by this Agreement are faithfully performed by Developer. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, for and in consideration of the mutual promises and covenants contained herein, the sufficiency of which is mutually acknowledged, the parties hereto agree as follows: 
1.  Purpose . The purpose of this Agreement is to set forth the terms, conditions and fees to be paid by Developer upon subdivision of the Property. All conditions in this Agreement are in addition to any requirements of the Greenwood Village Municipal Code, state statutes and other City ordinances, and are not intended to supersede any requirements contained therein. 
2.  Fees . The following fees shall be paid to the City by Developer. 
a.  The actual cost to the City for plan review, engineering review, hydrological and surveying review prior to and during the development process, and for construction observation, inspection and materials testing during the construction process for public improvements, and for construction observation, inspection and materials testing and electronic deliverable review during the warranty period for public improvements, and for legal services rendered in connection with the subdivision of the Property (the "Actual Costs"), plus related administrative fees not to exceed fifteen percent (15%). 
b.  The cost of making corrections or additions to the master copy of the official City map and for the fee for recording the final plat and accompanying documents with the Arapahoe County Clerk and Recorder. 
3.  Specific Conditions . Developer hereby agrees that: ______________________________. 
4.  Title Policy . Developer shall provide a title commitment for the Property. The title commitment shall show that all property to be dedicated to the City is or shall be subsequent to the execution and recording of the plat, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances (other than real estate taxes which are not yet due and payable) which would make the dedications unacceptable, as the City determines in its sole discretion. The title policy evidenced by the title commitment shall be provided thirty (30) days after the recording of the final plat. 
5.  Construction . 
a.  All drainage structures, paved streets, including curb, gutter and slope easements, and necessary appurtenances as shown on the subdivision plat and the associated construction documents (the "Public Improvements"), as approved by the City, shall be installed and completed at the expense of Developer and dedicated or conveyed to the City. The improvements required by this Agreement and shown on the final subdivision plat submittal, as well as associated construction documents approved by the City, and the estimated costs of these improvements are set forth on Exhibit C , attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference (the "Estimated Costs"). The Public Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the subdivision plat and associated construction documents drawn according to regulations and construction standards for such improvements. 
b.  The City may make reasonable engineering observations at Developer's expense. Observation, acquiescence in or approval by any engineering inspector of the construction of physical facilities at any particular time shall not constitute the approval by the City of any portion of such Public Improvements. 
c.  Developer shall provide all necessary engineering designs, surveys, field surveys and incidental services related to the construction of the Public Improvements at its sole cost and expense, including reproducible "as-built" drawings certified accurate by a professional engineer registered in the State of Colorado. 
6.  Completion . The obligations of Developer in Section 5 hereof shall be performed on or before ___________________, and proper application for acceptance of the Public Improvements shall be made on or before such date. Upon completion of construction of the Public Improvements, the City shall inspect the Public Improvements and certify with specificity their conformity or lack thereof to the City's specifications. Developer shall make all corrections necessary to bring the Public Improvements into conformity with the City's specifications. 
7.  Warranty . Developer shall warrant any and all Public Improvements which are conveyed to the City for a period of two (2) years from the date the City grants probationary acceptance of the Public Improvements. The warranty period shall extend to the date final acceptance is granted in writing by the City. Developer shall be responsible for scheduling the necessary inspections for probationary and final acceptance. Specifically, but not by way of limitation, Developer shall warrant that: 
a.  The title conveyed is marketable and its transfer rightful; 
b.  All Public Improvements dedicated or conveyed are free from any security interest or other lien or encumbrance; and 
c  All Public Improvements dedicated or conveyed are free of defects in materials or workmanship for a period of two (2) years, as stated above. 
8.  Ownership . All Public Improvements accepted by the City shall be dedicated to the City. Upon completion of construction and conformity with the subdivision plat and associated construction plans, and any properly approved changes, Developer shall convey to the City all installed physical facilities. 
9.  Performance Guarantee . 
a.  To secure the construction and installation of the Public Improvements, Developer shall, prior to recording the final plat in the real estate records of Arapahoe County, which recording shall occur no later than ninety (90) days after the execution of this Agreement, furnish the City, at Developer's expense, with an irrevocable letter of credit in which the City is designated as beneficiary in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the Estimated Costs. 
b.  Approval of the final plat shall be contingent upon Developer's provision of the Performance Guarantee within ninety (90) days of the execution of this Agreement. Failure of Developer to provide the Performance Guarantee shall negate the City's approval of the final plat. 
c.  The Performance Guarantee shall be substantially in the form and content set forth in Exhibit D , attached hereto and incorporated herein, and shall be subject to approval of the City Attorney. 
d.  Developer shall not start the construction of any public or private improvement on the Property, including but not limited to staking, earth work, overlot grading or the erection of any structure, temporary or otherwise, until the City has received and approved the Performance Guarantee. 
e.  The purpose of the Estimated Costs is solely to determine the amount of security. No representations are made as to the accuracy of these estimates, and Developer agrees to pay the Actual Costs of all such Public Improvements, regardless of the Estimated Costs. 
f.  The Estimated Costs may increase in the future. Accordingly, the City reserves the right to review and adjust the Estimated Costs on an annual basis. Adjustments shall be made according to changes in the Construction Costs Index as published by the Engineering News Record. If the City adjusts the Estimated Costs, the City shall give written notice to Developer. Developer shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of said written notice, provide the City with a new or amended Performance Guarantee in the amount of the adjusted Estimated Costs. 
If Developer fails to provide a new or amended Performance Guarantee, the City may exercise the remedies provided for in Section 12 hereof; provided, however, that, prior to increasing the amount of the Performance Guarantee, the City shall give credit to Developer for all Public Improvements which have actually been completed, so that the amount of the Performance Guarantee relates to the cost of required Public Improvements not yet constructed. 
g.  If the Public Improvements are not constructed or completed within the period of time specified by Section 6 hereof, the City may draw on the Performance Guarantee of credit to complete the Public Improvements. If the Performance Guarantee is to expire within fourteen (14) calendar days and Developer has not yet provided a satisfactory replacement, the City may draw on the Performance Guarantee and either hold such funds as security for performance of this Agreement or spend such funds to finish the Public Improvements or correct problems with the Public Improvements as the City deems appropriate. 
h.  Upon completion of construction and compliance with all conditions and requirements within the required time and the written approval of the City, the Performance Guarantee may be reduced to the amount of twenty percent (20%) of the total actual cost of construction and installation of the Public Improvements. The reduced Performance Guarantee shall be held by the City during the two-year warranty period. 
10.  Nuisance Conditions . Developer shall prevent the existence of any nuisances by way of its construction activities, as nuisances are defined by the Greenwood Village Municipal Code. If the City determines that a nuisance exists, Developer shall be subject to the provisions of the Greenwood Village Municipal Code regarding the abatement of nuisances and the cost assessed therefor. If the nuisance is not abated or an abatement plan is not submitted to the satisfaction of the City, the City may, upon thirty (30) days' notice under this Agreement, draw upon the Performance Guarantee to pay the cost of abating the nuisance, including any expenses and penalties incurred under the Greenwood Village Municipal Code. The City may exercise this right in addition to, or in lieu of, the withholding of permits or certificates of occupancy. The decision to draw on the Performance Guarantee shall be within the sole discretion of the City. 
11.  Indemnification . 
a.  Developer hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, employees, agents or servants from any and all suits, actions and claims of every nature and description caused by, arising from or on account of any act or omission of Developer, or of any other person or entity for whose act or omission Developer is liable, with respect to construction of the Public Improvements; and Developer shall pay any and all judgments rendered against the City as the result of any suit, action or claim, together with all reasonable expenses and attorney fees incurred by the City in defending any such suit, action or claim. 
b.  Developer shall pay all property taxes on the Property dedicated to the City, and shall indemnify and hold harmless the City for any property tax liability. 
12.  Breach . 
a.  If Developer breaches this Agreement, the City may take such action as permitted or authorized by law, this Agreement or the ordinances of the City, as the City deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The remedies include, but are not limited to: 
i.  The refusal to issue any building permit or certificate of occupancy; 
ii.  The revocation of any building permit previously issued under which construction directly related to such building permit has not commenced, except a building permit previously issued to a third party; 
iii.  A demand that the security given for the completion of the Public Improvements be paid or honored; or 
iv.  Any other remedy available at law or in equity. 
b.  Unless necessary to protect the immediate health, safety and welfare of the City, or to protect the interest of the City with regard to security given for the completion of the public improvements, the City shall provide Developer thirty (30) days' written notice of its intent to take any action under this Section, during which Developer may cure the breach and prevent further action by the City. 
c.  The rights and remedies of the City under this Agreement are in addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law. The expiration of this Agreement shall in no way limit the City's legal or equitable remedies, or the period in which such remedies may be asserted, for work negligently or defectively performed. 
d.  Should this Agreement become the subject of litigation to resolve a claim of breach by Developer and a court of competent jurisdiction determines that Developer was in breach, Developer shall pay the attorney fees, expenses and court costs of the City. 
13.  Waiver . In executing this Agreement, Developer waives all objections it may have concerning defects, if any, in the formalities whereby it is executed, or concerning the power of the City to impose conditions on Developer as set forth herein, and concerning the procedure, substance and form of the ordinances or resolutions adopting this Agreement. Developer expressly agrees that the City cannot be legally bound by the representations of any of its officers or agents or their designees, except in accordance with the Greenwood Village Municipal Code and the laws of the State of Colorado. 
14.  Modification . This Agreement shall not be modified, except by subsequent written agreement of the parties hereto. 
15.  Integration . This Agreement and any attached exhibits constitute the entire Agreement between Developer and the City, superseding all prior oral or written communications. 
16.  Binding Effect . This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and their respective heirs, successors and assigns. 
17.  Severability . If any provision of this Agreement is determined to be void by any court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect any other provision hereof, and all of the other provisions shall remain in full force and effect. It is the intention of the parties hereto that, if any provision of this Agreement is capable of two (2) constructions, one (1) of which would render the provision void and the other which would render the provision valid, then the provision shall have the meaning which renders it valid. 
18.  Governing Law and Venue . This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the State of Colorado, and any legal action concerning the provisions hereof shall be brought in Arapahoe County, Colorado. 
19.  Force Majeure . When Developer is required to complete the construction, repair or replacement of Public Improvements by an agreed deadline, Developer shall be entitled to an extension of time equal to a delay in completing the foregoing due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control and without the fault or negligence of Developer, including but not limited to acts of God, weather, fires and strikes. 
20.  Assignment . There shall be no transfer or assignment of any of the rights or obligations of Developer under this Agreement without the prior written approval of the City. 
21.  Recordation . This Agreement shall be recorded in the real estate records of Arapahoe County and shall be a covenant running with the Property. 
22.  Title and Authority . Developer expressly warrants and represents to the City that it is the record owner of the property constituting the Property and further represents and warrants, together with the undersigned individuals, that the undersigned individuals have full power and authority to enter into this Agreement. Developer and the undersigned individuals understand that the City is relying on such representations and warranties in entering into this Agreement. 
23.  Third Parties . There are no intended third-party beneficiaries to this Agreement. 
    WHEREFORE, the parties hereto have executed this Agreement on the day and year first above written. 
CITY OF GREENWOOD VILLAGE    
_______________________________________ 
Mayor                 
ATTEST: 
_____________________________________ 
City Clerk 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
_____________________________________ 
City Attorney 
DEVELOPER               
By: ____________________________________ 
Name: _________________________________ 
Title: __________________________________ 
STATE OF COLORADO  ) 
) ss. 
COUNTY OF ARAPAHOE  ) 
    The foregoing instrument was subscribed, sworn to, and acknowledged before me this ______ day of _____________, 20___, by _________________________ as the _______________________ of ______________________________________________. 
_______________________________________ 
Notary Public 
(SEAL) 
My commission expires: ____________________. 
CHAPTER 18 - Building Regulations 
ARTICLE 1 - General Provisions 

Sec. 18-1-10. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the words Building Official , Administrative Authority , department having jurisdiction or similar words are used in this Chapter, they shall be construed to mean the Chief Building Official or his or her authorized representative. 
(b)  For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Unfinished means not brought to an end or desired state of completion, subject to other processes. 
(Prior code 13.04.010; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 18-1-20. - Stop orders. 
    Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, the Chief Building Official or his or her authorized representative may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in doing or causing such work to be done. Any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Chief Building Official or his or her authorized representative to proceed with the work. It is unlawful to do or perform any work in violation of such stop work order. 
(Prior code 13.04.020; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 18-1-30. - Violation; penalty. 
    It is unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter. Any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or of any of the provisions of the codes adopted pursuant to this Chapter shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-4-20. 
(Prior code 13.04.030; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 18-1-40. - Construction standards. 
    All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and other structures, any work done in connection therewith and any other work done as regulated by this Chapter shall be performed in a good workmanlike manner according to accepted standards and practices in the trade and the standards set forth in this Code. 
(Prior code 13.04.040; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
Sec. 18-1-50. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    The Chief Building Official or the Department of Public Works shall have the right to enter any building or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Prior code 13.04.050; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 3 1, 2014) 
Sec. 18-1-60. - Sanitation measures at construction sites. 
(a)  Prior to the commencement of construction of any residential or commercial building on any building site within the City, the owner of the site or the contractor shall place an enclosed portable toilet on the site at a location to be determined by the Chief Building Official or the Department of Public Works. The portable toilet shall be regularly serviced so as to preclude offensive odors or the overflow of waste. The toilet shall remain on the site from the commencement of overlot grading until indoor toilet facilities on the site are available for use. The toilet shall be removed prior to a request for a certificate of occupancy. The Chief Building Official or the Department of Public Works may require that more than one (1) portable toilet be placed on a building site if he or she determines that proper sanitation requires more than one (1) toilet. 
(b)  Prior to the commencement of construction of any residential or commercial building on any building site within the City, the owner of the property or the contractor shall place on the site a trash-retaining receptacle or temporary enclosure of size sufficient to cause retention of trash, paper, lunch bags, shingles, tar paper and other items which could be blown about by the wind. By 6:00 p.m. each day, the owner of the site or the contractor shall deposit or cause to be deposited in the receptacle all trash which could be blown about by the wind. The trash receptacle or temporary fence shall be regularly serviced so as to preclude the contents from becoming airborne. The trash receptacle or fence shall be located at the area of the construction site. It shall be removed prior to a request for a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  A failure to provide the portable toilet or trash enclosure required by Subsections (a) and (b) hereof shall be the basis for the immediate issuance of a stop work order. 
(Prior code 13.04.060; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 3 1, 2014) 
Sec. 18-1-70. - Policy-making powers. 
    The Chief Building Official and/or the Department of Public Works may promulgate policies, as necessary, for their respective departments. Copies of the policies shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(Prior code 13.04.070; Ord. 32 1, 2011; Ord. 3 1, 2014) 
Sec. 18-1-80. - Authority of Chief Building Official. 
(a)  The Chief Building Official and his or her authorized representatives shall be authorized to issue citations or summonses and complaints to enforce any provision of any code adopted by this Chapter. 
(b)  It shall not be a requirement that the Chief Building Official be a certified peace officer, pursuant to Section 24-31-301, et seq. , C.R.S. 
(Prior code 13.04.080; Ord. 32 1, 2011) 
ARTICLE 2 - Building Code 

Sec. 18-2-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the building code of the City, by reference thereto, the International Building Code , 2012 edition ("IBC"), published by the International Code Council, Inc., 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6 th floor, Washington, DC 20001, to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures and building services equipment of all buildings and structures in the City, and with respect to the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except and explicitly for the amendments, deletions and exclusions in Section 18-2-30 below. 
(Ord. 23 1, 2013) 
Sec. 18-2-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Building Code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 23 1, 2013) 
Sec. 18-2-30. - Amendments. 
    The 2012 IBC is hereby modified by the following additions, amendments and deletions: 
(1)  Additions. The following new sections and provisions are added to the IBC: 
    "All elevator and conveying systems shall be regulated by the current Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME); ASME A17.1-2013, Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators; ASME A17.3-2005 and Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts; ASME A18.1-2011, as adopted by the State of Colorado. 
    "The Chief Building Official shall have the authority to approve all building, plumbing, mechanical, and other materials and applications, as necessary, in order to remain current with approved applications and installation methods as approved by nationally recognized testing and approval agencies. 
    "Section 110, Inspections. 
    "Section 110.3.1, Foundation Location Survey. When required by the Planning Manager, a foundation location and foundation height survey must be submitted to and approved by the Planning Division prior to any construction above grade; additionally, the survey must be approved prior to any above grade inspections by the Building Safety Division. 
    "Section 110.3.4, Roof Ridge Height Survey. When required by the Planning Manager, a roof ridge height survey must be submitted to and approved by the Planning Division prior to any above grade rough inspections by the Building Safety Division. 
    "Section 111.3, Temporary Occupancy. 
    "Section 111.3.1, Financial Surety for Temporary Occupancy. As a condition of the issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy, the Chief Building Official may require cash in the amount as may be deemed necessary to assure the completion or correction of work in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and an administrative fee. In lieu of cash, any instrument of credit approved by the Chief Building Official may be accepted. 
    In addition to the financial surety, the owner shall provide an access easement that would grant to the City and its agents the right to enter upon the property to complete work covered by the agreement. An agreed upon time frame for the completion of the work shall be stipulated as a condition of the issuance of the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
    "Section 202, Certificate of Completion. A certificate stating that the materials and products meet specified standards or that work was done in compliance with this code and approved construction documents. Issuance of a Certificate of Completion shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Use of the space or equipment is prohibited until the Certificate of Completion is issued by the Building Official." 
(2)  Amendments. The following sections of the 2012 IBC are hereby amended to read as follows: 
    "Section 111, Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made, until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy or Certificate of Completion therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy or Certificate of Completion shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
    "Chapter 27, Electrical. This chapter governs the electrical components, equipment and systems used in buildings and structures covered by this code. Electrical components, equipment and systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of NFPA 70 and the National Electric Code adopted by the State of Colorado Electric Board. All regulation and inspection of electrical components, equipment and electrical systems shall remain with the Colorado State Electrical Board." 
(3)  Deletions. The following items in the 2012 IBC are hereby deleted as follows: 
a.  Any and all references to the International Existing Building Code. 
b.  Section 3401.4, Alternative compliance. 
c.  Any and all references to the International Property Maintenance Code. 
d.  Section 105, Permits. Subsection 105.2, Work exempt from permit. Item #2, Fences not over 7 feet high. 
(Ord. 23 1, 2013; Ord. 03, 1, 2015 ) 
ARTICLE 3 - Residential Code 

Sec. 18-3-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the residential code of the City, by reference thereto, the International Residential Code , 2012 edition ("IRC"), together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6 th floor, Washington, DC 20001, to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code regulates the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures and building services equipment of all buildings and structures in the City, and with respect to the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except and explicitly for the following amendments, deletions and exclusions in Section 18-3-30 below. 
(Ord. 23 2, 2013) 
Sec. 18-3-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Residential Code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 23 2, 2013) 
Sec. 18-3-30. - Amendments. 
    The 2012 IRC is hereby modified by the following additions, amendments and deletions: 
(1)  Additions. The following new sections and provisions are added to the IRC: 
    "The Chief Building Official shall have the authority to approve all building, plumbing, mechanical, and other materials and applications, as necessary, in order to remain current with approved applications and installation methods as approved by nationally recognized testing and approval agencies. 
    "R109.1.1, Footing and foundation inspection. When required by the Planning Manager, a foundation location and foundation height survey must be submitted to and approved by the Planning Division prior to any construction above grade; additionally, the survey must be approved prior to any above grade inspections by the Building Safety Division. 
    "Section R109.1.1.2, Frame inspection. When required by the Planning Manager, a roof ridge height survey must be submitted to and approved by the Planning Division prior to any above grade rough inspections by the Building Safety Division. 
    "Section R110.4.1, Financial surety for temporary occupancy. As a condition of the issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy, the Chief Building Official may require cash in the amount as may be deemed necessary to assure the completion or correction of work in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and an administrative fee. In lieu of cash, any instrument of credit approved by the Chief Building Official may be accepted. 
    "In addition to the financial surety, the owner shall provide an access easement that would grant to the City and its agents the right to enter upon the property to complete work covered by the agreement. An agreed upon time frame for the completion of the work shall be stipulated as a condition of the issuance of the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
    "Section R202. Certificate of completion. A certificate stating that the materials and products meet specified standards or that work was done in compliance with this code and approved construction documents. Issuance of a Certificate of Completion shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
    "R2302 Solar Energy Systems, Section 2302.5 International Fire Code Chapter 6, section 605.11 is adopted in its entirety. 
    "Section R324.1 Sound transmission. All regulation of sound transmission is referenced in the International Building Code, Chapter 12, and Section 1207." 
"Table R301.2(1)
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria Table 
Ground snow load Wind design speed Wind Design Frost line depth Termite Winter design temp Ice barrier underlayment required Flood hazard Air freezing index Mean annual temp Topographic effect Seismic design category Weather- ing 30 psf 100 
mph No 'B' Severe 36" Slight 1 Yes (a) 1980 
(b) 08/16/1995 <1000 50"  
(2)  Amendments. The following sections of the 2012 IRC are amended to read as follows: 
    "R105 Permits, R105.2, Work exempt from permit. 
    "Item #1: One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet. 
    "R110, Certificate of occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made, until the building official has issued a Certificate of Occupancy or a Certificate of Completion therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
    "R303.5.1, Intake openings. Mechanical and gravity outdoor air intake openings shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any hazardous or noxious contaminant, such as vents, chimneys, plumbing vents, streets, alleys, parking lots and loading docks, except as otherwise specified in this code. Where a source of contaminant is located within 10 feet of an intake opening, such openings shall be located a minimum of 2 feet below the contaminant source. 
    "R313.1, Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. 
    "EXCEPTIONS: 
    "1. An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required if the fire flow in the hydrant system and the required distance to the hydrant meets the requirement of the IFC. 
    "2. An automatic sprinkler system is not required in townhouses that are less than 7700 square feet in area. 
    "3. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already provided with an automatic residential sprinkler system. 
    "M1901, Ranges and ovens; M1901.3, Prohibited locations. Cooking appliances designed, tested, listed and labeled for use in commercial occupancies may be installed within dwelling units. All requirements in the IBC, IMC, IFGC and the IFC for commercial cooking equipment shall be met. 
    "P2503.5.1, Rough plumbing. DWV (Drain Waste and Vent) systems, including plastic piping, shall be tested on completion of the rough piping installation by water. An air test is permitted if approved by the building official. With either test there shall be no evidence of leakage. 
    "P2905.4, Water service pipe. Only copper pipe approved by the Denver Water District Service Agreement shall be approved for use in water service lines. 
    "3103.5, Location of vent terminal. An open vent terminal from a drainage system shall not be located less than 4 feet directly beneath any door, operable window or other air intake opening of the building or of an adjacent building, nor shall any such vent terminal be within 10 feet horizontally of such an opening unless it is not less than 2 feet above the top of such opening." 
(3)  Deletions. The following items shall be deleted from the 2012 edition of the IRC: 
a.  R105.2, Work exempt from permit, Items 2 and 10. 
b.  Table P2905.4, Water service pipe. 
c.  Section R313, Automatic fire sprinkler systems. 
d.  Section R313.2, One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems, AP101 Fire sprinklers. 
(Ord. 23 2, 2013; Ord. 08, 1, 2015 ) 
ARTICLE 4 - Plumbing Code 

Sec. 18-4-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the plumbing code of the City, by reference thereto, the International Plumbing Code , 2012 edition ("IPC"), and all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6 th floor, Washington, DC 20001, to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures and building services equipment of all buildings and structures in the City, and with respect to the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except and explicitly for the following amendments, deletions and exclusions in Section 18-4-30 below. 
(Ord. 23 3, 2013) 
Sec. 18-4-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Plumbing Code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 23 3, 2013) 
Sec. 18-4-30. - Amendments. 
    The 2012 IPC is hereby modified by the following additions, amendments and deletions: 
(1)  Additions. The following provision shall be added to the 2012 IPC: 
    "The Chief Building Official shall have the authority to approve all building, plumbing, mechanical and other materials and applications, as necessary, in order to remain current with approved applications and installation methods as approved by nationally recognized testing and approval agencies." 
(2)  Amendments. The following sections of the IPC are amended to read as follows: 
    "605, Materials, joints and connections. Only copper pipe approved by the Denver Water District shall be approved for use in water service lines. 
    "903.5, Location of vent terminal. An open vent terminal from a drainage system shall not be located less than 4 feet directly beneath any door, operable window, or other air intake opening of the building or of an adjacent building, nor shall any such vent terminal be within 10 feet horizontally of such an opening unless it is not less than 2 feet above the top of such opening." 
(3)  Deletions. The following items shall be deleted from the IPC: 
a.  Table 605.3 Water service pipe. 
(Ord. 23 3, 2013) 
ARTICLE 5 - Mechanical Code 

Sec. 18-5-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the mechanical code for the City, by reference thereto, the International Mechanical Code , 2012 edition ("IMC"), together with all appendices and tables thereto, published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6 th floor, Washington, DC 20001, to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures and building services equipment of all buildings and structures in the City, and with respect to the issuance of permits and collections of fees therefor, except and explicitly for the amendments, deletions and exclusions in Section 18-5-30 below. 
(Ord. 23 4, 2013) 
Sec. 18-5-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Mechanical Code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 23 4, 2013) 
Sec. 18-5-30. - Amendments. 
    The 2012 IMC is hereby modified by the following additions, amendments and deletions: 
(1)  Additions. The following provision shall be added to the 2012 IMC: 
    "The Chief Building Official shall have the authority to approve all building, plumbing, mechanical, and other materials and applications, as necessary, in order to remain current with approved applications and installation methods as approved by nationally recognized testing and approval agencies." 
(2)  Amendments. None. 
(3)  Deletions. None. 
(Ord. 23 4, 2013) 
ARTICLE 6 - Fuel Gas Code 

Sec. 18-6-10. - Adoption. 
    The International Fuel Gas Code , 2012 edition ("IFGC"), published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6 th floor, Washington, DC 20001, is hereby adopted by reference to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures and building services equipment of all buildings and structures in the City, and with respect to the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except and explicitly for the amendments, deletions and exclusions in Section 18-6-30 below. 
(Ord. 23 5, 2013) 
Sec. 18-6-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Fuel Gas Code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 23 5, 2013) 
Sec. 18-6-30. - Amendments. 
    The 2012 IFGC is hereby modified by the following additions, amendments and deletions: 
(1)  Additions. The following provision shall be added to the IFGC: 
    "The Chief Building Official shall have the authority to approve all building, plumbing, mechanical, and other materials and applications, as necessary, in order to remain current with approved applications and installation methods as approved by nationally recognized testing and approval agencies." 
(2)  Amendments. None. 
(3)  Deletions. None. 
(Ord. 23 5, 2013) 
ARTICLE 7 - Fire Code 

Sec. 18-7-10. - Adoption. 
    The International Fire Code , 2012 edition ("IFC"), published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6 th floor, Washington, DC 20001, is hereby adopted by reference to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures and building services equipment of all buildings and structures in the City, and with respect to the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except and explicitly for the amendments, deletions and exclusions in Section 18-7-30 below. 
(Ord. 23 6, 2013) 
Sec. 18-7-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Fire Code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 23 6, 2013) 
Sec. 18-7-30. - Amendments. 
    The 2012 IFC is hereby modified by the following additions, amendments and deletions: 
(1)  Additions. The following provision shall be added to the IFC: 
    Appendix C, Fire hydrant locations and distribution, is adopted in its entirety. 
(2)  Amendments. The following sections of the IFC are amended to read as follows: 
    "109.3, Violation penalties. Persons who violate a provision of this code or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this Code, shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment up to the maximum specified in Section 18-1-30 of the Greenwood Village Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
    "111.4, Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment up to the maximum specified in Section 18-1-30 of the Greenwood Village Code. 
    "507.3, Fire flow. Fire flow requirements for buildings or portions of buildings and facilities shall be determined in accordance with Appendix B or by an approved method. 
    "507.5, Fire hydrant systems. Fire hydrant systems shall comply with Section 507.5.1 through 507.5.6 and Appendix C or by an approved method. 
    "907.2.9.1, Group-R, manual fire alarm system. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group R-2 occupancies where: 
    "1. (No changes). 
    "2. (No changes). 
    "3. The building contains more than 16 dwelling units or sleeping rooms. 
    "EXCEPTIONS: 
    "1. (No changes). 
    "2. (No changes). 
    "3. A fire alarm system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving dwelling units, provided that dwelling units either have a means of egress door opening directly to an exterior exit access that leads directly to the exits or are served by open-ended corridors designed in accordance with Section 1026.6, Exception 4. 
    "5601.1.3, Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited. 
    "EXCEPTION: The use of fireworks for fireworks displays as allowed in Section 5608. 
    "B105.1, One- and two-family dwellings. The minimum fire-flow requirements for one- and two-family dwellings having a fire-flow calculation area which does not exceed 3,600 square feet (344.5m 2 ) shall be 1,000 gallons per minute (3785.4 L/min). Fire flow and flow duration for dwellings having a fire-flow calculation area in excess of 3,600 square feet (344.5 m 2 ) shall not be less than that specified in Table B105.1. 
    "EXCEPTIONS: Regardless of the fire-flow calculation area, the following exceptions shall apply: 
    "1. For new subdivisions, a reduction in required fire flow of 50 percent is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.1.1, 903.1.2 or 903.1.3. 
    "2. When sufficient fire flow exists and hydrant spacing meets the requirements in Appendix C fire sprinklers are not required." 
(3)  Deletions. The following section shall be deleted from the IFC: 
    "108, Board of appeals." 
(Ord. 23 6, 2013) 
ARTICLE 8 - Energy Conservation Code 

Sec. 18-8-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the energy conservation code for the City, by reference thereto, the International Energy Conservation Code , 2012 edition ("IECC"), published by the International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6 th floor, Washington, DC 20001, to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures and building services equipment of all buildings and structures in the City, and with respect to the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, except and explicitly for the amendments, deletions and exclusions in Section 18-8-30 below. 
(Ord. 23 7, 2013) 
Sec. 18-8-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Energy Conservation Code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business hours. 
(Ord. 23 7, 2013) 
Sec. 18-8-30. - Amendments. 
    The 2012 IECC is hereby modified by the following additions, amendments and deletions: 
(1)  Additions. The following provision shall be added to the IECC: 
    "The Chief Building Official shall have the authority to approve all building, plumbing, mechanical, and other materials and applications, as necessary, in order to remain current with approved applications and installation methods as approved by nationally recognized testing and approval agencies." 
(2)  Amendments. The following sections of the IECC are amended to read as follows: 
    "C101.2, Scope. 
    "This code applies to commercial buildings and the building sites and associated systems and equipment. Commercial energy conservation regulations shall not be applied to existing commercial buildings. 
    "C402.4.7, Vestibules. 
    "All A building entrances shall be protected with an enclosed vestibule, with all doors opening into and out of the vestibule equipped with self-closing devices." 
(3)  Deletions. The following section shall be deleted from the IECC: 
    "101.4.3, Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs." 
(Ord. 23 7, 2013) 
ARTICLE 9 - Swimming Pool and Spa Code 

Sec. 18-9-10. - Adoption. 
    The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC), 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council (ICC), 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6 th floor, Washington, DC 20001, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this Chapter as though fully set forth herein. Except as otherwise provided hereafter, such code is adopted in full, including the outline of contents, index and appendices contained therein. 
(Ord. 23 8, 2013) 
Sec. 18-9-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business office hours. 
(Ord. 23 8, 2013) 
ARTICLE 10 - [National Electric Code] 

Sec. 18-10-10. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, C.R.S., there is adopted as the electrical code for the City, by reference thereto, the National Electric Code (NEC), 2014 edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02169, to regulate the safe installation of electrical wiring and equipment. Except as otherwise provided hereafter, such code is adopted in full including the outline of contents, index and appendices contained therein. 
( Ord. 08, 2, 2015 ) 
Sec. 18-10-20. - Copy on file. 
    At least one (1) copy of the NEC shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any interested person during regular business office hours. 
( Ord. 08, 2, 2015 ) 
CODE COMPARISON TABLE 
Prior Code New Code 1.04.010 1-2-10, 1-2-20, 1-2-40, 1-2-50 1.04.020 1-2-60 1.12.010 16-1-30 1.12.020 16-1-30 1.12.030 16-1-30 1.12.040 16-1-30 1.16.010 2-1-30 1.20.010 1-5-10 1.24.010 1-3-30 1.24.020 1-3-30 1.28.010 1-4-10-1-4-30 1.28.020 1-4-60 1.28.030 1-4-70 1.28.040 1-4-80 1.28.050 1-4-90 1.28.070 1-4-60 1.32.010 2-10-10 1.32.020 2-10-20 1.32.030 2-10-30 1.32.040 2-10-40 1.32.050 2-10-50 1.32.060 2-10-60 1.32.070 2-10-70 1.32.080 2-10-80 1.32.090 2-10-90 2.04.010 2-2-20 2.04.020 2-2-30 2.04.040 2-2-40 2.04.050 2-2-50 2.04.060 2-2-60 2.04.070 2-2-70 2.04.080 2-2-80 2.04.090 2-2-90 2.04.100 2-2-100 2.04.110 2-2-110 2.04.120 2-2-120 2.04.140 2-2-130 2.04.150 2-2-140 2.04.160 2-2-150 2.04.170 2-2-160 2.04.180 2-2-170 2.04.190 2-2-180 2.04.200 2-2-190 2.04.210 2-2-200 2.04.220 2-2-210 2.08.010 2-3-20 2.08.020 2-3-30 2.08.030 2-3-40 2.10.010 2-2-10, 2-3-10 2.40.010 2-2-230 2.40.020 2-2-220 2.44.010 2-12-10 2.44.020 2-12-20 2.44.030 2-12-30 2.44.040 2-12-40 2.44.060 2-12-50, 16-2-120, 16-2-130 2.44.070 2-12-50, 16-2-120, 16-2-130 2.44.090 16-2-505 2.44.110 16-2-130 2.44.130 16-2-130 2.48.010 2-14-10 2.48.020 2-14-20 2.48.030 2-14-30 2.48.040 2-14-40 2.48.050 2-14-50 2.48.060 2-14-60 2.48.070 2-14-70 2.48.080 2-14-80 2.48.090 2-14-90 2.52.010 2-13-10 2.52.020 2-13-20 2.52.030 2-13-30 2.52.040 2-13-40 2.52.050 2-13-50 2.53.010 2-15-10 2.53.020 2-15-20 2.53.030 2-15-30 2.53.040 2-15-40 2.53.050 2-15-50 2.53.060 2-15-60 2.53.070 2-15-70 2.56.010 2-4-10 2.56.020 2-4-20 2.56.030 2-4-30 2.56.040 2-4-50 2.56.050 2-4-60 2.56.060 2-4-70 2.56.070 2-4-80 2.56.080 2-4-90 2.56.100 2-4-100 2.56.110 2-4-100 2.56.120 2-4-110 2.56.130 2-4-120 2.56.140 2-4-130 2.64.010 2-6-10 2.64.020 2-6-20, 2-6-30 2.64.030 2-6-40 2.64.040 2-6-50, 16-2-280 2.64.050 2-6-60, 16-2-280 2.64.060 2-6-70, 16-2-280 2.64.070 2-6-80, 16-2-280 2.64.080 2-6-90 2.64.090 2-6-100 2.64.100 2-6-110 2.64.110 2-6-120 2.64.120 2-6-130 2.66.010 2-7-10 2.66.020 2-7-20 2.66.030 2-7-30 2.66.040 2-7-40 2.66.050 2-7-50 2.66.060 2-7-60 2.66.070 2-7-70 2.66.080 2-7-80 2.66.090 2-7-90 2.66.100 2-7-100 2.72.010 2-1-60 2.72.020 2-1-70 2.72.030 2-1-80 2.72.040 2-1-90 2.72.050 2-1-100 2.72.060 2-1-110 2.72.070 2-1-120 2.72.080 2-1-130 2.72.090 2-1-140 2.72.100 2-1-150 2.72.110 2-1-160 2.72.120 2-1-170 2.72.130 2-1-180 2.72.140 2-1-190 2.72.150 2-1-200 2.72.160 2-1-210 2.72.170 2-1-220 2.72.180 2-1-230 2.72.190 2-1-240 2.72.200 2-1-250 2.72.210 2-1-260 2.72.220 2-1-270 2.76.010 2-8-10 2.76.020 2-8-20 2.76.030 2-8-30 2.76.040 2-8-40 2.76.050 2-8-50 2.76.060 2-8-60 2.76.070 2-8-70 2.76.080 2-8-80 2.76.090 2-8-90 2.80.010 2-9-10 2.80.020 2-9-20 2.80.030 2-9-30 2.80.040 2-9-40 2.80.050 2-9-50 2.80.060 2-9-60 2.80.070 2-9-70 2.80.080 2-9-80 2.80.090 2-9-90 2.84.010 2-11-10 2.84.020 2-11-20 2.84.030 2-11-30 2.84.035 2-11-30 2.84.040 2-11-40 2.84.050 2-11-50 2.84.060 2-11-60 2.84.070 2-11-70 2.84.090 2-11-80 2.84.100 2-11-90 2.84.110 2-11-100 2.84.120 2-11-110 2.84.130 2-11-120 2.84.140 2-11-130 2.84.150 2-11-140 2.84.160 2-11-150 2.84.170 2-11-160 2.88.010 2-3-50 2.88.020 2-3-50 2.88.030 2-3-50 3.04.010 4-1-10 3.04.020 4-1-20 3.08.010 4-3-10 3.08.020 4-3-20 3.08.030 1-2-10, 4-3-30 3.08.040 4-3-40 3.08.060 4-3-50 3.08.070 4-3-60 3.08.080 6-1-10 3.08.090 6-1-20 3.08.100 6-1-30 3.08.110 6-1-40 3.08.120 6-1-50 3.08.130 4-3-70 3.08.140 4-3-80 3.08.150 4-3-90 3.08.180 4-3-100 3.08.200 4-3-110 3.08.210 4-3-120 3.08.220 4-3-120 3.08.230 4-3-120 3.08.240 4-3-130 3.08.250 4-3-140 3.08.260 4-3-150 3.08.265 4-3-160 3.08.270 4-3-170 3.08.280 4-3-180 3.08.290 4-3-190 3.08.300 4-3-190 3.08.310 4-3-200 3.08.320 4-3-210 3.08.330 4-3-220 3.08.340 4-3-230 3.08.350 4-3-240 3.08.360 4-3-250 3.08.365 4-3-260 3.08.370 4-3-270 3.08.375 4-3-280 3.08.380 4-3-290 3.08.390 4-3-300 3.08.400 4-3-310 3.08.410 4-3-310 3.08.420 4-3-310 3.08.430 4-3-320 3.08.440 4-3-330 3.08.460 4-3-340 3.08.470 4-3-350 3.08.480 4-3-360 3.08.490 4-3-370 3.08.500 4-3-380 3.08.510 4-3-390 3.08.520 4-3-400 3.08.530 4-3-410 3.08.540 4-3-420 3.08.550 4-3-430 3.08.560 4-3-440 3.08.570 4-3-450 3.08.580 4-3-460 3.08.590 4-3-470 3.08.600 4-3-480 3.08.610 4-3-490 3.08.620 4-3-500 3.08.630 4-3-510 3.08.640 4-3-520 3.08.650 4-3-530 3.08.660 4-3-540 3.10.010 4-8-10 3.10.020 4-8-20 3.10.030 4-8-30 3.10.040 4-8-40 3.10.050 4-8-50 3.10.060 4-8-60 3.10.070 4-8-70 3.10.080 4-8-80 3.12.010 4-7-10 3.12.020 4-7-20 3.12.030 4-7-30 3.12.040 4-7-40 3.12.045 4-7-50 3.12.050 4-7-60 3.12.060 4-7-70 3.12.061 4-7-80 3.12.062 4-7-90 3.12.063 4-7-100 3.12.064 4-7-110 3.12.065 4-7-120 3.12.066 4-7-130 3.12.067 4-7-140 3.12.068 4-7-150 3.12.069 4-7-160 3.12.070 4-7-170 3.12.071 4-7-180 3.12.072 4-7-190 3.12.073 4-7-200 3.12.074 4-7-210 3.12.075 4-7-220 3.12.076 4-7-230 3.12.077 4-7-240 3.12.078 4-7-240 3.12.079 4-7-240 3.12.080 4-7-250 3.12.081 4-7-260 3.12.082 4-7-270 3.12.083 4-7-280 3.12.084 4-7-290 3.12.085 4-7-300 3.12.086 4-7-310 3.12.087 4-7-320 3.12.088 4-7-330 3.12.089 4-7-340 3.12.090 4-7-350 3.12.091 4-7-360 3.12.092 4-7-370 3.12.093 4-7-380 3.12.094 4-7-390 3.12.095 4-7-400 3.12.096 4-7-410 3.12.097 4-7-420 3.12.098 4-7-430 3.12.099 4-7-440 3.16.010 4-6-10 3.16.020 4-6-20 3.16.030 4-6-30 3.16.040 4-6-40 3.16.045 4-6-50 3.16.050 4-6-110 3.16.060 4-6-120 3.16.070 4-6-130 3.16.071 4-6-140 3.16.072 4-6-150 3.16.073 4-6-160 3.16.074 4-6-170 3.16.075 4-6-210 3.16.076 4-6-220 3.16.077 4-6-230 3.16.078 4-6-240 3.16.079 4-6-250 3.16.080 4-6-260 3.16.081 4-6-270 3.16.082 4-6-310 3.16.083 4-6-320 3.16.084 4-6-330 3.16.085 4-6-340 3.16.086 4-6-350 3.16.087 4-6-360 3.16.088 4-6-360 3.16.089 4-6-360 3.16.090 4-6-370 3.16.091 4-6-380 3.16.092 4-6-390 3.16.093 4-6-400 3.16.094 4-6-410 3.16.095 4-6-420 3.16.096 4-6-430 3.16.097 4-6-440 3.16.098 4-6-450 3.16.099 4-6-460 3.16.100 4-6-470 3.16.101 4-6-480 3.16.102 4-6-490 3.16.103 4-6-500 3.16.104 4-6-510 3.16.105 4-6-520 3.16.106 4-6-530 3.16.107 4-6-540 3.16.108 4-6-550 3.16.109 4-6-560 3.18.010 6-9-10 3.18.020 6-9-20 3.18.030 6-9-30 3.18.040 6-9-40 3.18.050 6-9-50 3.18.060 6-9-60 3.18.070 6-9-70 3.18.080 6-9-80 3.18.090 6-9-90 3.18.100 6-9-100 3.20.010 4-4-10 3.20.020 4-4-20 3.20.030 4-4-30 3.20.040 4-4-40 3.20.050 4-4-50 3.20.060 4-4-60 3.20.070 4-4-70 3.20.080 4-4-80 3.20.090 4-4-90 3.20.100 4-4-100 3.20.110 4-4-110 3.20.120 4-4-120 3.20.130 4-4-130 3.20.140 4-4-140 3.20.150 4-4-150 3.20.160 4-4-160 3.20.170 4-4-170 3.20.180 4-4-180 3.20.200 4-4-190 3.20.210 4-4-200 3.24.010 4-2-10 3.24.020 4-2-10 3.24.030 4-2-20 3.24.040 4-2-70 3.24.050 4-2-80 3.24.060 4-2-40 3.24.070 4-2-50 3.24.080 4-2-30 3.24.100 4-2-60 3.28.010 4-9-10 3.28.020 4-9-20 3.28.030 4-9-30 3.28.040 4-9-40 3.28.050 4-9-50 3.28.060 4-9-60 3.28.070 4-9-70 3.28.080 4-9-80 3.28.090 4-9-90 3.28.100 4-9-100 3.28.110 4-9-110 3.28.120 4-9-120 3.28.130 4-9-130 3.32.010 4-10-10 3.32.020 4-10-20 3.32.030 4-10-30 3.32.040 4-10-40 3.32.050 4-10-50 3.34.010 4-10-110 3.34.020 4-10-120 3.34.030 4-10-130 3.36.010 4-5-10 3.36.020 4-5-20 3.36.030 4-5-30 3.36.040 4-5-40 3.36.050 4-5-50 3.36.060 4-5-60 3.36.070 4-5-70 3.36.080 4-5-80 3.36.090 4-5-90 3.36.100 4-5-100 5.04.010 6-4-10 5.04.020 6-4-20 5.04.030 6-4-30 5.04.040 6-4-40 5.12.010 1-2-10, 6-7-10 5.12.020 6-7-20 5.12.030 6-7-30 5.12.040 6-7-40 5.12.050 6-7-50 5.12.070 6-7-60 5.12.080 6-7-70 5.12.110 6-7-70, 6-7-80 5.12.180 6-7-90 5.12.190 6-7-100 5.12.200 6-7-110 5.12.210 6-7-120 5.12.220 6-7-130 5.12.230 6-7-140 5.12.240 6-7-150 5.12.250 6-7-160 5.12.260 6-7-170 5.12.270 6-7-180 5.16.010 6-10-10 5.16.020 6-10-20 5.16.030 6-10-30 5.16.040 6-10-40 5.16.050 6-10-50 5.16.060 6-10-60 5.16.070 6-10-70 5.16.080 6-10-80 5.16.090 6-10-90 5.16.100 6-10-100 5.18.010 6-6-10 5.18.020 6-6-20 5.18.030 6-6-30 5.18.040 6-6-10 5.18.050 6-6-50 5.20.010 6-11-40 5.24.010 6-8-10 5.24.020 6-8-20 5.24.030 6-8-30 5.24.040 6-8-40 5.24.050 6-8-50 5.24.060 6-8-60 5.24.070 6-8-70 5.24.080 6-8-80 5.24.090 6-8-90 5.24.100 6-8-100 5.24.110 6-8-110 5.24.120 6-8-120 5.24.130 6-8-130 5.24.140 6-8-140 5.24.150 6-8-150 5.24.160 6-8-160 5.24.170 6-8-170 5.24.180 6-8-180 5.24.190 6-8-190 5.24.200 6-8-200 5.24.210 6-8-210 6.04.010 7-8-10 6.04.020 7-8-20 6.04.030 7-8-30 6.04.040 7-8-40 6.04.050 7-8-50 6.04.060 7-8-60 6.04.070 7-8-70 6.04.080 7-8-80 6.04.090 7-8-90 6.04.100 7-8-100 6.04.110 7-8-110 6.04.120 7-8-120 6.04.130 7-8-130 6.04.140 7-8-140 6.04.150 7-8-170 6.04.160 7-8-180 6.04.170 7-8-190 6.04.180 7-8-200 6.04.190 7-8-210 6.04.200 7-8-220 6.08.010 7-8-310 6.08.020 7-8-320 6.08.030 7-8-330 6.08.040 7-8-340 6.08.050 7-8-350 6.08.060 7-8-360 8.02.010 7-1-20 8.02.020 7-1-30 8.02.040 7-1-40 8.02.050 7-1-50 8.02.060 7-1-60 8.02.080 7-1-70 8.02.090 7-1-80 8.02.100 7-1-90 8.02.110 7-1-100 8.02.120 7-1-110 8.02.130 7-1-120 8.02.140 7-1-130 8.02.150 7-1-140 8.04.010 7-2-130 8.04.020 7-2-130 8.04.030 7-2-90 8.04.040 7-2-120 8.04.050 7-2-140 8.04.060 7-2-150 8.04.070 7-2-160 8.04.080 7-2-180 8.04.090 7-2-50 8.04.100 7-2-30 8.04.110 7-2-100 8.04.120 7-2-110 8.04.130 7-2-20 8.04.140 7-2-60 8.04.150 7-2-10 8.04.160 7-2-70 8.04.170 7-2-40 8.04.180 7-2-190 8.04.190 7-2-200 8.04.200 7-2-210 8.04.210 7-2-220 8.04.220 7-2-230 8.08.010 9-18-10 8.08.020 9-18-20 8.08.030 9-18-30 8.08.040 9-18-40 8.08.050 9-18-50 8.08.060 9-18-60 8.22.010 7-1-10 8.22.020 7-4-10 8.22.030 7-4-20 8.22.040 7-4-30 8.22.050 7-4-40 8.22.060 7-4-50 8.22.070 7-4-60 8.22.080 7-4-70 8.22.090 7-4-80 8.24.010 7-5-10 8.24.020 1-2-10, 7-5-20 8.24.030 7-5-30 8.24.040 7-5-40 8.24.050 7-5-60 8.24.060 7-5-70 8.24.070 7-5-80 8.24.080 7-5-50 8.28.010 9-14-10 8.28.020 9-14-20 8.28.030 9-14-30 8.28.040 9-14-40 8.28.050 9-14-50 8.28.060 9-14-60 8.28.070 9-14-70 8.32.010 7-6-10 8.32.020 7-6-20 8.32.030 7-6-30 8.32.040 7-6-40 8.32.050 7-6-50 8.32.060 7-6-60 8.32.070 7-6-70 8.34.010 7-7-10 8.34.020 7-7-20 8.34.030 7-7-30 8.34.040 7-7-40 8.34.050 7-7-50 8.34.060 7-7-60 8.34.070 7-7-70 8.34.080 7-7-80 8.34.090 7-7-90 8.34.100 7-7-100 8.34.110 7-7-110 8.34.120 7-7-120 8.39.010 7-3-10 8.39.020 7-3-20 8.39.030 7-3-30 8.39.040 7-3-40 8.39.050 7-3-50 8.39.060 7-3-60 9.04.010 9-4-10 9.04.020 9-1-10, 9-4-20 9.04.030 9-4-30 9.04.040 9-4-40 9.04.050 9-4-50 9.04.060 9-4-60 9.04.070 9-4-70 9.04.080 9-4-80 9.04.090 9-4-90 9.04.100 9-4-100 9.08.010 9-8-10 9.08.020 9-8-20 9.08.030 9-8-30 9.08.040 9-8-40 9.12.010 9-12-10 9.12.020 9-12-20 9.12.030 9-12-30 9.12.040 9-12-40 9.12.050 9-12-50 9.12.060 9-12-60 9.12.070 9-12-70 9.12.080 9-12-80 9.12.090 9-12-90 9.12.100 9-12-100 9.12.105 9-12-105 9.12.110 9-12-110 9.12.120 9-12-120 9.12.122 9-12-122 9.12.125 9-12-125 9.12.130 9-12-130 9.12.140 9-12-140 9.12.150 9-12-150 9.12.160 9-12-160 9.12.170 9-12-170 9.12.180 9-12-180 9.12.200 9-12-200 9.16.010 9-16-10 9.16.020 9-16-20 9.16.030 9-16-30 9.16.070 9-16-70 9.16.080 9-16-80 9.16.100 9-16-100 9.16.110 9-16-110 9.16.120 9-16-120 9.16.130 9-16-130 9.16.140 9-16-140 9.16.150 9-16-150 9.16.160 9-16-160 9.16.170 9-16-170 9.16.180 9-16-180 9.16.190 9-16-190 9.16.200 9-16-200 9.16.210 9-16-210 9.20.010 9-20-10 9.20.020 9-20-20 9.20.030 9-20-30 9.20.040 9-20-40 9.20.050 9-20-50 9.20.060 9-20-60 9.20.070 9-20-70 9.20.080 9-20-80 9.20.090 9-20-90 9.20.100 9-20-100 9.20.110 9-20-110 9.20.120 9-20-120 9.24.010 9-24-10 9.24.020 9-24-20 9.24.030 9-24-30 9.24.040 9-24-40 9.24.070 9-24-70 9.24.080 6-3-10-6-3-80 9.24.090 9-24-90 9.24.100 9-24-100 9.24.110 9-24-110 9.24.120 9-24-120 10.04.010 8-1-10, 8-1-30, 8-1-40, 8-1-50 10.04.020 8-1-60 10.04.030 8-1-70 10.04.040 8-1-80 10.04.050 8-1-90 10.04.060 8-1-100 10.04.070 8-1-110 10.04.080 8-1-120 10.04.090 8-1-130 10.04.100 8-1-50 10.08.010 8-2-10 10.08.020 8-2-20 10.08.030 8-2-30 10.08.040 8-2-40 10.08.050 8-2-50 10.08.060 8-2-60 10.08.070 8-2-70 10.12.010 8-3-10 10.12.020 8-3-20 10.12.030 8-3-30 10.12.040 8-3-40 10.12.050 8-3-50 12.04.010 11-3-10 12.04.020 11-3-20 12.04.030 11-3-30 12.04.040 11-3-50 12.04.050 11-3-40 12.04.060 11-3-60 12.04.070 11-3-70 12.04.080 11-3-80 12.04.090 11-3-90 12.04.100 11-3-100 12.04.110 11-3-110 12.04.120 11-3-120 12.04.130 11-3-130 12.04.140 11-3-140 12.04.150 11-3-150 12.04.160 11-3-160 12.04.170 11-3-170 12.04.180 11-3-180 12.04.190 11-3-190 12.04.200 11-3-200 12.04.210 11-3-210 12.04.230 11-3-220 12.04.240 11-3-230 12.04.250 11-3-240 12.04.260 11-3-250 12.04.270 11-3-260 12.04.280 11-3-270 12.04.290 11-3-280 12.06.010 11-3-410 12.06.020 11-3-420 12.06.030 11-3-430 12.12.010 11-2-10 12.12.020 11-2-20 12.12.030 11-2-30 12.12.040 11-2-40 12.12.050 11-2-50 12.12.060 11-2-60 12.12.070 11-2-70 12.12.080 11-2-80 12.12.090 11-2-90 12.12.100 11-2-100 12.12.110 11-2-110 12.12.120 11-2-120 12.12.130 11-2-130 12.16.010 11-9-10 12.16.020 11-9-20, 16-1-50 12.16.030 11-9-30 12.24.010 11-1-10 12.24.020 11-1-20 12.24.025 11-1-30 12.24.030 11-1-40 12.28.010 11-7-10 12.28.020 11-7-20 12.28.030 11-7-30 12.28.040 11-7-40 12.28.050 11-7-50 12.28.060 11-7-60 12.28.070 11-7-70 12.28.080 11-7-80 12.28.090 11-7-90 12.30.010 9-16-220 12.32.010 11-5-10 12.32.020 11-5-20 12.32.030 11-5-30 12.32.040 11-5-40 12.32.050 11-5-50 12.32.060 11-5-60 12.32.070 11-5-70 12.32.080 11-5-80 12.32.090 11-5-90 12.33.010 11-6-10 12.33.020 11-6-20 12.33.030 11-6-30 12.33.040 11-6-40 12.33.050 11-6-50 12.33.060 11-6-60 12.36.010 11-4-10 12.36.020 11-4-20 12.36.030 11-4-30 12.36.040 11-4-40 12.36.050 11-4-50 12.36.060 11-4-60 12.36.070 11-4-70 12.36.080 11-4-80 13.04.010 18-1-10 13.04.020 18-1-20 13.04.030 18-1-30 13.04.040 18-1-40 13.04.050 18-1-50 13.04.060 18-1-60 13.04.070 18-1-70 13.04.080 18-1-80 13.08.010 18-2-10-18-2-30 13.08.020 18-3-10-18-3-30 13.08.030 18-4-10, 18-4-20 13.08.040 18-5-10, 18-5-20 13.08.050 18-6-10, 18-6-20 13.08.060 18-7-10-18-7-30 13.08.070 18-8-10-18-8-30 13.12.010 6-5-10 13.12.020 6-5-20 13.12.030 6-5-30 13.12.040 6-5-40 13.12.050 6-5-50 13.12.060 6-5-60 13.12.070 6-5-70 13.12.080 6-5-80 13.12.090 6-5-90 13.12.100 6-5-100 13.12.110 6-5-110 13.12.120 6-5-120 13.12.130 6-5-130 13.12.140 6-5-140 14 16-1-100, 16-2-40-16-2-70, 16-2-140-16-2-190, 16-2-220, 16-2-260, 16-2-270, 16-2-290, 16-2-310-16-2-340, 16-2-505, 16-18-50, 16-26-10, 16-26-210, 16-26-220-16-26-280, 16-26-310, 16-26-410-16-26-440 14.04.015 16-1-90 14.04.015 16-1-90 14.04.020 16-2-230 15.02.010 16-1-10 15.02.030 16-1-20 15.02.040 16-1-80 15.02.050 16-2-270, 16-2-280 15.02.060 16-21-610 15.04.020 16-1-100 15.04.030 16-1-100 15.04.060 16-1-100 15.04.062 16-1-100 15.04.064 16-1-100 15.04.070 16-1-100 15.04.090 16-1-100 15.04.105 16-1-100 15.04.110 16-1-100 15.04.120 16-1-100 15.04.125 16-1-100 15.04.145 16-1-100 15.04.157 16-1-100 15.04.158 16-1-100 15.04.159 16-1-100 15.04.169 16-1-100 15.04.180 16-1-100 15.04.190 16-1-100 15.04.200 16-1-100 15.04.210 16-1-100 15.04.224 16-1-100 15.04.226 16-1-100 15.04.230 16-1-100 15.04.232 16-1-100 15.04.240 16-1-100 15.04.242 16-1-100 15.04.244 16-1-100 15.04.250 16-1-100 15.04.274 16-1-100 15.04.290 16-1-100 15.04.300 16-1-100 15.04.305 16-1-100 15.04.310 16-1-100 15.04.320 16-1-100 15.04.340 16-1-100 15.04.348 16-1-100 15.04.350 16-1-100 15.04.360 16-1-100 15.04.370 16-1-100 15.04.380 16-1-100 15.04.400 16-1-100 15.04.402 16-1-100 15.04.404 16-1-100 15.04.408 16-1-100, 16-2-535 15.04.430 16-1-100 15.04.456 16-1-100 15.04.458 16-1-100 15.04.460 16-1-100 15.04.470 16-1-100 15.04.480 16-1-100, 16-21-240 15.04.495 16-1-100 15.04.497 16-1-100, 16-2-550 15.04.500 16-1-100 15.04.520 16-1-100 15.04.550 16-1-100 15.04.552 16-1-100 15.04.557 16-1-100 15.04.559 16-1-100 15.04.560 16-1-100 15.04.562 16-1-100 15.04.564 16-1-100 15.04.568 16-1-100 15.04.570 16-1-100 15.04.612 16-1-100 15.04.620 16-1-100 15.04.630 16-1-100 15.04.640 16-1-100 15.04.641 16-1-100 15.04.642 16-1-100 15.04.643 16-1-100 15.04.643.5 16-1-100 15.04.644 16-1-100 15.04.645 16-1-100 15.04.646 16-1-100 15.04.648 16-1-100 15.04.660 16-1-100 15.06 16-2-20 15.06.010 16-1-40 15.06.020 16-2-20 15.08.020 16-5-10 15.08.021 16-5-20 15.08.030 16-5-30, 16-5-40 15.08.040 16-5-50 15.10.020 16-6-10 15.10.021 16-6-20 15.10.030 16-6-30, 16-6-40 15.10.040 16-6-50 15.10.050 16-6-60 15.12.020 16-7-10 15.12.021 16-7-20 15.12.030 16-7-30, 16-7-40 15.12.040 16-7-50 15.12.050 16-7-60 15.14.020 16-8-10 15.14.021 16-8-20 15.14.030 16-8-30, 16-8-40 15.14.040 16-8-50 15.14.050 16-8-60 15.16.010 16-2-70 15.16.020 16-9-10 15.16.021 16-9-20 15.16.030 16-9-30-16-9-50 15.16.050 16-9-60 15.18.020 16-10-10 15.18.021 16-10-20 15.18.030 16-10-30-16-10-50 15.18.050 16-10-60 15.20.020 16-11-10 15.20.021 16-11-20 15.20.030 16-11-30-16-11-50 15.20.050 16-11-60 15.22.020 16-12-10 15.22.021 16-12-20 15.22.030 16-12-30-16-12-60 15.22.050 16-12-70 15.22.060 16-26-290 15.24.020 16-13-10 15.24.021 16-13-20 15.24.030 16-13-30-16-13-60 15.24.040 16-13-70 15.26.010 16-14-10 15.26.020 16-14-20 15.26.021 16-14-30 15.26.030 16-14-40, 16-14-70 15.26.040 16-14-60 15.26.050 16-14-80 15.26.060 16-14-50 15.28.010 16-15-10 15.28.020 16-15-20 15.28.021 16-15-30 15.28.030 16-15-50, 16-15-70 15.28.040 16-15-60 15.28.050 16-15-80 15.28.060 16-15-40 15.30.020 16-16-20 15.30.021 16-16-30 15.30.030 16-16-50, 16-16-70 15.30.040 16-16-60 15.30.050 16-16-80 15.30.060 16-16-40 15.32.010 16-17-10 15.32.020 16-17-20 15.32.025 16-17-30 15.32.030 16-17-50, 16-17-70 15.32.040 16-17-80 15.32.060 16-17-40 15.34.010 16-4-10 15.34.020 16-4-20 15.34.030 16-4-40 15.34.050 16-4-30 15.34.060 16-4-60 15.35.040 16-4-50 15.35.050 16-17-60 15.36.010 16-3-10 15.36.020 16-3-20 15.36.030 16-3-40 15.36.040 16-3-30 15.38 16-2-40, 16-2-50 15.38.010 16-19-10 15.38.030 16-19-20 15.38.040 16-19-60 15.38.050 16-19-60 15.38.060 16-19-50 15.38.070 16-19-60 15.38.080 16-19-60, 16-19-70 15.38.086 16-2-230 15.38.260 16-2-50 15.40 16-2-50 15.40.010 16-18-10 15.40.020 16-18-40 15.40.030 16-18-20 15.40.031 16-18-30 15.40.040 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.050 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.060 16-2-220, 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.070 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.080 16-2-220, 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.090 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.100 16-2-220, 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.110 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.120 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.130 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.140 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.150 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.160 16-2-500, 16-2-510, 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.170 16-2-500, 16-2-510, 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.180 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.190 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.40.200 16-26-210, 16-26-220 15.41.010 16-20-10 15.41.020 16-20-20 15.41.030 16-20-30 15.41.040 16-20-40 15.41.050 16-20-80 15.41.060 16-20-60 15.41.070 16-20-70 15.41.080 16-20-50 15.42.060 16-21-620 15.42.310 16-1-100, 16-21-160 15.42.380 7-8-150 15.42.390 7-8-160 15.42.450 7-2-170 15.42.500 16-2-550, 16-24-40 15.42.501 16-2-530, 16-2-550, 16-21-170 15.42.510 16-24-40 15.42.512 16-2-535 15.42.513 16-2-500, 16-2-510, 16-2-535 15.42.520 16-1-100, 16-22-140 15.43.010 16-21-10 15.43.020 16-21-20, 16-21-30 15.43.030 16-21-550 15.43.040 16-21-550 15.43.050 16-21-50, 16-21-550 15.43.060 16-21-60 15.43.070 16-21-70 15.43.080 16-21-40 15.43.090 16-21-80 15.43.100 16-21-90 15.43.110 16-21-100, 16-21-110, 16-21-120 15.43.120 16-21-140 15.43.130 16-21-570 15.43.140 16-21-530 15.43.150 16-21-230, 16-21-340 15.43.160 16-21-150 15.44.010 16-21-510 15.44.020 16-2-540, 16-21-520, 16-21-580 15.44.030 16-21-530 15.44.040 16-21-540 15.44.060 16-21-560 15.44.070 16-21-560 15.44.080 16-21-560 15.44.090 16-1-100 15.44.090 16-21-550 15.44.100 16-1-100, 16-2-500, 16-2-510, 16-2-540, 16-21-570 15.44.110 16-21-80 15.45.010 16-21-210 15.45.020 16-21-220 15.45.030 16-2-90, 16-21-230 15.45.030 16-21-240, 16-21-260 15.45.040 16-21-240, 16-21-250 15.45.050 16-21-250 15.45.060 16-21-260 15.45.070 16-21-260, 16-21-270 15.45.080 16-21-280 15.46.010 16-2-80, 16-21-410 15.46.020 16-21-420 15.46.030 16-21-430 15.46.040 16-21-440 15.46.050 16-21-450 15.46.060 16-2-545, 16-21-460 15.46.070 16-2-545, 16-21-470 15.46.080 16-2-80, 16-21-480 15.46.090 16-21-485 15.46.100 16-21-490 15.46.110 16-21-495 15.46.170 16-2-545 15.47.020 16-21-130 15.47.030 16-21-130 15.47.040 16-21-130 15.47.060 16-21-130 15.47.070 16-21-130 15.47.080 16-21-130 15.48.010 16-21-310 15.48.020 16-21-310 15.48.030 16-21-310 15.48.050 16-2-500, 16-2-510 15.48.050 16-2-515 15.48.060 16-2-220, 16-2-500 15.48.060 16-2-510, 16-2-515 15.48.070 16-21-330 15.48.080 16-21-310, 16-21-320 15.48.090 16-21-350 15.48.100 16-21-360 15.48.104 16-1-100, 16-21-360 15.48.110 16-21-310, 16-21-370 15.48.120 16-1-100, 16-2-515, 16-21-380 15.49.020 16-2-500, 16-2-510 15.50.020 16-2-500, 16-2-510 15.50.030 16-2-565 15.50.050 16-2-500, 16-2-510 15.52 16-18-50, 16-19-10, 16-19-40 15.52.005 16-2-30, 16-2-280 15.52.010 16-2-30 15.52.025 16-2-230 15.52.030 16-2-30 15.52.130 16-2-280 15.52.140 16-2-50 15.52.160 16-1-40, 16-2-30 15.54.010 16-2-60 15.54.020 16-2-60 15.54.035 16-2-230 15.54.110 16-2-60 15.54.120 16-2-60 15.54.130 16-2-60 15.54.140 16-2-60 15.54.150 16-2-60 15.55.010 16-2-410 15.55.020 16-2-410 15.55.030 16-2-420 15.55.040 16-2-430 15.55.050 16-2-440 15.55.060 16-2-450 15.55.080 16-2-460 15.56.005 16-1-60 15.56.010 16-1-70 15.56.020 16-2-130 15.56.030 16-1-70, 16-1-80 15.56.040 16-1-80 15.58.010 16-21-630 15.60.020 16-2-70 15.60.025 16-2-230 15.60.050 16-2-70 15.60.110 16-2-70 15.60.120 16-2-280 15.62.010 16-2-310 15.62.020 16-2-320 15.62.030 16-2-310, 16-2-330 15.62.040 16-2-340 15.62.050 16-2-340 15.62.060 16-2-340 15.62.080 16-1-80 15.66.010 16-25-10 15.66.020 16-25-20 15.66.030 16-25-30 15.72 16-2-290 15.72.010 16-23-10 15.72.020 16-23-20 15.72.030 16-23-30 15.72.050 16-23-50 15.72.060 16-23-60 15.72.070 16-23-70 15.72.080 16-2-110, 16-2-280 15.74.010 16-2-295 15.74.020 16-2-100, 16-2-295 15.78 16-2-120, 16-2-130 15.78.020 16-2-280 15.78.060 16-2-280 15.80.010 16-2-520, 16-24-20 15.82.010 16-2-555, 16-22-10 15.82.020 16-22-20 15.82.030 16-2-555, 16-22-30 15.82.040 16-22-40 15.82.050 16-22-50 15.82.060 16-22-60 15.82.070 16-22-70 15.82.080 16-22-80 15.82.090 16-22-90 15.82.100 16-22-100 15.82.110 16-22-110 15.82.120 16-22-120 15.84.010 16-23-210 15.84.020 16-23-220 15.84.030 16-23-230 15.84.040 16-23-240 15.84.050 16-23-250 15.86.010 16-23-310 15.86.020 16-23-320 15.86.030 16-23-330  
ORDINANCE LOG AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
Ord. # Year Subject Section Disposition 35 2005 Residential solicitations  1 Chap. 6, Art. 3 33 2007 Compensation  1 2-2-10, 2-3-10 36 2007 Cable franchise applications  1 6-4-20       Rpld/Rnctd 6-4-50 37 2007 Abatement of nuisances by City  1 7-1-100 39 2007 Targeted residential picketing  1       Added Chap. 9, Art. 17 03 2008 Fees  1 2-4-110  2 6-5-60 04 2008 Targeted residential picketing  2 9-17-30 16 2008 Recovery of costs  1       Added 6-1-60 28 2008 Property  1 9-16-30 03 2009 Park regulations  1 11-5-100 12 2009 Licensed contractors  1 6-5-100 13 2009 Wireless telephone usage  1 8-1-30 16 2009 Animal regulations  1       Added 7-8-230-7-8-250  2       Added 7-8-370 04 2010 Park regulations  1       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 11, Art. 5 07 2010 Illegal weapons  1 9-20-10 10 2010 Site and design standards  1 16-22-10 14 2010 Procedures  1 16-2-210 Town Center (TC) District 16-19-40 Procedures  2 16-2-50 Procedures  4 16-2-170 Subdivisions 16-26-280 16 2010 Newsracks  1       Added Chap. 11, Art. 8 20 2010 Building Code  1       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 2 Residential Code  2       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 3 Plumbing Code  3       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 4 Mechanical Code  4       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 5 Fuel Gas Code  5       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 6 Fire Code  6       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 7 Energy Conservation Code  7       Added Chap. 18, Art. 8 28 2010 Model Traffic Code  1 9-16-30 07 2011 Park regulations  1 11-5-20  2 11-5-30  3       Deleted 11-5-40  4       Rnmbd 11-5-50       as 11-5-40  5       Added 11-5-50  6 11-5-70 09 2011 Miscellaneous offenses  1 9-24-10 10 2011 General provisions  1 16-1-80 11 2011 Snow removal 11-1-10 18 2011 Elections  1 2-1-80 19 2011 General provisions 16-1-30 20 2011 Model Traffic Code  2 8-1-10, 8-1-30, 8-1-40 21 2011 Elections  1 2-1-30  2       Deleted 2-1-40, 2-1-50 22 2011 Site and design standards  1 16-21-410-16-21-495 23 2011 Energy Conservation Code  1 18-8-10, 18-8-30 Residential Code  2 18-3-10, 18-3-30 26 2011 Arts and Humanities Council  1       Added Chap. 2, Art. 15 27 2011 Officers and employees  1 2-3-20 30 2011 Model Traffic Code  1 8-1-80 31 2011 Model Traffic Code  1 8-1-10, 8-1-30, 8-1-40 32 2011 Adopted Municipal Code  1       Adopted Chapters 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 16, 18, Tables, Index 33 2011 Adoption of budget for City (Special) 2012 34 2011 Appropriation of money (Special) 2012 35 2011 Fixing mill levies of City (Special) 2012 36 2011 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 5th 37 2011 Supplemental appropriation of money (Special) 5th 38 2011 Tax exempt status  1 6-1-30 40 2011 Failed 41 2011 Failed 01 2012 Land Development Code definitions  1 16-1-100 02 2012 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 1st 03 2012 Supplemental appropriation of money (Special) 1st 04 2012 Town Center zoning  1 16-19-20  2 16-19-30  3 16-19-50 05 2012 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 2nd 06 2012 Supplemental appropriation of money (Special) 2nd 07 2012 PUD Procedure  1 16-2-60 10 2012 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 3rd 11 2012 Supplemental appropriation of money (Special) 3rd 12 2012 Places of lodging  1       Added Chap. 9, Art. 5 13 2012 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 4th 14 2012 Supplemental appropriation of money (Special) 4th 15 2012 Boards and commissions  1 2-2-230 16 2012 Planning and Zoning Commission  1 2-14-20  2 2-14-30  3 2-14-50  4       Rpld 2-14-60-2-14-90 17 2012 Parks, Trails and Recreation Commission  1 2-13-20  2 2-13-30  3 2-13-40  4 2-13-50 18 2012 Board of Adjustments and Appeals  1 2-12-20  2 2-12-30 19 2012 Arts and Humanities Council  1 2-15-20  2 2-15-30  3 2-15-40  4 2-15-50       Rpld 2-15-70 20 2012 Noise control  1 7-5-10  2 7-5-20  3 7-5-30  4 7-5-40 21 2012 Open Space Districts  1 Chap. 16, Art. 3 22 2012 Site development plans  1, 2 16-2-50 23 2012 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 5th 24 2012 Supplemental appropriation of money (Special) 5th 25 2012 Illicit storm sewer discharges  1 7-1-60  2 7-2-150 26 2012 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 6th 27 2012 Supplemental appropriation of money (Special) 6th 28 2012 Park regulations  1 11-5-10  2 11-5-20  3 11-5-30  4 11-5-70 29 2012 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 7th 30 2012 Supplemental appropriation of money (Special) 7th 31 2012 Rezoning (Special) 32 2012 Rezoning (Special) 33 2012 Rezoning (Special) 34 2012 Mobile food service  1 16-2-535  2 16-24-30 35 2012 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 8th 36 2012 Supplemental appropriation of money (Special) 8th 37 2012 Amendment of Comprehensive Plan (Special) 38 2012 Adoption of budget (Special) 2013 39 2012 Appropriation of money (Special) 2013 40 2012 Mill levy (Special) 2013 41 2012 Disconnection of land (Special) 42 2012 Marijuana  1 16-22-140 43 2012 Marijuana  1 9-12-130 01 2013 Marijuana  1 16-1-100  2 16-22-140 02 2013 Local improvement district (Special) 03 2013 Elections  1 2-1-70  2 2-1-110  3 2-1-130  4 2-1-170  5 2-1-190 04 2013 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 2013 05 2013 Supplemental appropriation (Special) 2013 06 2013 Vacation of right-of-way (Special) 07 2013 Rezoning (Special) 08 2013 Sales and use tax  1 4-3-30 09 2013 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 2012 10 2013 Supplemental appropriation (Special) 2012 11 2013 Penalties  1 1-4-20  2 1-4-30  3 4-6-550  4 4-7-430  5 7-7-120  6       Rpld/Rnctd 8-1-80  7 9-4-90  8 9-18-60  9 9-20-70  10 9-24-70  11 11-3-430 12 2013 Vacation of utility easement (Special) 13 2013 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 2013 14 2013 Supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2013 15 2013 Adoption of cable customer service standards (Special) 16 2013 Property offenses  1 9-16-120  2 9-16-130  3 9-16-140  4 9-16-150  5 9-16-160  6 9-16-170  7 9-16-180 Alcoholic beverages  8 9-12-122 18 2013 Adoption of budget (Special) 2014 19 2013 Supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2014 20 2013 Mill levy (Special) 2013 21 2013 Adoption of third amended budget (Special) 2013 22 2013 Third supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2013 23 2013 Building Code  1       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 2 Residential Code  2       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 3 Plumbing Code  3       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 4 Mechanical Code  4       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 5 Fuel Gas Code  5       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 6 Fire Code  6       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 7 Energy Conservation Code  7       Rpld/Rnctd Chap. 18, Art. 8 Swimming Pool and Spa Code  9       Added Chap. 18, Art. 9 24 2013 Land Development Code procedures  1 16-2-270 25 2013 Adoption of amended budget (Special) 2013 26 2013 Supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2013 01 2014 Sales and use tax  1 4-3-30 02 2014 Land Development Code procedures  1 16-2-270 03 2014 Department of Public Works  1 11-7-20, 11-7-50, 11-7-70, 11-7-80, 16-1-50, 16-21-380, 18-1-70 04 2014 Adoption of amended budget and supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2014 05 2014 Adoption of amended budget and supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2014 06 2014 Rezoning (Special) 07 2014 Land Development Code procedures  1 16-2-270 08 2014 Zoning  1 16-1-100  2 16-17-20  3 16-17-30  4       Added 16-17-90  5 16-18-30 09 2014 Greenwood Village Hospitality Business Improvement District (Special) 10 2014 Vacating easement (Special) 11 2014 Amending Ordinance 9, Series 2014 regarding the Greenwood Village Hospitality Business Improvement District (Special) 13 2014 Vacating right-of-way (Special) 15 2014 Adoption of amended budget and supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2014 16 2014 Adoption of the 2015 budget and supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 17 2014 Ad valorem taxes (Special) 01 2015 Annexation of Enclave (Special) 02 2015 Adoption of amended budget and supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2015 03 2015 Adoption of Safety Codes for Elevators and Escalators  1 18-2-30(1) 04 2015 Zoning (Special) 05 2015 Adoption of amended budget and supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2015 06 2015 Vacating drainage easement (Special) 08 2015 Adoption of the National Electric Code  1 18-3-30(1)  2       Added Ch. 18, Art. 10,  18-10-10, 18-10-20 09 2015 Adoption of amended budget and supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2015 10 2015 Reservation of fields and shelters in public parks  1 11-5-10  2 11-5-20  3 11-5-40(a)  4 11-5-60 11 2015 Streetlights  1 11-2-10  2 11-2-20  3 11-2-50  4 11-2-70  5       Rpld 11-2-80  6 11-2-100  7 11-2-110 12 2015 Vacating right-of-way (Special) 13 2015 Adoption of amended budget and supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2015 14 2015 Adoption of amended budget and supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 2015 15 2015 Noise-attenuating structures  1       Rpld Ch. 11, Art. 7,  11-7-10-11-7-90  2 16-21-380 16 2015 Land Development Code  1 16-2-40  2 16-2-50  3 16-15-20  4 16-18-10  5 16-18-20  6 16-18-30  7 16-18-50  8-10       Added 16-18-60-16-18-80  11, 12 16-20-20, 16-20-30  13 16-1-100 17 2015 Adoption of the amended 2015 budget and supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 19 2015 Rezoning (Special) 20 2015 Adoption of the 2016 budget and supplemental fund appropriation (Special) 21 2015 Ad valorem taxes (Special) 22 2015 Land Development Code  1 16-1-100  2 16-12-10  3 16-13-10  4 16-19-30  5 16-21-530  6 16-21-570(a) 23 2015 Comprehensive plan (Special) 01 2016 Electronic smoking devices 1 9-14-10 2 9-14-20 3 9-14-30 4 9-14-40 5 9-14-70 02 2016 Land Development Code 1 16-18-30 2 16-1-100 3 16-16-20 03 2016 Budget amendment (Special) 04 2016 Dissolving the Rural Colorado Boulevard Local Improvement District (Special) 05 2016 Granting of variance requests for residential properties 1 16-1-100 2 2-12-50 3 16-2-120 06 2016 Roadway construction 1 16-26-430 07 2016 Budget amendment (Special) 09 2016 Budget amendment (Special) 12 2016 Cable franchise agreement (Special) 13 2016 Budget amendment (Special) 15 2016 Vacating a right-of-way (Special) 17 2016 Budget (Special) 18 2016 Ad valorem taxes (Special) 19 2016 Budget amendment (Special) 20 2016 Vacating a utility easement (Special) 21 2016 Rezoning (Special) 23 2016 Permit parking districts to include public trails 1, 2 8-3-10, 8-3-20 16 2016 Cable franchise agreement (Special) 23 2016 Permit parking districts to include public trails 1, 2 8-3-10, 8-3-20 01 2017 Dissolving the Greenwood Village sewer general improvement district(Special) 02 2017 Permit parking districts(Special) 03 2017 Procedure for evaluating requests for reasonable accommodation under the Fair Housing Amendments Act 1       Added 16-2-195 04 2017 Comprehensive plan (Special) 05 2017 Budget (Special) 06 2017 Sales and use tax 1-3 4-3-30-4-3-50 07 2017 Granting of variance requests for residential properties 1 16-2-120(f)(1) 08 2017 Park Regulations 1 11-5-70(c)(2) 09 2017 Telecommunications facilities 1 16-1-100 2 16-2-10 3       Rpld 16-2-110 4 16-2-210(b) 5 16-3-30 6       Rpld 16-23-10-16-23-70       Added 16-23-10-16-23-110 10 2017 Budget (Special) 11 2017 Unlawful dumping 1       Added 7-2-135 13 2017 Budget (Special) 15 2017 Budget (Special) 17 2017 Budget (Special) 18 2017 Ad valorem taxes (Special) 19 2017 Dissolving 900 East Belleview Local Improvement District (Special) 20 2017 Indoor marijuana cultivation and consumption 1 16-22-140(b)(4), (5) 21 2017 Adding divisions concerned special districts 1       Added div. 1, title 2       Rpld 4-9-110-4-9-130       Added 4-9-110-4-9-160 3       Added 4-9-210-4-9-280 22 2017 Refuse 1 7-2-210 01 2018 Budget Amendment (Special) 02 2018 Recommendations from the planning and zoning commission amending the city's comprehensive plan 1 2-14-50 03 2018 Small unmanned aircraft systems 1       Added 9-8-50 2 9-16-30 3 9-8-40(a) 4 9-4-20 04 2018 Ethics 1 2-7-40 05 2018 Wild animals and wild birds 1 7-8-70 2 7-8-90 6 2018 Land Development Code 1 16-18-30 07 2018 Colorado beer and liquor laws 1 6-2-10 2 9-12-105(a) 3-5 9-12-120-9-12-125 6 9-14-20 7 11-5-20 8 11-5-60 08 2018 Failed 09 2018 Weed and grass control 1 7-2-190 10 2018 Budget Amendment (Special) 11 2018 Ad valorem taxes (Special) 12 2018 General provisions 1 1-1-10 2 1-1-50 3 1-2-10 4 1-4-40 5 1-4-60 13 2018 Comprehensive Plan (Special) 01 2019 Outdoor equestrian arena mirrors 1       Added 16-22-150 02 2019 Arts and Humanities Council 1, 2 2-15-20, 2-15-30 04 2019 Notice of abatement for nuisances 1 7-1-60(a) 2 7-1-70(1) 3 7-1-80 05 2019 Red Fox Improvement District (Postponed indefinitely) 03 2019 Small wireless telecommunication facilities 1 16-1-100 2 16-2-270(2) 3-8 16-23-10-16-23-60 9-12       Added 16-23-61-16-23-64 13 16-23-70 14 11-2-30 15 11-2-100(f) 07 2019 Short term rentals 1 16-1-100 2       Added 16-22-160 3 4-8-20  
