CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF GLENWOOD SPRINGS, COLORADO 
____________ 
Republished in 2015 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CITY OFFICIALS\ 
____________ 
Jonathan Godes, Ward 5 
Mayor 
____________ 
Shelley Kaup, At-Large 
Mayor Pro-Tem 
____________ 
Steve Davis, Ward 1 
Rick Voorhees, Ward 2 
Paula Stepp, Ward 5 
Charlie Willman, Ward 3 
Tony Hershey, At-Large 
City Council 
____________ 
Debra Figueroa 
City Manager 
____________ 
Karl Hanlon 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Catherine Mythen Fletcher 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the city's website, as supplemented through Ordinance 20, Series of 2014, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the current Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been arranged based on their arrangement on the city's website up through Ordinance 20, Series of 2014. The various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of three parts separated by a period. The figure before the first period refers to the title number, the figure before the second period refers to the article number, and the period after the second number refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Under this system, each section is identified with its article, and each article is identified within its title. At the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New titles may be included by using one of the reserved title numbers. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a title of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE T0101:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1  
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this republication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the republication. With this system, the republication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the republication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this republication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the republication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Jodi Hunt, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Catherine Mythens for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 2015. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord./Res. No. Include/Omit Supplement No. 8-2015 Included 1 9-2015 Included 1 13-2015 Included 1 14-2015 Included 1 16-2015 Included 1 17-2015 Included 1 19-2015 Included 1 33-2015 Included 2 1-2016 Included 2 2-2016 Included 2 7-2016 Included 2 11-2016 Included 3 13-2016 Included 3 14-2016 Omitted 3 15-2016 Omitted 3 17-2016 Omitted 3 18-2016 Omitted 3 19-2016 Included 3 21-2016 Included 3 33-2016 Included 3 36-2016 Included 3 38-2016 Included 3 39-2016 Included 3 9-2017 Included 4 11-2017 Included 4 12-2017 Included 4 14-2017 Included 4 2-2017 Included 5 3-2017 Included 5 15-2017 Included 5 16-2017 Included 5 17-2017 Included 5 20-2017 Included 5 21-2017 Included 5 24-2017 Included 5 25-2017 Included 5 27-2017 Included 5 1-2018 Included 5 2-2018 Included 5 5-2018 Included 6 6-2018 Included 6 8-2018 Included 6 9-2018 Included 6 11-2018 Included 6 12-2018 Included 6 22-2016 Included 7 15-2018 Included 7 2018-16 Included 7 17-2018 Included 7 18-2018 Included 7 14-2018 Included 8 19-2018 Included 8 21-2018 Included 8 22-2018 Omitted 8 25-2018 Omitted 9 26-2018 Omitted 9 27-2018 Omitted 9 28-2018 Omitted 9 29-2018 Omitted 9 30-2018 Omitted 9 2-2019 Omitted 9 1-2019 Omitted 10 3-2019 Included 10 5-2019 Included 10 7-2019 Omitted 10 8-2019 Included 11 10-2019 Omitted 11 11-2019 Omitted 11 14-2019 Included 11 15-2019 Included 11  
CHARTER[1] 
PREFATORY SYNOPSIS 
    The Glenwood Springs Charter Convention was elected on the twelfth day of July, 1966, under the authority and the method set out by Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado. The twenty-one elected members have been charged with the responsibility of drawing a document to prescribe the form and substance of home rule government for the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
    The delegates to the convention have viewed their task as one of great responsibility. 
    Two objectives have been uppermost in the minds of the members of the Charter Convention: 
    First: That the Charter must reserve to the people of Glenwood Springs the absolute right and power of self-government under the home rule provisions of the Constitution. 
    Second: That the Charter must ensure the orderly and economical management of the government of Glenwood Springs, guided and controlled by the people through their elected representatives. 
    To these ends, this Charter provides for a Council-Manager form of government for our City and provides for the appointment of a City Manager, who will serve at the exclusive pleasure of the Council, with powers and duties as provided by this Charter and by the Council. 
    Under this Charter, the Council will be responsible to the people, will be legislative in function, and enact ordinances for the good government of the City. The Council will consist of seven members elected from the City in such a manner as to achieve overlapping terms, thus providing for continuity of City government. 
    All ordinances now in effect will remain in effect unless superseded by the provisions of this Charter, or hereafter amended and repealed by the Council. 
    To ensure the greatest possible control of governmental process by the people, provision is made in the Charter for the direct democratic techniques of initiative, referendum, and recall. These methods provide the means whereby the people can, if they wish, directly control the legislative process and recall any elected official who proves himself unsatisfactory. 
    Modern budget-making and fiscal procedures are included to ensure that the City government will always operate as economically as possible and with the maximum degree of financial responsibility. The Manager will be the principal budget-making officer, subject to approval of the budget by the Council. 
    This Charter may be amended when need arises in accordance with provisions of the Constitution. However, the convention believes this Charter is so written that it will serve the needs of Glenwood Springs for many years to come and will provide a sound, economical governmental structure. 
    The aims for the City government and the scope of this Charter are not confined to the present, but are set out in this document to last for many generations, subject to the right of the people to make necessary changes to meet the possible unforeseen requirements of the future. 
    This Charter is designed to meet the continuing needs of a growing City and have a high quality of government. 
    This Charter guarantees and vests the final voice of City government in the people of Glenwood Springs. 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, under authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Colorado, do ordain and establish this Charter for the City government of Glenwood Springs. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Charter for the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado was adopted by the Glenwood Springs Charter Convention on September 9, 1966, and approved by the citizens of Glenwood Springs at a special election on October 11, 1966. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headlines and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.1 - Name and boundaries. 
    The municipal corporation heretofore existing as the City of Glenwood Springs, which is located in Garfield County, State of Colorado, shall remain and continue as a body politic and corporate and under this Charter be known as the City of Glenwood Springs, with the same boundaries, until changed in a manner authorized by law. 
Sec. 1.2 - Powers. 
    The City shall have all the power of local self-government and home rule and all power possible for a city to have under the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado. The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter is not exclusive of others. 
Sec. 1.3 - Rights and liabilities. 
    By the name of the City of Glenwood Springs, the municipal corporation shall have perpetual succession; shall own, possess and hold all property, real and personal heretofore owned, possessed and held by the City, and does assume and shall manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities; shall acquire all benefits and does assume and shall pay all bonds, obligations, and indebtedness of the City; may, by the name of the City of Glenwood Springs, sue and defend, purchase, receive, hold and enjoy, or sell and dispose of real and personal property, and shall have a common seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
Sec. 1.4 - Present ordinances in force. 
    All ordinances of the City in force at the time that this Charter becomes effective shall continue in force, except as they may conflict with the provisions of this Charter, or shall be amended or repealed by ordinance enacted under authority of this Charter. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 2.1 - Colorado Municipal Election Laws adopted. 
    City elections shall be governed by the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965 as now existing, or hereafter amended or modified, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, or by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.2 - Registrations, judges and clerks. 
    The establishment of the regulations on registration, judges, and clerks, and the conducting of elections shall be governed by the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965 as now existing, or hereafter amended or modified, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, or by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.3 - Election date. 
    A general municipal election shall be held biennially on the first Tuesday in the month of April in odd numbered years. Special municipal elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. The polling places shall be open from seven a.m. to seven p.m. on election days. 
(15-04, §1; 15-07, §1) 
Sec. 2.4 - Special elections. 
    Any special municipal election shall be called by resolution or ordinance of the Council at least ninety (90) days in advance of such election, or as stipulated in the Colorado Municipal Election Code or the Uniform Election Code of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended from time to time. The resolution or ordinance calling a special municipal election shall set forth the purpose of such election. 
(15-07, §1) 
Sec. 2.5 - Election wards. 
    The City, as its corporate limits are now established, or may hereafter be extended or changed, is hereby divided into five wards with numbers and boundaries as follows: 
WARD 1 
All that area southerly and westerly of a line starting at the intersection of the westerly City Limits line southerly of the Colorado River, extended north, and the centerline of the Colorado River, then easterly along the centerline of the Colorado River to the intersection of the centerlines of the Colorado River and Grand Avenue (State Highway 82), then southerly along the centerline of Grand Avenue to the intersection of the centerlines of Grand Avenue and 14th Street, then westerly along the centerline of 14th Street to the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive, then westerly and southerly along the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive to the intersection of the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive and the northerly line of the parcel of City owned land located at 1477 Riverside Drive (Kline Family LLC Parcel) extended easterly , then westerly along the northerly line of the parcel of City owned land located at 1477 Riverside Drive to the centerline of the Roaring Fork River, then southerly along the centerline of the Roaring Fork River to the intersections of the centerlines of the Roaring Fork River and 27th Street, then westerly along the centerline of 27th Street to the intersection of the centerlines of 27th Street and Midland Avenue, then southerly along the centerline of Midland Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of Midland Avenue and the southerly line, extended easterly, of the parcel of land platted as Riverview Terrace. 
WARD 2 
All of that area northerly and westerly of a line starting at a point on the centerline of the Colorado River, said point being south of the western most point on the City Limits line northerly of the Colorado River, then easterly along the centerline of the Colorado River to the intersection of the centerlines of the Colorado River and Devereux Road, then northerly along the centerline of Devereux Road to the intersection of the centerlines of Devereux Road and State Highway 6, then westerly along the centerline of State Highway 6 to the intersection of the centerlines of State Highway 6 and Traver Trail, extended southerly, then northerly along the centerline of Traver Trail to the intersection of the centerlines of Traver Trail and Transfer Trail, extended southerly, then northerly along the centerline of Transfer Trail to the intersection of the centerline of Transfer Trail and the City Limits line located on the westerly line of Lot 2, Section 4, T.6 S., R. 89 W., 6th PM 
WARD 3 
All that area northerly and easterly of a line starting at the intersection of the centerline of 14th Street, extended easterly, and the easterly City Limits line, then westerly along the centerline of 14th Street to the intersection of the centerlines of 14th Street and Grand Avenue (State Highway 82), then northerly along the centerline of Grand Avenue to the intersection of the centerlines of Grand Avenue and the Colorado River, then westerly along the centerline of the Colorado River to the intersection of the centerlines of the Colorado River and Devereux Road, then northerly along the centerline of Devereux Road to the intersection of the centerlines of Devereux Road and State Highway 6, then westerly along the centerline of State Highway 6 to the intersection of the centerlines of State Highway 6 and Traver Trail, extended southerly, then northerly along the centerline of Traver Trail to the intersection of the centerlines of Traver Trail and Transfer Trail, extended southerly, then northerly along the centerline of Transfer Trail to the intersection of the centerline of Transfer Trail and the City Limits line located on the westerly line of Lot 2, Section 4, T.6 S., R. 89 W., 6th PM 
WARD 4 
All that area southerly and easterly of a line starting at the intersection of the centerline of 14th Street, extended easterly, and the easterly City Limits line, then westerly along the centerline of 14th Street to the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive, then westerly and southerly along the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive to the intersection of the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive and the northerly line of the parcel of City owned land located at 1477 Riverside Drive (Kline Family LLC Parcel) extended easterly, then westerly along the northerly line of the parcel of City owned land located at 1477 Riverside Drive to the centerline of the Roaring Fork River, then southerly along the centerline of the Roaring Fork River to the intersection of the centerline of the Roaring Fork River and the easterly line of Rosebud Cemetery, extended south. 
WARD 5 
All that area southerly and westerly of a line starting at the intersection of the centerline of Midland Avenue and the southerly line, extended easterly, of the parcel of land platted as Riverview Terrace, then northerly along the centerline of Midland Avenue to the intersection of the centerlines of Midland Avenue and 27th Street, then easterly along the centerline of 27th Street to the intersection of the centerlines of 27th Street and the Roaring Fork River, then southerly along the centerline of the Roaring Fork River to the intersection of the centerline of the Roaring Fork River and the easterly line of Rosebud Cemetery, extended south, then north along the extended easterly line of Rosebud Cemetery to the intersection of the extended easterly line of Rosebud Cemetery and the centerline of South Grand Avenue (County Road 154), then southerly along the centerline of South Grand Avenue and County Road 154 to the intersection of the centerline of County Road 154 and the southerly line of the Deerwalker Subdivision, extended north, then southerly along the southerly line of the Deerwalker Subdivision to the intersection of the southerly line of the Deerwalker Subdivision and the Roaring Fork River, then southerly along the centerline of the Roaring Fork River to the intersection of the centerline of the Roaring Fork River and the south line of Section 27, T.6 S., R. 89 W., 6th PM. 
    The aforementioned ward boundaries shall be effective commencing with the general municipal election on November 5, 1985. 
    The Council shall have the authority, and is hereby directed to realign and redistrict the above said wards at such time as the growth, redistribution of population or otherwise requires the same, provided, however, that: 
(a)  The number of wards shall not be reduced to less than five; 
(b)  The same shall be accomplished by ordinance effective more than one year preceding any general municipal election date; and 
(c)  All wards shall be contiguous, compact and have approximately the same number of voters as determined by the number registered to vote in the preceding general municipal election. 
(Amend. No. 1, 8-7-73; Res. No. 85-13, § 1; 15-07, §1; A. 24-04, § 1) 
Sec. 2.6 - Elective officers. 
    The elective officers of the City shall be seven Councilpersons. One member of Council shall be nominated and elected from each of the several wards of the City and the remainder of the members of Council shall be nominated and elected from the City at large. 
(15-07, § 1) 
See. 2.7 - Nominations for elective municipal office. 
    Nominations for elective municipal office shall be by petition as provided by the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965, as now existing, or hereafter amended or modified, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by ordinance. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 3.1 - City council. 
    All powers of the City not otherwise limited or conferred upon others by this Charter shall be vested in a Council consisting of seven members. It shall have the power to enact and provide for the enforcement of all ordinances necessary to protect life, health and property; to declare, prevent and summarily abate and remove nuisances; to preserve and enforce good government, general welfare, order and security of the City and the inhabitants thereof, to enforce ordinances and regulations by ordaining fines and sentencing as established in Section 13.12 of this Charter; to provide for the granting of probation and the conditional suspension of sentences by the Municipal Court; and to delegate to boards and commissions, within limitations of the Constitution and this Charter, such functions, powers, and authority of the City as it deems proper and advisable. No enumeration of particular powers granted to the Council shall be construed to impair any general grant of power herein contained or granted by the Constitution, nor to limit any such grant to powers of the same class or classes as those so enumerated. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 3.2 - Qualifications of councilpersons. 
    Each Councilperson, when nominated and elected, or appointed, shall be a registered elector of the City and shall have been registered in and shall have resided in the City for one year immediately preceding each election. No Councilperson shall be a salaried employee of the City or hold any other municipal public office during his term as Councilperson. 
(Amend. No. 2, 8-7-73; 29-83) 
Sec. 3.3 - Mayor and mayor pro tem. 
    The Mayor shall be the presiding officer and required to vote and shall be elected from the members of the Council at its organizational meeting, by a majority vote, after each general municipal election. The Mayor shall be recognized as head of the City government for all ceremonial and legal purposes, and shall execute and authenticate legal instruments requiring the Mayor's signature as such official. 
    The Council shall elect a Mayor Pro Tem who shall act as Mayor during the absence of the Mayor with all powers herein granted to the Mayor. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 3.4 - Terms of office. 
    Terms of the newly elected members of Council shall begin upon their taking oath at the first regular meeting of the Council following their election. Council members elected at the November 6, 2007 election (Ward 1, Ward 3, Ward 4 and At Large) shall serve until the first regular meeting of the Council after the April, 2011 election. Council members elected at the November 1, 2005 election (Ward 2, Ward 5 and At Large) shall serve until the first regular meeting of the Council after the April, 2009 election. 
    At each general municipal election, the terms of office for which the Councilmember shall be elected shall be four years. 
(Amend. No. 3, 8-17-73; 15-07, § 1; Res. No. 85-13, § 2) 
Sec. 3.5 - Vacancies. 
    A Councilmember's office shall become vacant whenever he or she is recalled, dies, becomes incapacitated, resigns, misses three consecutive regular meetings of the City Council, removes from or becomes a non-resident of the City, or removes from the ward from which he or she was elected. Vacancies shall be filled in the following manner: 
(a)  Appointment by Council if the vacancy occurs more than ninety days before the next general municipal election. The appointee shall be selected by a majority vote of Council and such appointment shall be made within thirty days after such vacancy occurs. All such appointments shall be until a successor is elected and qualified at the next general municipal election. Vacancies occurring in the offices of Councilpersons elected from the several wards of the City shall be filled as herein provided by the appointment of a person residing in the ward wherein the vacancy occurs and who is otherwise qualified, as provided in Article 3, Section 2, of this Charter. In the event that a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, the appointment shall be for the office of Councilperson only and the Mayor Pro-Tem shall assume the duties of Mayor. 
(b)  By election at the next general municipal election if the vacancy occurs within the ninety days immediately preceding said election. 
(c)  By election at a special municipal election if three or more vacancies exist at any one time and there will not be a general municipal election within the ninety days immediately succeeding the date that the third vacancy occurred. In the event of such multiple vacancies, Council shall call a special municipal election to be held within sixty days from the occurrence of the third vacancy to elect a Councilperson to fill each vacated office. 
All  members of Council elected to fill vacancies as provided in subparagraphs (b) and (c) hereof and those elected subsequent to the filling of a vacancy by appointment as provided in subparagraph (a) hereof shall be elected to fill only the unexpired terms of the offices so vacant. 
(24-76, § 1; 37-81, § 2; 29-83, § 2; 15-07 § 1) 
Sec. 3.6 - Oath of office. 
    Members of Council and applicable employees of the City shall each take an oath or affirmation before entering upon the duties of his or her office, that he or she will support the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Colorado, and the Charter and ordinances of the City of Glenwood Springs, and faithfully perform the duties of his or her office. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 3.7 - Compensation of members of council. 
    City Council's compensation may be changed by ordinance from time to time; provided, however, that no increase so granted will take effect before the next general election of City Council. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 3.8 - Council meetings. 
(a)  The organizational meeting of the Council shall be held at the first regular meeting in April following the regular municipal election. At the organizational meeting, the outgoing City Council shall meet to act upon any ordinances pending on second reading. 
After the outgoing Council has performed the foregoing duties, the outgoing Council shall adjourn sine die, new members of the incoming Council shall take the oath of office as provided in Section 3.6 of the Charter, and the incoming Council shall henceforth assume all powers and duties as set forth herein. 
(b)  Council meetings shall be held in the Council Chambers at the City Hall, or other designated assembly room. The regular meetings of the Council shall be not less than twice a month and shall be held on the first and third Thursday of each month unless changed by ordinance of the City Council. All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public. 
(c)  Four (4) members of Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(52-87, § 2; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 3.9 - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the Council shall be called by the City Clerk on the written request of the Mayor, or any two members of the Council, on at least twenty-four hours written notice to each member of the Council., served personally or left at his or her usual place of residence; but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice, if all members of the Council are present or have waived notice thereof in writing. 
(37-81, § 1; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 3.10 - Council-administration relations. 
    Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative functions of the City solely through the City Manager and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Manager. 
Sec. 3.11 - Independent audit. 
    An independent audit of all financial affairs of the City shall be made by registered or certified public accountants experienced in the municipal accounting selected by the Council; 
(1)  Annually, and 
(2)  Upon the termination of the employment of the Director of Finance, or the City Manager, or both, more than ninety (90) days after or more than thirty (30) days before the effective date of the nearest annual audit. 
(27-79, § 1) 
ARTICLE IV. - ORDINANCES 

Sec. 4.1 - When required. 
    All legislative enactments of the Council must be in the form of ordinances. Legislative enactments as used herein shall include, but not be limited to, every act making an appropriation, levying a tax, authorizing the borrowing of money, creating an indebtedness, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property. 
Sec. 4.2 - Voting. 
    A roll call or electronically displayed vote of Council shall be taken upon the first and second introductions of all ordinances and the "yeas" and "nays" entered upon the minutes or records of the Council proceedings. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, passage of every ordinance upon first reading shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of Council present and entitled to vote thereon, and final passage of every ordinance shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Council entitled to vote thereon. 
    Every member, when present, must vote upon ordinances, except that a member who has a personal or private interest in any ordinance proposed or pending before the Council shall disclose this fact to it and shall not be entitled to vote thereon; provided, however, should any member entitled to vote thereon fail to vote, his or her vote shall be recorded in the affirmative. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 4.3 - Form of ordinance. 
    Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be, "THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GLENWOOD SPRINGS, COLORADO, ORDAINS." 
Sec. 4.4 - Procedure of passage. 
    The course that an ordinance shall take for passage shall be: 
(a)  Introduction at any regular or special meeting by any member of the Council. 
(b)  At the first introduction, reading the title and number only, unless a Council member or citizen in attendance requests a reading in full of any ordinance except standard codes proposed to be adopted by reference pursuant to Section 4.6 of this Charter; at least one (1) copy of all ordinances shall be available at the meeting for public inspection, and except for standard codes to be adopted by reference pursuant to Section 4.6, either digital or paper copies of ordinances shall be furnished to each member of Council. 
(c)  Passage or rejection on first reading by a roll call or electronically displayed vote of the City Council. 
(d)  If passed upon first introduction, the title of the ordinance shall be published, or the title of an amendment thereto, together with a statement that the text is available for public inspection and acquisition in the office of the City Clerk. Except for standard codes adopted by reference pursuant to Section 4.6, the full ordinance shall also be electronically displayed. 
(e)  Introduction a second time at a regular or special meeting of Council, held not earlier than seven days after publication, for final passage or rejection by roll call or electronically displayed vote of the Council. 
(f)  At the second introduction, reading of the title and number of the ordinance. 
(g)  Final passage or rejection by roll call or electronically displayed vote of the Council. 
(h)  An ordinance may be amended as to form at the second introduction by a roll call or electronically displayed vote of the Council. 
(i)  After final passage, the ordinance shall be published by title and number, with notice that the text of any amendments as to form enacted upon the second introduction are available in full text in the office of the City Clerk. 
(j)  Appropriation ordinances are excepted from the provisions of (d) and (e) above. The annual appropriation ordinance shall be passed at a meeting of Council on or before the first regular meeting of December of each year. The annual appropriation ordinance may be introduced by the reading of its title and number, unless a member of Council or citizen attending the meeting requests a reading in full; each member of Council shall be furnished with one (1) paper or digital copy of the appropriation ordinance, and at least one (1) copy shall be available at the meeting for public inspection. 
(k)  An ordinance, when passed, shall take effect and be in force ten (10) days after final publication except for ordinances necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, which shall take effect upon final publication if they are approved by at least five (5) members of Council on final reading. Such excepted ordinances shall contain a finding that Council deems the passage of the ordinance to be necessary for the immediate preservation of public peace, health or safety, and a brief statement in support of this finding, which shall be conclusive. 
(24-76, § 2; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 4.5 - Disposition. 
    A true copy of every ordinance, as adopted by Council, shall be numbered and recorded, and adoption shall be authenticated by the signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk and proof of publication by the certificate of the publisher, respectively. Original ordinances and the proofs of publication for the same shall be kept and be available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk. 
(37-81, § 1; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 4.6 - Codes published by reference. 
    Standard codes, promulgated by the Federal Government, the State of Colorado, or any agency of either, or by any municipality within the State of Colorado, including the City of Glenwood Springs, or by recognized trade or professional organizations, or amendments or revisions thereof may be adopted by reference; providing the publication of the adopting ordinance shall advise that copies of the code to be adopted by reference are available for inspection at the office of the City Clerk and providing that any penalty clause in said codes may be adopted only if set forth in full and published in the adopting ordinance. 
(37-81, § 1) 
Sec. 4.7 - Severability of ordinances. 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given affect without the invalid portion or application; provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. 
Sec. 4.8 - Ordinances, resolutions and motions. 
    All actions of the Council not required by this Charter to be in the form of ordinances, may be in the form of resolutions and motions, on which the "yeas" and "nays" shall be entered upon the minutes or records of the Council proceedings. Every member, when present, must vote upon ordinances, resolutions and motions, except that a member who has a personal, private or conflict of interest in any ordinance, resolution and motion proposed or pending before the Council shall disclose this fact to it and shall not be entitled to vote thereon; provided, however, should any member entitled to vote thereon fail to vote, his vote shall be recorded in the affirmative. 
(15-07, § 1) 
ARTICLE V. - INITIATION, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

Sec. 5.1 - Citizen initiative and referendum. 
    A ballot question, new ordinance, or a referendum on an enacted effective ordinance may be initiated by citizen petition to the electorate, as hereafter provided; or the Council may, on its own motion, submit an ordinance, question or issue to the electorate as hereafter provided. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 5.2 - Petition requirements. 
    A citizen initiated petition shall be signed by registered electors in a number not less than five percent (5%)of the number of persons who were registered electors of the City as of the date of the last regular City election, and all signatures on said petition shall be obtained within twenty-one (21) days before the date of filing the petition with the City Clerk. Any such petition shall be addressed to the Council and may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers identical as to content and simultaneously filed by one person. An initiated petition shall set forth in full the proposed ordinance, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one ordinance. A referendum petition shall identify the ordinance, or part thereof, or code section it proposes to have repealed or amended. Each signer of a petition shall sign his or her name, the date and his or her place of residence by street and number. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof stating the number of signers thereof, that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall, within fifteen (15) days, canvass the signatures thereon. If the petition does not contain a sufficient number of signatures or qualified electors of the City, or any other error or insufficiency shall be found in the petition, the City Clerk shall notify forthwith, by mail, the person filing such petition. Fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing such notice shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental or corrected petition papers. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed by this section, the City Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. 
(37-81, § 3; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 5.2.1 - Time for submission of referendum petitions. 
    Any person seeking a referendum on an enacted, effective ordinance shall submit to the City Clerk a written notice of intent to circulate a referendum petition within ten (10) days after final publication of the subject ordinance. The petitioner shall then submit the referendum petition within twenty-one (21) days of submission of the notice of intent to circulate. 
(28-91, § 2; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 5.3 - Council procedure on petitions. 
    Upon presentation to the Council of a citizen petition by the City Clerk the Council shall, within thirty (30) days, either: 
(a)  Adopt the ordinance as submitted by an initiated petition; 
(b)  Repeal the ordinance, or part thereof, referred to by a referendum petition; or 
(c)  Determine to submit to the electors the question as set forth in the petition. 
(37-81, § 3; 07-15, § 1) 
Sec. 5.4 - Submission of ordinances to electors. 
    All ordinances, or parts thereof, be they initiated, referred or upon motion of Council, shall be submitted at the next regular City election held in the City for any other purpose or in the discretion of the Council at a special election called for that specific purpose. If no election is to be held in the City for any other purpose within one hundred fifty (150) days from the time the petition is presented to the Council, and it does not enact or repeal the ordinance, or part thereof, referred to by a petition, then the Council shall by resolution or ordinance call a special election for the submission of the question to the electors, which said election shall be held within ninety (90) days from such date of presentation. The results of all elections held under the provisions of this section shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 5.5 - Miscellaneous provisions on petitions. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate may not be amended or repealed for a period of six (6) months after the date of the election at which it was adopted; provided, however, Council may make technical changes in such an ordinance by amendment thereof, which, by change of conditions or circumstances, or otherwise, are necessary to give full effect thereto. An ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be re-enacted for a period of six (6) months after the date of the election at which it was repealed. Any ordinance, however, may be adopted, amended or repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiatory procedure in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Charter, or if submitted to the electorate by the Council on its own motion. If two or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 5.6 - Ordinances excepted. 
    Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, ordinances authorizing the issuance of bonds, levying taxes, the annual appropriation ordinances and those ordering improvements initiated by petition to be paid for by special assessments and those declaring an emergency shall be excepted from the referendum. 
Sec. 5.7 - Recall. 
    Every elective officer of the City may be recalled at any time after six (6) months in office by the electors entitled to vote for a successor of such incumbent through the procedure and in the manner provided for in Article XXI of the Constitution as now existing, or as may hereafter be amended or modified. 
(29-83, § 4). 
Sec. 5.8 - Recall procedure by council. 
    The Council may provide by ordinance such further recall procedure as may be deemed necessary as long as it is not inconsistent with the Constitution or this Charter. However, in no event shall an ordinance require any recall petition to be signed by more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the electors of the entire vote cast at the last preceding election for all candidates for the office. 
    After one (1) recall petition and election, no further petition shall be filed against the same officer during the term for which he was elected, unless the petitioners signing said petition shall equal fifty percent (50%) of the votes cast at the last preceding general election for all candidates for the office. 
Article VI. - CITY ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 6.1 - City manager. 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City and shall reside within a ten-mile radius of the corporate limits of the City. 
(29-83, § 5) 
Sec. 6.2 - Appointment and qualifications. 
    The Council by majority vote shall appoint a City Manager within one hundred twenty (120) days after any vacancy exists in such position, who shall serve at the pleasure of a majority of the Council at a salary to be fixed by the Council. He or she shall be selected on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual experience in and knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. 
(24-76, § 3; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 6.3 - Absence of city manager. 
    The City Council may appoint or designate an acting City Manager during any period of vacancy in the office, or during the absence of the City Manager from the City. In addition, for short temporary absences not exceeding twenty-one (21) days, the City Manager may appoint an acting City Manager. Such acting City Manager shall, while in such office, have all the responsibilities, duties, functions, protections, and authority of the City Manager. 
(Res. 77-18(A), § 1) 
Sec. 6.4 - Powers and duties. 
    The City Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the efficient administration of all affairs of the City placed in his or her charge, and to that end shall have the power and duty to: 
(a)  Enforce the laws and ordinances of the City. 
(b)  Appoint, subject to the provisions of this Charter, all the officers and employees of the City, except where this Charter expressly provides otherwise. The City Manager may remove, suspend, demote or discipline any officer or employee of the City, except such as are appointed by Council. 
(c)  Make appointments on the basis of executive and administrative ability and the training and experience of such appointees in the work which they are to perform. 
(d)  Prepare a proposed budget annually and submit it to the Council and be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption. 
(e)  Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year and, upon request of the Council, make written or verbal reports at any time concerning the affairs of the City under the City Manager's supervision. 
(f)  Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the Council as the City Manager may deem necessary or expedient. 
(g)  Exercise supervision and control over all executive and administrative departments and recommend to the Council any proposal the City Manager thinks advisable to establish, consolidate or abolish administrative departments. 
(h)  Enforce all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any contract or public utility franchise and, upon knowledge of any violation thereof, report same to the Council for such action and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the same. 
(i)  Attend Council meetings and participate in discussions with the Council in an advisory capacity. 
(j)  Be responsible for the establishment and maintenance of a system of accounts of the City which shall conform to any uniform system required by the Council and to generally accepted principles and procedures of governmental accounting. 
(k)  Be responsible for City purchases and for engineering, architectural and maintenance, construction and equipment services required by the City. 
(l)  For such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance, or by Council. 
(27-79, § 2; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 6.5 - Director of finance and city clerk. 
    There shall be a Director of Finance and City Clerk who shall be appointed by the City Manager, to serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The City Manager may also appoint a deputy or deputies to serve under the Director of Finance or the City Clerk who shall have the authority to act in the absence of the Director of Finance or the City Clerk, respectively. 
(37-81, § 4) 
Sec. 6.6 - Duties and powers of director of finance and city clerk. 
(a)  The Director of Finance shall be the City Treasurer with the power to administer oaths and take acknowledgments under the seal of the City. The Director shall keep and supervise all financial accounts, receive and have custody of all monies of the City, collect all City taxes, electrical fees, water fees and other charges for City services, issue licenses and collect fees therefore, and perform such other duties pertaining to the Department of Finance as are specified in this Charter or required by ordinance or assigned by the City Manager. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council with the power to administer oaths and take acknowledgments under seal of the City. The Clerk shall make and keep all records of the City and publish notice on behalf of the City not specifically entrusted to or required of any other department by this Charter or by ordinance. The Clerk should perform such other duties pertaining to the City records as are specified in this Charter or by ordinance or assigned by the City Manager. 
(27-79, § 3; 29-83, § 6; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 6.7 - Departments created. 
(a)  The administrative functions of the City shall be performed by such departments as may hereafter be established by ordinance. Upon recommendation of the City Manager, the Council may, by ordinance, establish departments necessary to perform and carry out the City's lawful functions, and the Council may, by ordinance, consolidate or merge any departments. 
(b)  Residency requirements for all members of the police and emergency services departments shall be specified in the City of Glenwood Springs Employee Handbook. 
(c)  In the employment of persons to work for the City, whether by contract or otherwise, all other things being equal, preference shall be given to the residents of the City. 
(27-79, § 4; 24-76, § 4; Res. No. 77-18A, § 2; 29-83, §§ 7, 8; 32-94, § 1) 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 7.1 - General provisions. 
    The Council may establish Boards and Commissions and provide for their powers and duties, and the Council may consolidate, merge, or abolish any of the said Boards or Commissions. The establishment, consolidation, merger, or abolishment of any Boards or Commissions shall be accomplished only by ordinance. Unless otherwise required by law or this Charter, all Boards and Commissions shall be appointed by the Council. Initial appointments by the Council shall specify the term of office of each individual in order to achieve overlapping tenure. All members shall be subject to removal by the appointing authority. The Council shall make appointments to fill vacancies for unexpired terms. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, each Board and Commission shall choose its own chairman and vice-chairman from its members and operate in accordance with the rules of procedures set forth by the appointing authority. 
    All meetings shall be open to the public. Copies of all records and minutes of all meetings shall be kept and placed in the office of the City Clerk or in the office of the Department staffing the Board or Commission for public inspection. Reports shall be made to the Council as the Council shall require. 
(37-81, § 1; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 7.2 - Services provided. 
    The Council may provide by ordinance for the planning, establishment, and supervision of a community recreation program and for equipping and maintaining City-owned or controlled parks, recreational areas and facilities, in and outside the City, which functions shall be under the direction of the City Manager. 
    The City may cooperate with other public authorities, organizations, or individuals, in or outside the City, to implement the operations of any programs for the benefit of the public. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY ATTORNEY AND MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 8.1 - Appointment of city attorney. 
    The Council shall appoint a City Attorney who shall be the legal representative of the City and shall advise the Council and City officials in matters relating to their official powers and duties. The City Attorney shall be an attorney-at-law admitted to practice in Colorado. The Council may provide the City Attorney with such assistants as the Council may deem necessary. The Council shall establish compensation for the City Attorney and special counsel. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 8.2 - Duties. 
    The City Attorney or assistants shall represent the City in all legal proceedings; supervise the drafting of all ordinances; and the preparation of all other legal documents. The City Attorney or assistants shall attend all Council meetings and shall perform all services incident to this position as may be required by this Charter or the ordinances of the City. 
Sec. 8.3 - Special counsel. 
    The Council may, on its own motion, or upon request of the City Attorney, in special cases employ special counsel to serve under the direction of the City Attorney. Special counsel engaged in regard to irregularities found by audit or any alleged dereliction in the duties of any officer or employee, shall serve independently of the City Attorney. 
Sec. 8.4 - Municipal court. 
    There shall be a Municipal Court which shall have jurisdiction to hear and try all alleged violations of this Charter and the City ordinances. The Municipal Court shall have all jurisdiction as is provided under state statutes and rules promulgated by the Colorado Supreme Court. The Municipal Court shall be a qualified Municipal Court of Record and shall keep a verbatim record of all proceedings and evidence at trials by either electric devices or stenographic means. The Council shall provide suitable quarters for the honor and dignity of the Municipal Court and all supplies and things necessary for the proper functioning of the Court. 
Sec. 8.5 - Qualifications and appointment of municipal judges, assistant municipal judges, and substitute municipal judges. 
    The Council shall appoint one or more municipal judges and such assistant municipal judges as may be reasonably necessary to insure the prompt and expeditious determination of Municipal Court matters. Council may also appoint substitute municipal judges as circumstances may require in case of temporary absence, sickness, disqualification, or other inability of the presiding or assistant municipal judges to act. Each municipal judge, assistant municipal judge, and substitute municipal judge shall be admitted to and licensed in the practice of law in Colorado so long as such person acts as judge, shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age at the time the duties of the office are assumed, shall reside within a ten (10) mile radius of the corporate limits of the City, and shall take the oath of office as set forth in Article III, Section 6, of this Charter. 
    Each judge shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, and any vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Council shall provide for the salary of each municipal judge or assistant municipal judge which shall be a fixed annual compensation and payable on a monthly basis. The Council may pay any substitute judge, appointed pursuant to this section, proportionate to the services rendered served by such judge. 
(27-79, § 5; 29-91, § 2; 15-07, § 1) 
ARTICLE IX. - CITY FINANCES 

Sec. 9.1 - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year for the City and of all its agencies shall begin on the first day of January and end on the thirty-first day of December each year. 
Sec. 9.2 - Annual budget. 
    On or before the first regular Council meeting in October of each year, the City Manager shall submit to the Council a complete budget for the City for the next fiscal year. 
(24-76, § 5; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 9.3 - Scope of the budget. 
    The budget adopted by the Council shall contain: 
(a)  An estimate of anticipated revenue from all sources other than the tax levy for the ensuing year. 
(b)  An estimate of the general fund cash surplus at the end of the current fiscal year, or of the deficit to be made up by appropriation. 
(c)  The estimated expenditures necessary for the operation of the several departments, offices, and agencies of the City. 
(d)  Debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(e)  A program of proposed capital projects for the ensuing year and the five (5) years thereafter, which shall contain estimates of the cost of such projects, together with suggested methods of financing the same. The City Manager shall include those projects previously considered and not abandoned and give reasons therefor. This report may be a part of the budget or a separate report attached thereto. 
(f)  A balance between the total estimated expenditures including any deficit to be met, and moneys set aside for public improvements and total anticipated revenue, plus any surplus. All estimates shall be in detail showing revenues by source, and expenditures by organizational units, activities, character and object. 
Sec. 9.4 - Budget hearing. 
    On receipt of the proposed budget, the Council shall set a day for the hearing of the budget and shall show that such proposed budget is open for inspection by the public at the office of the Director of Finance. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once ten (10) days prior to such hearing. 
(37-81, § 1) 
Sec. 9.5 - Adoption of the budget. 
    After said public hearing and on or before the first regular meeting of Council in November of each year, the Council shall adopt by resolution the budget for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(30-91, § 2; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 9.6 - Annual appropriation. 
    After said public hearing and on or before the first regular meeting in December of each year, the Council shall pass the annual appropriation ordinance in which shall be appropriated such sums of money as the Council deems necessary to defray all expenses and liabilities of the City during the ensuing year. 
    The annual appropriation ordinance shall be based upon the budget as adopted, but need not be itemized further than by departments and the major divisions thereof, and by each independent office and agency. 
Sec. 9.7 - Certification of tax levy. 
    Not later than the first regular meeting of Council in December of each year, or such other date required by law, the Council shall fix the amount of tax levy which shall be assessed upon each dollar of assessed valuation of all taxable property within the corporate limits of the City, and shall cause the same to be certified to the County as required by law. If the Council should fail in any year to make such levy as above provided, the rate last fixed shall be the rate for the ensuing fiscal year, which rate shall be levied as by law provided. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 9.8 - General fund. 
    There is hereby established a fund to be known as the general fund. All revenues not specifically allocated to any other fund shall be placed in the general fund. All general functions of the City shall be financed by expenditures from the general fund. 
Sec. 9.9 - Contingencies. 
    The general fund may contain an item for contingencies. Except in those cases where there is no logical account to which an expenditure can be charged, expenditures shall not be charged directly to contingencies; but instead, the necessary part of the appropriation for contingencies shall be transferred to the logical account, and the expenditure charged to such account. No such transfer shall be made without the express approval of the Council, and then only for expenditures which could not readily be foreseen at the time the budget was adopted. 
Sec. 9.10 - Special funds. 
    Additional funds which shall be known as special or enterprise funds shall be created by ordinance to provide for moneys to be held for special purposes, such as: depreciation and obsolescence; debt service; equipment and building replacement; special services; local improvements; City-owned utilities; trust funds and endowments; and such other purposes as the Council may determine. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 9.11 - Capital project fund. 
    The Council may create a fund to be known as the capital project fund for the purpose of paying the cost of capital improvements, including purchase of land, buildings or equipment, and the improvement and the construction of public works. The Council shall have power to define the rules and regulations pertaining to such fund by ordinance and shall have power to transfer from time to time moneys from the general fund to the capital project fund; however, no monies may be transferred by the Council at any time from the capital project fund to the general fund. Unless unexpended appropriated monies are carried over to the next fiscal year by resolution of the City Council, all monies remaining for an appropriation in the capital project fund at the end of a fiscal year shall revert to the capital project fund balance. Any such monies not appropriated by Council in the budget for the following fiscal year shall automatically become additional monies in the contingency capital project appropriation for that fiscal year. 
(37-81, § 6) 
Sec. 9.12 - Transfer of funds. 
    The Council may, by the affirmative vote of five (5) or more of the Council, transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof, from one department to another at any time; except that no transfer shall be made from any sinking fund, encumbered fund, or capital project fund. 
Sec. 9.13 - Additional appropriation. 
    The Council may make additional appropriations by ordinance during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the City, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget, unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public health, peace or safety. 
Sec. 9.14 - Investments. 
    Funds on hand which are not then needed in the conduct of the affairs of the City may be invested in securities which are legal investments for public funds under the statutes in effect at the time of such investments. In investing such funds, all other things being equal, preference shall be given to local financial institutions. 
(29-83, § 9) 
Cross reference- Charter §13.6 
ARTICLE X. - BONDED INDEBTEDNESS 

Sec. 10.1 - General Obligation Bonds, Water Extension Bonds, and Sewer Extension Bonds. 
    Indebtedness and obligations of the City shall be incurred and limited as provided in Articles XI and XX of the Constitution, as now existing or as may hereafter be amended or modified, applicable to towns and cities, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The Council shall have power to issue general obligation bonds of the City for any public purpose upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the taxpaying electors of the City voting thereon at any special or general election; provided, however, that sewer bonds as well as water bonds need not be so authorized. The total outstanding general obligation indebtedness of the City, other than water bonds or sewer bonds, shall not at any time exceed ten percent (10%) of the assessed valuation of the taxable property within the City as shown by the last preceding assessment for tax purposes. Bonds of the City, other than water bonds and sewer bonds, shall mature in not more than twenty-five (25) years from date and shall be payable in annual installments commencing not later than five (5) years after the date of issue of said bonds. Water bonds and sewer bonds shall mature and be payable as provided by the ordinance authorizing the issuance of said bonds. 
(29-83, § 10) 
Sec. 10.2 - Refunding bonds. 
    The Council may authorize, by ordinance, without an election, issuance of refunding bonds for the purpose of paying or providing for the payment of, by escrow deposit or otherwise outstanding bonds of the City, including special improvement bonds. 
Sec. 10.3 - Special and local improvement districts and construction of improvements therein. 
    The Council shall have the power to establish, by ordinance, improvement districts for the construction of special or local improvements of every land and character. Such districts shall be established in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
A.  Necessity of District. Council shall, by resolution, determine that it is necessary to form a district by finding: 
(1)  Such improvement is necessary for the preservation of the public peace, safety, health or welfare, or 
(2)  A petition requesting improvements signed by the owners of more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the proposed district, provided that such majority shall include not less than fifty percent (50%) of the landowners residing in the territory. 
B.  Public Hearing. Such resolution shall include a date, time and place for a public hearing at which all interested parties may appear and give testimony and shall state the method and manner by which Council proposes to assess the property owners in the proposed improvement district. Such resolution shall be published, not less than seven (7) days nor more than fourteen (14) days, prior to the date of the public hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. In addition, a copy of such resolution shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to each property owner to be included within the proposed special improvement district. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Council shall consider all protests and shall establish or reject all or any part of the proposed district as the interests of the property owners within the proposed district and the general public may best be served. 
C.  Ordinance Establishing District. In the event Council determines, after the public hearing, to establish an improvement district it shall do so by ordinance. The establishing ordinance shall prescribe the area to be included in the improvement district and the method and manner of making such improvements and assessing the costs of such improvements. The method of assessment shall bear a rational relationship to the benefits to be conferred upon the property to be assessed and may be based upon front footage, assessed valuation or other methods or combination of methods. 
D.  Financing Improvements. The Council by the establishing ordinance or by subsequent ordinance or both shall provide for the method by which the costs and expenses of the organization of the district and the construction or installation of the improvements shall be made. Those methods may include the issuance of bonds or the funding of the costs and expenses from current appropriations. In the event the costs and expenses are paid from the current appropriations, the interest rate shall be set by Council in accordance with the interest rate which could be earned by the City should those same funds be invested by the City for the same period given the property owners to repay their assessments to the City. 
E.  Prepayment of Assessments. Property owners shall have the right to pay their individual assessments in full prior to certification of the assessment to the County and such payment in full shall be subject to a discount in an amount to be set by Council not to exceed its proportional share of the interest plus the cost of annual collection. 
(29-83, § 11) 
Sec. 10.4 - Special or local improvement district bonds-general benefits. 
    In consideration of general benefits conferred on the City at large from the construction or installation of improvements in special or local improvement districts, the Council may levy annual taxes on the taxable property within the City, not exceeding one mill in any one year, to be disbursed as determined by the Council for the paying of such benefits, for the payment of any assessments levied against the City itself in connection with bonds issued for special or local improvement districts and for the purpose of advancing money to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of bonds issued for any special or local improvement district hereafter created. 
Sec. 10.5 - Bond sales-limitations. 
    All the terms and conditions of all bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this Charter shall be fixed by the authorizing ordinance and such bonds shall be sold to the best advantage of the City, provided that refunding bonds may be exchanged, dollar for dollar, for the bonds being refunded. Each bond issue may contain provisions for the redemption of bonds prior to their respective maturity dates on such terms as may be provided by the Council. 
(29-83, § 12) 
Sec. 10.6 - Sales tax revenue securities. 
    The Council may authorize, by ordinance, without an election, securities made payable solely out of the proceeds of any sales or use taxes, or from any portion, however determined, or any combination, of sales and use taxes ("Sales Tax Revenue Securities"). Sales Tax Revenue Securities include, without limitation, interim or short term securities, and securities extending or funding such interim or short term securities. Sales Tax Revenue Securities may be refunded in the manner provided in Section 10.2. No Sales Tax Revenue Securities shall be issued for a term longer than twenty-five (25) years from the date thereof. Sales Tax Revenue Securities shall not be subject to any restrictions or limitations contained in Section 10.1. Sales or use taxes, or any portion, however determined, or any combination of sales and use taxes may also be pledged as additional security for any other City securities. 
(6-83, § 3) 
ARTICLE XI. - TAXATION 

Sec. 11.1 - Authority to levy taxes. 
    The Council may levy and collect taxes for municipal purposes, and it may levy and collect special assessments for local improvements as provided in this Charter or by ordinance; provided, however, that no income tax, sales tax, or cigarette or tobacco tax shall be levied after the adoption of this Charter until it shall have been approved by a majority of the electorate at a regular or special election. This section shall have no effect on any taxes in existence on the effective date hereof. 
Sec. 11.2 - Authority to acquire property. 
    In addition to any other power it has to acquire property, the City is hereby authorized to purchase or otherwise acquire property on which there are delinquent taxes and/or special assessments. The City may sell and dispose of any property acquired under this authority, provided provision for any such sale or disposal is accomplished by ordinance. 
ARTICLE XII. - FRANCHISES 

Sec. 12.1 - Granting of franchises. 
    Any franchise relating to any street, alley, public place or property of the City shall be subject to the initiative and referendum powers reserved to the people under Article V of this Charter and Sec. 1 of Article V of the Colorado Constitution. Such referendum powers shall be guaranteed notwithstanding a recital in an ordinance granting such franchise that such ordinance is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health and safety. If such a referendum is ordered to be submitted to the registered electors, the grantee of such franchise shall deposit with the Director of Finance the expense, as determined by the Director of Finance, of such submission. 
(24-76, § 6; 47-87, § 2) 
Sec. 12.2 - Present franchises. 
    All franchise ordinances of the City in effect at the time this Charter is adopted shall remain in full force and effect, according to their provisions and terms, until the expiration date provided in such ordinances, or until such ordinances are amended in order to comply with state and federal law or upon mutual agreement of the City and the franchisee. 
(24-76, § 6) 
Sec. 12.3 - Extension of territory. 
    With respect to any franchise, after negotiation or mutual agreement, the Council may by ordinance extend the area to include streets, or public places and property not embraced in such franchise, when public convenience and necessity require, subject to all terms and conditions of such original franchises, and coextensive with the terms thereof, without a vote of the qualified taxpaying electors. 
Sec. 12.4 - Term, compensation, restriction. 
    No franchise, lease, or right to use the streets, alleys, or the public places or property of the City shall be granted for longer than twenty (20) years. Every grant of a franchise shall fix the amount and manner of payment of the compensation to be paid by the grantee for the use of the same. This provision shall not exempt the grantee from any lawful taxation upon grantee or grantee's property, nor from any license, charges, or other impositions, levied by the Council, not levied on account of the use granted by the franchise. 
(15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 12.5 - Revocable permits. 
    The Council may grant permits for the temporary use or occupation of any street, alley, public place or property of the City and establish conditions and compensation to be paid the City therefor. 
Sec. 12.6 - Condemnation or purchase. 
    The right of the City to construct, purchase, or condemn any public utility, work or way, as provided by law, is expressly reserved. 
Sec. 12.7 - Assignment. 
    Assigning, selling, leasing, or otherwise alienating a franchise shall be considered a forfeiture unless consent is given by the Council by ordinance. 
Sec. 12.8 - Books and records. 
    The Council shall cause to be kept in the office of the Director of Finance an indexed franchise record in which shall be transcribed copies of all franchises granted by the City. The record shall be a complete history of all such franchises and shall include a comprehensive and convenient reference to all actions at law affecting the same, copies of all annual and inspection reports, and such other information as the Council may require. 
Sec. 12.9 - Control of franchise for use of water reserved to city. 
    No franchise, right, or privilege shall be granted affecting the use of the water belonging to the City, or affecting its water systems, without retaining complete and absolute control in the City. 
Sec. 12.10 - Common use of facilities. 
    The Council shall have the power to require any holder of a franchise from the City, or other public utility, to allow the use of its rights-of-way, poles, and wires by any franchise holder, or the City itself, upon payment of a reasonable rental therefor, and the City may, under the terms prescribed by the Council, allow such franchise holders to use rights-of-way, poles, and wires of City-owned utilities. 
ARTICLE XIII. - MISCELLANEOUS LEGAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 13.1 - Water rights in annexation. 
    The City shall have the power to purchase, or obtain, such existing water rights as may be used upon, or allotted to, any land which is annexed to the City. 
Sec. 13.2 - Restriction on sales of land and water rights. 
    Neither lands owned and used by the City for park or governmental purposes, nor water rights, shall be sold or conveyed without an affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors. Nothing in this provision, however, shall prohibit the City from exchanging, or changing point of diversion of water rights without such vote. 
Sec. 13.3 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 37-1981, §7, repealed this section which set forth the notice required to be given the city in the event of negligence action claim against the City. 
(Res. No. 77-18A, § 4) 
Sec. 13.4 - Right of eminent domain. 
    The City shall have the right of eminent domain as provided by the Constitution and the statutes. 
Sec. 13.5 - Surety bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all officers of the City whose duties involve the custody of public property or the handling of public funds, either by way of receipt or disbursement or both, and all other officers and employees so required by the Council shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective office, file with the City an official bond, in such form and amount as the Council shall direct and approve. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by the purchase of one or more appropriate blanket surety bonds covering all or a group of City employees and officers. 
    All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premium thereon shall be paid by the City. The Director of Finance shall be custodian of all bonds of all officers or employees, except that the City Manager shall be custodian of any bonds pertaining solely to the Director of Finance. 
Sec. 13.6 - City depository. 
    The Council shall designate depositories for City funds and shall provide for the regular deposit of all City moneys. The Council shall provide for such security for the City deposits as is authorized or permitted by statute. 
Cross reference- Charter §9.14 
Sec. 13.7 - Contracts with other governmental units. 
    The Council may, by resolution or by ordinance, enter into contracts or agreements with other governmental units or special districts for the use of buildings, equipment, or facilities, and for furnishing or receiving commodities or services. 
Sec. 13.8 - Bequests, gifts or donations. 
    The Council, on behalf of the City, may receive bequests, gifts, and donations of all kinds of property in fee simple or in trust, for public, charitable or other purposes, and do all things and acts necessary to carry out the purposes of such gifts, bequests, and donations, with the power to manage, sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the terms of the gift, bequest or trust. 
Sec. 13.9 - Competitive bidding. 
    When the City purchases materials or equipment for twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more, ample opportunity shall be given for competitive bidding; however, the City need not engage in competitive bidding when purchasing through or from an agency of the state or federal government which engaged in competitive bidding to purchase the equipment or materials, when the City Council determines an emergency exists or when the City Council determines there is only one source for an item. In addition Council may provide for purchase of used equipment at other than competitive bid if it is determined to be to the best advantage to the City. Council shall provide by ordinance for procedures to implement this section. 
(24-76, § 7; Res. No. 77-18A, § 5; 27-79, § 6; 29-83, § 13; 19-03 § 1) 
Sec. 13.10 - Emergency purchases. 
    In case of emergency affecting the public peace, health, or safety, the Council may waive all provisions for competitive bidding and direct the City Manager, acting as purchasing agent for the City, to purchase necessary supplies in the open market at not more than commercial prices. 
Sec. 13.11 - City not to pledge credit. 
    The City shall not lend or pledge the credit or faith thereof, directly or indirectly, in any manner to, or in aid of, any person, company or corporation, public or private, for any amount, or for any purpose whatever; or become responsible for any debt, contract or liability of any person, company or corporation, public or private, in or out of the State. 
Sec. 13.12 - Penalties for violation of Charter and Municipal Code. 
A.  Any violation of a provision of this Charter shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of such violation may be punished by fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than one (1) year. 
B  Any violation of a provision of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code as adopted by the City Council from time to time shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of such violation may be punished by a fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than one (1) year. 
(31-83, § 1) 
Sec. 13.13 - Article and section headings. 
    The article and section headings used in this Charter are for convenience only, and shall not be considered as part of the Charter. 
Sec. 13.14 - Amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by the Constitution. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Sec. 13.15 - Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
    Whenever the date fixed by this Charter, or by ordinance, for doing or completion of any act, except a regular City Council meeting, falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday. Whenever a regular City Council meeting falls on a legal holiday, such meeting shall be continued until the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. 
(37-81, § 8) 
Sec. 13.16 - Zoning. 
    The Council shall comply with the procedures and ordinances for zoning now or hereafter amended or enacted. 
Sec. 13.17 - Interpretations. 
(a)  All words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. 
(b)  The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the singular, and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this Charter: 
1.  "Ad valorem tax" means only the general property tax levied annually on real or personal property listed with the assessor of Garfield County, Colorado; it shall not include any one or more of the following taxes: income tax, sales tax, use tax, excise tax or specific ownership tax on a motor vehicle or trailer. The generality of this definition shall not be restricted by the listing set forth herein. 
2.  "City" means the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, a municipal corporation. 
3.  "Constitution" and "statute" mean the Constitution and laws of the State of Colorado, respectively, in effect at the time the provision of the Charter containing the words "Constitution" and "statute" are to be applied. 
4.  "Council" means the City Council of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
5.  "Elector" means any person who is at least eighteen years of age, a citizen of the United States, and who has resided in the State of Colorado for three (3) months and in a ward of the City for thirty-two (32) days immediately preceding the election at which he offers to vote and who is registered to vote. 
6.  "Person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate, and to partnerships, and associations as well as to individuals. 
7.  "Public utility" when used in this Charter means any person, firm or corporation operating heat, power or light systems, communication systems, water, sewer or scheduled transportation systems, and serving or supplying the public under a franchise granted by the City. 
8.  "Publication" means publishing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
9.  "State" and "County" mean the State of Colorado and the County of Garfield, respectively. 
10.  "Taxpaying elector" and "qualified taxpaying elector" means an elector who owns real or personal property within the City and has paid an ad valorem tax thereon in the calendar year last preceding the election or in the calendar year in which the election is held. An elector who is obligated to pay ad valorem taxes under a contract to purchase real property within the City shall be considered as a taxpaying elector or qualified taxpaying elector within the meaning of this definition. 
11.  "Ward" means a district, the boundaries of which have been established pursuant to Article 2, Section 5, of this Charter or which will be established by Council pursuant to Article 2, Section 5, of this Charter, from which an elective officer or officers shall be elected. 
12.  "Written" and "in writing," except in reference to signatures, shall include printing, typewriting, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing, electronic processing system or any other similar method. 
(Amend. No. 4, 8-7-73; 15-07, § 1) 
Sec. 13.18 - Severability of charter provisions. 
    If any provision, section, article or clause of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the Charter which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end this Charter is declared to be severable. 
ARTICLE XIV. - Reserved[2] 
Certificate of Charter Convention 
    We, the undersigned, members of the Glenwood Springs Charter Convention, duly elected by the people of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, at a special election held on July 12, 1966, under authorization of Article XX, Constitution of the State of Colorado, to frame a Home Rule Charter for the City of Glenwood Springs, do hereby certify that the foregoing is the proposed Charter as finally approved and adopted by the members of said Convention on the 9th day of September, 1966, for submission to the people of Glenwood Springs at a special election to be held on October 11, 1966. 
    Done in triplicate at Glenwood Springs, Colorado, this 9th day of September, 1966. 
/s/ E.L. Busby 
President and Chairman /s/ Kenneth Hollenbaugh /s/ Florence Hitt 
Secretary /s/ John Hooker /s/ Hal Beattie /s/ James Kennedy /s/ Henry Bosco /s/ Jay Kimball /s/ Charles Casteel /s/ Stan Kochevar /s/ Walker Coleman /s/ John Samuelson /s/ Cliff Collings /s/ Ruben Stroh /s/ William Crutcher /s/ Margaret Thrall /s/ Gene Curtis /s/ Don Vanderhoof /s/ Warren Ferrin /s/ Leo Grange /s/ Roger Henderson  
State of Colorado   ) 
  ) ss. 
County of Garfield   ) 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 9th day of September, 1966. 
      Ann F. S Skidmore 
      City Clerk 
      City of Glenwood Springs, 
      Colorado   (Seal) 
Certificate of Receipt by City Clerk 
State of Colorado   ) 
  ) ss. 
County of Garfield   ) 
I hereby certify that the above and foregoing document is the Proposed Charter delivered to me by the Glenwood Springs Charter Convention on the 9th day of September, 1966. 
      Ann F. S Skidmore 
      City Clerk 
      City of Glenwood Springs, 
      Colorado   (Seal) 
Results 
Certificate of Election 
CITY OF GLENWOOD SPRINGS   ) 
COUNTY OF GARFIELD   ) ss. 
STATE OF COLORADO   ) 
    I, ANN F. SKIDMORE, City Clerk of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, do hereby certify that the above and foregoing Proposed Charter for the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado was submitted to the qualified electorate of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, after having been duly published in full three times and a week apart at a Special Municipal Election held in said City on Tuesday, the 11th day of October, 1966, and approved by a majority of those voting thereon, and that the vote for and against said Charter was as follows: 
For: 176 
Against: 73 
    I further certify that said Charter was published in full within ten days following said election, the same being October 19, 1966. 
    WITNESS my hand and seat of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, this 19th day of October. 1966. 
      Ann F. S Skidmore 
      City Clerk 
      City of Glenwood Springs, 
      Colorado   Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07-15, § 1, repealed Art. XIV, which pertained to Transitional periods. 

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE[1] 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance No Effective Date Charter Section Change * Amendment 
No. 1 ** 08/07/73 2.5 R & Re Amendment 
No. 2 08/07/73 3.2 R & Re Amendment 
No. 3 08/07/73 3.4 R & Re Amendment 
No. 4 08/07/73 13.17(c)(5) R & Re 24-76, §1 11/02/76 3.5 A 24-76, §2 11/02/76 4.4 R & Re 24-76, §3 11/02/76 6.2 R & Re 24-76, §5 11/02/76 9.2 R & Re 24-76, §6 11/02/76 12.1 R & Re 24-76, §6 11/02/76 12.2 R & Re 77-18(A), §1 *** 11/08/77 6.3 R & Re 77-18(A), §4 11/08/77 13.3 R & Re 77-18(A), §5 11/08/77 13.9 R & Re 27-79, §1 11/06/79 3.11 R & Re 27-79, §2 11/06/79 6.4(k) R & Re 27-79, §2 11/06/79 6.4(l) R & Re 27-79, §2 11/06/79 6.4(m) R 27-79, §3 11/06/79 6.6 R & Re 27-79, §4 11/06/79 6.7 R & Re 27-79, §5 11/06/79 8.4 R & Re 27-79, §5 11/06/79 8.5 R & Re 27-79, §6 11/06/79 13.9 R & Re 37-81, §1 11/03/81 3.9 R & Re 37-81, §1 11/03/81 4.5 R & Re 37-81, §1 11/03/81 4.6 R & Re 37-81, §1 11/03/81 7.1 A 37-81, §1 11/03/81 9.4 R & Re 37-81, §1 11/03/81 12.8 A 37-81, §2 11/03/81 3.5 A 37-81, §3 11/03/81 5.2 R & Re 37-81, §3 11/03/81 5.3 R& Re 37-81, §4 11/03/81 6.5 R & Re 37-81, §5 11/03/81 8.5 A 37-81, §6 11/03/81 9.11 R & Re 37-81, §7 11/03/81 13.3 R 37-81, §8 11/03/81 13.15 R & Re 6-83, §3 04/26/83 10.6 Ad 29-83, §1 11/08/83 3.2 A 29-83, §2 11/08/83 3.5(c) A 29-83, §3 11/08/83 3.8 A 29-83, §4 11/08/83 5.7 A 29-83, §5 11/08/83 6.1 A 29-83, §6 11/08/83 6.6 A 29-83, §7 11/08/83 6.7(a) A 29-83, §8 11/08/83 6.7(d) A 29-83, §9 11/08/83 9.14 A 29-83, §10 11/08/83 10.1 A 29-83, §11 11/08/83 10.3 R & Re 29-83, §12 11/08/83 10.5 A 29-83, §13 11/08/83 13.9 A  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- * A=Amended; R=Repealed; R & Re=Repealed and Reenacted; Ad=Added Amendments 1-4 were enacted by an unnumbered Resolution of City Council passed July 5, 1973, and approved by the voters on August 7, 1973 at a special election. (See Minutes Book (H) at pages 229 and 230.) *** Resolution 18 of 1977. 

TITLE 010 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE 010.010 - DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 

010.010.010 - Definitions. 
    In the construction of the Municipal Code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the City Council, the following definitions shall apply unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council and unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Building Official or Building Inspector means the Building Inspector of the City of Glenwood Springs or his/her assistants. 
    Charter , the Charter , this Charter or Municipal Charter means the Charter of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado as it exists at the time of the adoption of this Code or as it may be subsequently amended. 
    City , the City , this City or City means the City of Glenwood Springs, in the County of Garfield and State of Colorado. 
    City Clerk or Clerk means the City Clerk of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado or his/her duly appointed deputy. 
    City Manager , Manager means the City Manager of the City of Glenwood Springs or his/her designee. 
    Code , this Code or Municipal Code means the Municipal Code of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, 1983 Edition, as designated in Section 010.020.010 and as it exists at the time of adoption or as it may be subsequently amended. 
    Council , this Council , the Council or City Council means the City Council of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
    County , the County or this County means Garfield County, Colorado. 
    Legal holiday means New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Colorado Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. 
    Month means a calendar month. 
    Newspaper of general circulation means a newspaper printed at regular intervals, available by paid subscription to any resident of the City and generally available within the City limits with or without charge, possessing a diverse potential reader base measured by the geographic region of its circulation area, and containing news of a general character and interest to the community. 
    Oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed. 
    Official newspaper means a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
    Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Commission or Planning and Zoning Commission means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Glenwood Springs. 
    Preceding, following mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Publication, published or publishing have the same meaning as publication, as defined in Section 13.17(c)(8) of the Municipal Charter. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street or alley improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Sidewalk means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State , the State or this State means the State of Colorado. 
    Street means any highway, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the City, dedicated or devoted to public use which shall exclude an alley. 
    Written or in writing includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year means a calendar year. 
(Code 1962 §§ 1.4, 21.1; Code 1971 § 1-3; 22-09, § 2) 
010.010.020 - Rules of construction. 
(a)  Catchlines of sections. The catchlines of the several Titles, Articles, sections, paragraphs and subparagraphs of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the same and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed within this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. A half-holiday shall be considered as other days and not as a holiday. 
(c)  Gender. A word importing the one (1) gender only shall extend and be applied to such other gender as appropriate. 
(d)  Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise declared. 
(e)  Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
(f)  Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to any officer, board or commission, the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Glenwood Springs." 
(g)  Owner. The word owner, applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
(h)  Person. The word person shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
(i)  Severability of parts of code. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the titles, articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, subparagraph, paragraph, subsection, section, article or title of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, subparagraphs, paragraphs, sections, articles and titles of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation into this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, subparagraph, paragraph, subsection, section, article or title. 
(j)  Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
(Code 1971 §§ 1-3, 1-4, 1-9) 
ARTICLE 010.020 - IN GENERAL 

010.020.010 - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the other titles and articles shall constitute and be designated as the Municipal Code of the City of Glenwood Spring, Colorado, 1983 Edition, and may be so cited or as the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code, 1983 Edition or as the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code. 
(Code 1971 § 1-1) 
010.020.020 - Publication; used as evidence. 
    This Code is hereby ordered published in bound looseleaf form and copies thereof, duly certified by the City Clerk and the Mayor, shall be received without further proof as prima facie evidence of the provisions of this Code in all courts and administrative tribunals of this State. 
(Code 1971 § 1-2) 
010.020.030 - Corporate seal. 
    The corporate seal shall consist of a circular plate and disc bearing the following inscription: The City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado in circular form and the word Seal across the center of the plate and within the circular inscription. 
(Code 1962 § 2.3; Code 1971 § 2-1) 
010.020.040 - Notice of claim against City. 
    Any person claiming to have suffered an injury by the City, or by an employee of the City while in the course of his/her employment for the City, shall file a written notice of such injury in accordance with the laws of this State as they exist now or as they may be amended from time to time. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to be a waiver of sovereign immunity as it may exist at the time of the injury. 
(Code 1971 § 1-17) 
010.020.050 - Amendments or additions to Code. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any title, article, section or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances and shall be considered as part of this Code until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances are adopted as a revision to this Code or as a new Code by the City Council. 
(Code 1971 § 1-5) 
010.020.060 - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes, for an annual budget, or for the appointment of salaries, vacation, sick leave, holiday schedule, retirement plan or any other condition of employment for City officers and employees; 
(3)  Any ordinance authorizing the sale, purchase or lease of property by the City; 
(4)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the City or discontinuing territory as a part of the City; 
(5)  Any ordinance granting any franchise; 
(6)  Any ordinance creating or assessing any local or general improvement district; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, accepting, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening or vacating any street or other public way in the City; or 
(8)  Any ordinance adopting or amending the zoning map of the City. 
(Code 1971 §§ 1-6, 19-1) 
010.020.070 - Code does not affect prior offenses, contracts, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1971 § 1-7) 
Editor's note- The effective date of this Code is June 1, 1984 at 12:01 a.m. See Ordinance 17-84 §5. 
010.020.071 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5-2019 , § 2, adopted Feb. 21, 2019, repealed § 010.020.071, which pertained to temporary suspension of Municipal Code and derived from Ord. No. 12-2017 , § 2, adopted June 1, 2017; and Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 3, adopted Aug. 2, 2018. 
010.020.080 - General penalty for violations of Code, continuing violations. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person eighteen (18) years of age or older violating any provision of this Code by performing an act prohibited or declared to be unlawful by this Code or by failing to perform an act required by or otherwise made mandatory by this Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by incarceration not to exceed one (1) year or by both such fine and incarceration. Any person under eighteen (18) years of age convicted of violating any provision of this Code, except the provisions of the Model Traffic Code as adopted in Title 120, may be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years convicted of violating any provision of the Model Traffic Code as adopted in Title 120 may be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by incarceration not to exceed one (1) year, or by both such fine and incarceration. Each person violating any provision of this Code shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this Code is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and he/she shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 1971 § 1-8; 46-83 § 1) 
010.020.081 - Contempt of Court. 
    Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older found in contempt of court by failing to perform an act required by or otherwise made mandatory by this Code or the Municipal Court shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by incarceration not to exceed one (1) year or by both such fine and incarceration. Any person under eighteen (18) years of age found in contempt of court by failing to perform an act required by or otherwise mandatory by this Code or Municipal Court, may be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and juvenile detention not to exceed ten (10) days. 
(1-05, § 2) 
ARTICLE 010.030 - ELECTION PROVISIONS 

010.030.010 - Voting wards. 
    The following shall be the boundaries for the voting wards for all municipal elections: 
VOTING WARD 1: All that area southerly and westerly of a line starting at the intersection of the westerly City Limits line southerly of the Colorado River, extended north, and the centerline of the Colorado River, then easterly along the centerline of the Colorado River to the intersection of the centerlines of the Colorado River and Grand Avenue (State Highway 82), then southerly along the centerline of Grand Avenue to the intersection of the centerlines of Grand Avenue and 14th Street, then westerly along the centerline of 14th Street to the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive, then westerly and southerly along the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive to the intersection of the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive and the northerly line of the parcel of City owned land located at 1477 Riverside Drive (Kline Family LLC Parcel) extended easterly, then westerly along the northerly line of the parcel of City owned land located at 1477 Riverside Drive to the centerline of the Roaring Fork River, then southerly along the centerline of the Roaring Fork River to the intersections of the centerlines of the Roaring Fork River and 27th Street, then westerly along the centerline of 27th Street to the intersection of the centerlines of 27th Street and Midland Avenue, then southerly along the centerline of Midland Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of Midland Avenue and the southerly line, extended easterly, of the parcel of land platted as Riverview Terrace. VOTING WARD 2: All of that area northerly and westerly of a line starting at a point on the centerline of the Colorado River, said point being south of the western most point on the City Limits line northerly of the Colorado River, then easterly along the centerline of the Colorado River to the intersection of the centerlines of the Colorado River and Devereux Road, then northerly along the centerline of Devereux Road to the intersection of the centerlines of Devereux Road and State Highway 6, then westerly along the centerline of State Highway 6 to the intersection of the centerlines of State Highway 6 and Traver Trail, extended southerly, then northerly along the centerline of Traver Trail to the intersection of the centerlines of Traver Trail and Transfer Trail, extended southerly, then northerly along the centerline of Transfer Trail to the intersection of the centerline of Transfer Trail and the City Limits line located on the westerly line of Lot 2, Section 4, T.6 S., R. 89 W., 6th PM VOTING WARD 3: All that area northerly and easterly of a line starting at the intersection of the centerline of 14th Street, extended easterly, and the easterly City Limits line, then westerly along the centerline of 14th Street to the intersection of the centerlines of 14th Street and Grand Avenue (State Highway 82), then northerly along the centerline of Grand Avenue to the intersection of the centerlines of Grand Avenue and the Colorado River, then westerly along the centerline of the Colorado River to the intersection of the centerlines of the Colorado River and Devereux Road, then northerly along the centerline of Devereux Road to the intersection of the centerlines of Devereux Road and State Highway 6, then westerly along the centerline of State Highway 6 to the intersection of the centerlines of State Highway 6 and Traver Trail, extended southerly, then northerly along the centerline of Traver Trail to the intersection of the centerlines of Traver Trail and Transfer Trail, extended southerly, then northerly along the centerline of Transfer Trail to the intersection of the centerline of Transfer Trail and the City Limits line located on the westerly line of Lot 2, Section 4, T.6 S., R. 89 W., 6th PM VOTING WARD 4: All that area southerly and easterly of a line starting at the intersection of the centerline of 14th Street, extended easterly, and the easterly City Limits line, then westerly along the centerline of 14th Street to the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive, then westerly and southerly along the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive to the intersection of the centerline of Coach Don Miller Drive and the northerly line of the parcel of City owned land located at 1477 Riverside Drive (Kline Family LLC Parcel) extended easterly, then westerly along the northerly line of the parcel of City owned land located at 1477 Riverside Drive to the centerline of the Roaring Fork River, then southerly along the centerline of the Roaring Fork River to the intersection of the centerline of the Roaring Fork River and the easterly line of Rosebud Cemetery, extended south. VOTING WARD 5: All that area southerly and westerly of a line starting at the intersection of the centerline of Midland Avenue and the southerly line, extended easterly, of the parcel of land platted as Riverview Terrace, then northerly along the centerline of Midland Avenue to the intersection of the centerlines of Midland Avenue and 27th Street, then easterly along the centerline of 27th Street to the intersection of the centerlines of 27th Street and the Roaring Fork River, then southerly along the centerline of the Roaring Fork River to the intersection of the centerline of the Roaring Fork River and the easterly line of Rosebud Cemetery, extended south, then north along the extended easterly line of Rosebud Cemetery to the intersection of the extended easterly line of Rosebud Cemetery and the centerline of South Grand Avenue (County Road 154), then southerly along the centerline of South Grand Avenue and County Road 154 to the intersection of the centerline of County Road 154 and the southerly line of the Deerwalker Subdivision, extended north, then southerly along the southerly line of the Deerwalker Subdivision to the intersection of the southerly line of the Deerwalker Subdivision and the Roaring Fork River, then southerly along the centerline of the Roaring Fork River to the intersection of the centerline of the Roaring Fork River and the south line of Section 27, T.6 S., R. 89 W., 6th PM  
(Code 1971 § 1-19; 32-85 § 1; 45-88 § 1; 15-09 § 2) 
010.030.020 - Write-in candidates, cancellation of election. 
(a)  No write-in vote for any municipal office shall be counted unless an affidavit of intent has been filed with the City Clerk by the person whose name is written in at least twenty (20) days before the day of the election indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of the office if elected. 
(b)  At any municipal election, if the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office and if, at the close of business on the nineteenth day before the election, there is no more than one (1) candidate per office to be filled at such election, including filing affidavits of intent as potential write-in candidates, the City Clerk, if instructed by resolution of the governing body either before or after such date, shall cancel the election and declare the candidates elected. Upon such declaration, the candidates shall be deemed elected. Notice of cancellation shall be published if possible, in order to inform the electors of the municipality, and notice of such cancellation shall be posted at each polling place and in no less than one (1) other public place. 
(c)  If offices are contested in some but not all of the wards of the City and there are no offices at large to be contested or other matters to be determined on a City-wide basis, the City Council may authorize the partial cancellation of the election within those wards where no matter is being contested according to the procedures set forth in Subsection (b) hereof. 
(Code 1971 § 1-19; 42-89 § 1; 24-91 § 1) 
ARTICLE 010.040 - FINANCE 

010.040.010 - Approval of legal instruments. 
(a)  The City Council shall approve all unbudgeted legal instruments entered into by the City and all budgeted legal instruments involving the commitment or expenditure of funds in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). Each such legal instrument shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, approved as to substance by the City Manager and approved as to form by the City Attorney. 
(b)  The City Manager shall approve all budgeted legal instruments entered into by the City involving the commitment or expenditure of funds in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or less. Each such legal instrument shall be signed by the City Manager, attested by the City Clerk, and approved as to form by the City Attorney. 
(c)  The Chief Operating Officer shall approval all budgeted legal instruments entered into by the City involving the commitment or expenditure of funds in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less. Each such legal instrument shall be signed by the Chief Operating Officer, attested by the City Clerk, and approved as to form by the City Attorney. 
(Code 1962 § 7.3-7; Code 1971 § 2-19; 6-96 § 1; Ord. No. 14-2018 , § 3, 7-19-2018) 
010.040.020 - Contents and signing of warrants and checks. 
    All warrants or checks drawn upon the City must be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Director of Finance stating the particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable. 
(Code 1962 § 15.9; Code 1971 § 2-30) 
010.040.030 - Accounts of utilities. 
    Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City, distinct from other City accounts, and in such a manner as to show the true and complete financial result of such City ownership and operation, including all assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. 
(Code 1962 § 15.2; Code 1971 § 2-32) 
010.040.040 - Requirements, limitations and procedures for issuance of refunding bonds. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter specifically provided to the contrary, bonded indebtedness and other bonded obligations of the City shall be refunded in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the State and the Municipal Charter, as the same now exist or as may, from time to time, be amended. General obligation bonds of the City may be refunded, and general obligation refunding bonds may be issued for the purpose, as provided in C.R.S. Title 31, Article 21, Part 2, as amended and as hereinafter modified. 
(b)  The separate requirements of determinations and certificates thereof required by C.R.S. §§ 31-21-202 and 31-12-205, as amended, shall not be applicable to the issuance of refunding bonds of the City. The ordinance authorizing the refunding bonds shall include and constitute such determinations. 
(c)  No bonds may be refunded under the provisions of this section unless the holders thereof voluntarily surrender said bonds for immediate exchange or immediate payment or unless said bonds either mature or are callable for redemption prior to their maturity under their terms within twenty (20) years from the date of issuance of the refunding bonds, and provisions shall be made for paying or redeeming and discharging all of the bonds refunded within said period of time. To the extent that the provisions of C.R.S. § 31-21-211(8), as amended, or any other provision of otherwise applicable law, would require a shorter period or limit such refunding to bonds maturing or being redeemable within a shorter time, said provisions shall be inapplicable to the issuance and refunding of bonds by the City, and the provisions of this subsection shall control and govern. 
(d)  Refunding bonds issued pursuant to this section may be exchanged for bonds being refunded or shall be sold, in accordance with the provisions and requirements of Section 10.5 of the Charter. 
(e)  All actions heretofore taken by the officers and members of the City Council not inconsistent with the provisions of this section relating to the authorization, sale, issuance and delivery of refunding bonds, be and the same are hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. 
(f)  All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this section are hereby repealed, but this action shall in no way operate to revive any ordinance previously repealed. 
(Code 1971 § 2-4) 
010.040.050 - Contracts and expenses to be within appropriations. 
    No contract shall be made by the City Council and no expense shall be incurred by any officer or department of the City, whether the object of the expenditure shall have been ordered by the City Council or not, unless an appropriation shall have been previously made concerning such expense, except as otherwise provided in the Charter. 
(Code 1962 § 15.7; Code 1971 § 2-31) 
010.040.060 - General Fund contingencies. 
    The City Council shall maintain within the unappropriated General Fund balance a line item for General Fund contingencies, monies from which shall serve to defray the costs of unforeseen emergencies. Appropriations and disbursements from General Fund contingencies shall be made in accordance with Section 9.9 of the Charter, shall be authorized by ordinance and shall require affirmative approval of five (5) or more members of City Council. 
(Ad 10-86 § 1) 
010.040.070 - Disposition of unclaimed property. 
(a)  Definitions . Unless otherwise required by context or use, words or terms as used in this section shall be defined as follows: 
    City Manager means the City Manager of the City or his/her designated representative. 
    Owner means a person or entity, including corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity other than the City, or a duly authorized legal representative or successor in interest of the same, which owns unclaimed property held by the City. 
    Unclaimed property means any tangible or intangible property, including any income or increment derived therefrom, less any lawful charges or fees, that is held by or under the control of the City and which has not been claimed by its owner for a period of more than sixty (60) days after it became payable or distributable, after the City received the item for safekeeping, or after a case has been finally disposed, if the item is kept as evidence. Unclaimed property does not include abandoned motor vehicles. 
(b)  Procedure . 
(1)  Prior to disposition of any unclaimed or abandoned property having an estimated value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more, the City Manager shall send a written notice by certified mail to the owner. The last known address of the owner shall constitute adequate and reasonable notice. The notice shall include a description of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held by the City. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that if the owner fails to provide the City Manager with a written claim for the return of the property within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the City, and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forever forfeited. 
(2)  Prior to the disposition of any unclaimed or abandoned property having an estimated value of less than fifty dollars ($50.00), or having no last known address of the owner, the City Manager shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice shall include a description of the property, the owner of the property, the amount or estimated value of the property and, when available, the purpose for which the property was deposited or otherwise held by the City. The notice shall state where the owner may make inquiry of or claim the property. The notice shall also state that, if the owner fails to provide the City Manager with a written claim for the return of the property within ten (10) days after the date of the publication of the notice, the property shall become the sole property of the and any claim of the owner to such property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(3)  If the City Manager receives a written claim within the ten-day claim period, the City Manager shall evaluate the claim and give written notice to the claimant within ten (10) days thereof whether the claim has been accepted or denied in whole or in part. The City Manager may investigate the validity of a claim and may request further supporting documentation from the claimant prior to disbursing or refusing to disburse the property. 
(4)  In the event that there is more than one (1) claimant for the same unclaimed or abandoned property, the City Manager may, in his/her sole discretion, resolve said claims himself/herself, or may resolve such claims by depositing the disputed property with the registry of the District Court in an interpleader action. 
(5)  In the event that all claims filed are denied, the unclaimed or abandoned property shall become the sole property of the City and any claim of ownership of the property shall be deemed forfeited. 
(6)  Any legal action filed challenging a decision of the City Manager shall be filed pursuant to Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure within thirty (30) days of such decision or shall be forever barred. If any legal action is timely filed, the property shall be disbursed by the City Manager pursuant to the order of the court having jurisdiction over such claim. 
(7)  The City Manager is authorized to establish procedures for the administration and disposition of unclaimed or abandoned property consistent with this section, including compliance requirements for other municipal officers and employees in the identification and disposition of such property. 
(c)  The City Manager shall direct the sale of unclaimed or abandoned personal property in such a manner as will, in his/her opinion, be in the best interests of the City. The sale shall be conducted as provided in Section 010.050.200. 
(d)  If the City Manager determines, after investigation, that any property delivered under this section has nominal commercial value, the City Manager may destroy or otherwise dispose of the property at any time. A written log shall be kept of all such property destroyed or otherwise disposed of and shall be of public record. No action or proceeding may be made against the City or any officer, or against the holder for or on account of any action taken by the City Manager pursuant to this subsection. 
(11-92 § 1; 31-99 § 1) 
ARTICLE 010.050 - RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSITION OF GOODS, SERVICES, AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-2018 , § 2, adopted July 19, 2018, repealed Art. 010.050 and enacted a new Article as set out herein. The former Art. 010.050, §§ 010.050.010-010.050.200, pertained to procurement and disposition of goods, services and construction, and derived from § 2-33 and §§ 2-43-2-48 of the 1971 Code; Ord. No. 23-84, § 1; Ord. No. 33-84, § 2; Ord. No. 8-93, § 1; Ord. No. 2-94, § 1; Ord. No. 14-98, § 1; Ord. No. 38-01, § 1; Ord. No. 19-02, §§ 1-4; Ord. No. 29-03, § 1; Ord. No. 7-04, § 1; Ord. No. 13-07, § 1; and Ord. No. 1-10, § 1. 

010.050.010 - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The Chief Operating Officer or Finance Director may promulgate policies and procedures for the operation, organization, administration and duties of the Procurement Department subject to the approval of the City Manager. 
(a)  Adoption. The Procurement Department Policy and Procedures as promulgated by the Chief Operating Officer or Finance Director shall be approved by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Copies. Copies of the Procurement Department Policy and Procedures are available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk, 101 W. 8th Street, Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
(c)  Conflicts. If any provision of the Procurement Department Policy and Procedures conflicts with any other provisions of this Code or any state or federal law or regulation, the other provision of this Code or state or federal law or regulation shall control. 
(Ord. No. 14-2018 , § 2, 7-19-2018) 
ARTICLE 010.060 - PROHIBITED GIFTS TO CITY OFFICIALS 

010.060.010 - Title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the Glenwood Springs Prohibited Gifts Code. 
010.060.020 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, unless the context clearly implies a contrary meaning, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Board and commission member means any person duly appointed by the council to any board or commission of the city as authorized in City Charter Article VII and as established in Municipal Code Title 020. 
    City official means a Councilmember, an Employee or a Board and commission member. 
    Councilmember means a member of the city council. 
    Employee means each compensated person in the service of the city who is designated as an employee in the city's personnel rules and regulations, but shall not include any person providing services for the city who is considered for federal income tax purposes to be an independent contractor. 
    Gift means the transfer of a thing of value from one (1) person to another without receiving in return, from the other person, lawful compensation or consideration of equal or greater value. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, limited liability company, partnership, labor organization, association, political party, committee or other legal entity. 
    Thing of value means any tangible or intangible thing having a market value, including, without limitation, money, real property, personal property, services, loans of money or property, favors, gratuities, rewards, awards, grants, scholarships, discounts, promises of future employment, honoraria, event tickets, travel, lodging, meals, and the forbearance and forgiveness of debt. 
010.060.030 - Prohibited Gifts. 
    A City official shall not solicit or accept any gift from any person either directly or indirectly through the City official's spouse or dependent child which gift the City official knows or which a reasonable person in the City official's position should know under the circumstances is either: 
(1)  A gift that would tend to improperly influence that City official to depart from the faithful and impartial discharge of his or her public duties; or 
(2)  A gift being solicited or given for the primary purpose of rewarding the City official for an official action he or she has taken. 
010.060.040 - Enforcement. 
(a)  The City Manager shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article as to all Employees other than those appointed or hired by the City Council. The City Manager shall have the power to investigate any complaint, to initiate any suit, and to prosecute any criminal or civil action on behalf of the City where the City Manager believes such action is appropriate. 
(b)  The City Council shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article as to Council members or Board and commission members and those Employees appointed or hired by the City Council. It shall have the power to investigate any complaint, and if appropriate, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with all of the requirements of due process of law and, in written findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, make a determination concerning the propriety of the conduct alleged and shall take whatever action necessary to address the improper conduct. 
(c)  The exhaustion of the foregoing administrative remedies shall be a prerequisite to the bringing of a civil action to enforce any claim of the complainant, based in whole or in part upon a violation of this article. 
(d)  The City Manager or City Council, as the case may be, may direct the City Attorney to investigate or prosecute any apparent violation of this article or the City Manager or City Council may employ or appoint any qualified attorney to investigate or prosecute any violation or series of violations by one (1) or more persons of this article. 
(e)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
(f)  The City Council may remove any Board and commission member who willfully violates any portion of this article. 
(Ad 8-07, § 2) 
TITLE 020 - CITY COUNCIL AND BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
ARTICLE 020.010 - CITY COUNCIL 

020.010.010 - Powers. 
    The City Council shall have all powers granted it by the Municipal Charter. Where not limited by the Charter or the Constitution of the State of Colorado, the City Council shall have such additional powers granted to cities of the same class by the statutes of the State of Colorado. The City Council shall have the power to establish policy for all boards and commissions created pursuant to Section 020.020.010. 
(11-95) 
020.010.020 - Compensation. 
    City Council members, except the Mayor, shall be paid one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month. The Mayor shall be paid one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per month. Compensation for City Council members and the Mayor shall include the option of a family membership in the City's Community Center at no cost, and participation in the health insurance plans available to City employees by paying the full premium. Such compensation may be changed by ordinance from time to time, but no increase in compensation shall take effect until the next organizational meeting of Council following a general election of Council Members that is held after the adoption of the ordinance increasing compensation. 
(40-85 § 1; 22-93 § 1; 41-95 § 1; 44-96 § 1; 6-09 § 1) 
Cross reference- § 3.7 Charter 
ARTICLE 020.020 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

020.020.010 - Boards and commissions created. 
    There is hereby created the following boards and commissions of the City Council: 
(1)  Local Liquor Licensing Authority, 
(2)  Airport Board, 
(3)  Building Board of Appeals, 
(4)  Finance Advisory Board, 
(5)  Park and Recreation Commission, 
(6)  Planning and Zoning Commission, 
(7)  River Commission, 
(8)  Victim's and Witnesses Assistance and Law Enforcement Board, 
(9)  Transportation Commission, 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Housing Commission, 
(12)  Historic Preservation Commission, 
(13)  Tourism Promotion Board, 
(14)  Arts and Culture Board. 
(Code 1971 §;s ;2-61, 4-75, 4-230, 15-2; 26-84 § 1; 19-89 § 1; 12-90 § 1; 54-90 § 1; 29-91 § 1; 10-93 § 1; 29-93 § 1; 7-94 § 1; 23-94 § 1; 10-95 § 1; 19-95 §§ 1, 2; 40-95 § 1; 28-97 § 1; 29-97 § 1; 61-01 § 2; 9-04 §; 13-06, § 2; 6-08 § 2; 12-10 § 2; Ord. No. 16-2017 , § 2, 8-17-2017) 
020.020.020 - Composition of boards and commissions. 
    The membership of boards and commissions shall be composed of the following persons: 
(1)  Local Liquor Licensing Authority. 
a.  The Local Liquor Licensing Authority shall consist of a Hearing Officer appointed by the City Council by resolution and may be removed with our without cause by a majority vote of the City Council. 
(2)  Airport Board. 
a.  Five (5) citizens, at least four (4) who are residents of the City and one (1) who may reside outside of the City but within the 81601 zip code area or own real property or a business within the City. 
(3)  Building Board of Appeals. 
a.  Building inspector, ex officio; 
b.  One (1) professional engineer who may reside outside of the City but within the 81601 zip code area or own real property or a business within the City; 
c.  One (1) licensed contractor who may reside outside of the City but within the 81601 zip code area or own real property or a business within the City; 
d.  One (1) citizen who is a resident of the City; and 
e.  One (1) current or former firefighter, licensed fire alarm installer or fire code inspector who may reside outside of the City but within the 81601 zip area code or own real property or a business within the City. 
(4)  Finance Advisory Board: 
a.  Seven (7) members of which at least six (6) are City residents. One (1) member shall be employed in the finance industry; one (1) member shall be employed by the tourism industry; and one (1) member may be a non-resident, but shall own or be employed by a business within the City. 
(5)  Parks and Recreation Commission. 
a.  Seven (7) citizens, at least six (6) who are residents of the City and one (1) who may reside outside of the City but within the 81601 zip code area or own real property or a business within the City. 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  Reserved. 
d.  One (1) youth (under the age of eighteen [18] at appointment) who shall serve a one-year term from June 1 to May 31 of the following year. 
(6)  Planning and Zoning Commission. 
a.  Seven (7) citizens who are residents of the City. 
(7)  River Commission. 
a.  Seven (7) citizens, with one (1) alternate, at least six (6) who are residents of the City and one (1) who may reside outside of the City but within the 81601 zip code area or own real property or a business within the City. 
(8)  Victim's and Witnesses Assistance and Law Enforcement Board. 
a.  Five (5) citizens, at least four (4) who are residents of the City and one (1) who may reside outside of the City but within the 81601 zip code area or own real property or a business within the City. 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  The Chief of Police as an advisory member, but a nonvoting member of the Board. 
(9)  Transportation Commission. 
a.  Seven (7) citizens, at least six (6) who are residents of the City and one (1) who may reside outside of the City but within the 81601 zip code area or own real property or a business within the City. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  Glenwood Springs Housing Commission. 
a.  Seven (7) citizens, at least six (6) who are residents of the City and one (1) who may reside outside of the City but within the 81601 zip code area or own real property or a business within the City. 
Membership should reflect a broad representation of organizations and other entities which are related to housing, including but not limited to the financial community, the building and development community, the real estate industry, and organizations which support low-income residents of the community. 
(12)  Historic Preservation Commission. 
a.  Seven (7) citizens, at least six (6) who are residents of the City and one (1) who may reside outside of the City but within the 81601 zip code area or own real property or a business within the City. 
(13)  Tourism Promotion Board. 
a.  Two (2) representatives from the tourism related businesses located within the City; 
b.  Two (2) representatives from the lodging businesses located within the City; 
c.  One (1) representative from the restaurant or retail businesses located within the City; 
d.  One (1) representative from the Glenwood Springs Chamber Resort Association; and 
e.  Three (3) citizens, at least two (2) who are residents of the City and that shall not have a direct or indirect financial interest in a business referenced in (a), (b) or (c) above and one (1) who is a resident that may have a financial interest in a business referenced in (a), (b) or (c) above. 
(14)  Arts and Culture Board. 
a.  Eight (8) members, at least five (5) of which are residents of the City, three (3) of which may reside outside of the City, and one (1) of which being a youth representative under the age of eighteen (18) or not having completed his or her final year of high school. Those representatives residing outside of the City must reside within the 81601 postal zip code area, own real property or a business within the City, or attend school within the City. 
(15)  Council and Staff Participation on Boards and Commissions: 
a.  The Mayor may appoint up to two (2) members of Council to act as a liaison between Council and a Board or Commission. 
b.  The City Manager may appoint a member of staff to assist a Board or Commission as necessary to fulfill their duties as provided for in 020.020.030. 
(Code 1971 §§ 2-61, 4-75, 4-230, 15-2; 26-84 § 1; 19-89 § 1; 12-90 § 1; 54-90 § 1; 29-91 § 1; 10-93 § 1; 29-93 § 1; 7-94 § 1; 23-94 § 1; 10-95 § 1; 19-95 §§ 1, 2; 40-95 § 1; 28-97 § 1; 29-97 § 1; 1-01 § 1; 61-01 § 2; 14-03 § 1 ; 9-04 § 1; 20-05 § 2; 7-06 § 2; 13-06, § 2; 10-07 § 2; 6-08 § 2; 12-09 § 2; 12-10 § 2; 2-12 § 2; Ord. No. 2-2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 2-4-2016; Ord. No. 16-2017 , § 3, 8-17-2017; Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 2, 1-18-2018; Ord. No. 6-2018 , § 2, 3-1-2018; Ord. No. 21-2018 , § 2, 9-20-2018) 
020.020.030 - Powers and duties of boards and commissions. 
(a)  Local Liquor Licensing Authority. 
(1)  Powers and duties of local liquor licensing authority. The Local Liquor Licensing Authority shall have the powers granted to local licensing authorities pursuant to C.R.S. Title 12, Articles 46, 47, and 48, as amended. 
(2)  Temporary permits. The City Clerk is hereby delegated the authority to issue temporary fermented malt beverage permits to license transferees, as authorized by C.R.S. § 12-46-106.5, as amended, and temporary permits for any class of liquor license as authorized by C.R.S. § 12-47-106.5, as amended. Each temporary permit shall authorize the transferee to continue selling fermented malt beverages and other licensed beverages in accordance with state law during the period in which an application to transfer is pending. The City Clerk may issue the temporary permit if: (a) the premises shall have been previously licensed by the State and the license is valid at the time the application for transfer is filed; (b) the application appears to be in order, an application for transfer of the appropriate license has been filed, all fees have been paid, the initial background check has been successfully completed, and the fingerprint cards have been completed; and (c) the application for the temporary permit is filed no later than thirty (30) days after the filing of the application for transfer and associated fees paid. No temporary permit issued by the City Clerk shall be for a period greater than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of its issuance. 
(3)  Wine tastings. The Local Liquor Licensing Authority is authorized to issue annual wine tasting permits pursuant to C.R.S. § 12-47-301 with the following conditions: (a) All requirements of C.R.S. § 12-47-301 have been met; and (b) Payment of an annual application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00); and (c) No more than one hundred four (104) wine tastings may be held during the term of any permit issued pursuant to this section; and (d) Permit holders shall notify the City Clerk and Police Department at least seven (7) days prior to any wine tasting. 
(4)  Rules, policies and procedures. The Local Liquor Licensing Authority shall adopt rules, policies and procedures for the implementation of its duties and powers as those have been granted pursuant to C.R.S. Title 12, Articles 46, 47, and 48, as amended. 
(5)  Report to city council. The Local Liquor Licensing Authority shall be required to report on all actions taken with respect to the issuance of or control over liquor licenses within the City to the City Council. Reports shall be made in a timely fashion to the City Council. 
(6)  Appeal to city council. Any decision of the Local Liquor Licensing Authority may be appealed to the City Council within ten (10) calendar days, or at the next regularly scheduled meeting. City Council shall have the authority to sustain, modify or overturn the decision of the Local Liquor Licensing Authority. In any event, the City Council shall direct the Local Liquor Licensing Authority to take a particular action. The Local Liquor Licensing Authority shall conform to the written direction of the City Council within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the written directive. 
(7)  Appeal to district court. Any person applying to the District Court for review of a decision of the Local Liquor Licensing Authority shall apply for review within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Local Liquor Licensing Authority. The thirty-day period shall be inclusive of the appeal process to City Council as outlined in Subparagraph (5) above. 
(b)  Powers and Duties of Airport Board. The powers and duties of the Airport Board shall be to investigate, study and report to the City Council all matters concerning the airport facilities of the City and other matters concerning the subject of aviation which may be pertinent to the City as shall be requested of the Airport Board by the City Council; and such Board may investigate, study and report to the City Council on such other matters concerning the Municipal Airport as the Board may deem for the best interests of the City. 
(c)  Powers and Duties of Building Board of Appeals. The powers and duties of the Building Board of Appeals shall be: 
(1)  To hear appeals in accordance with the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International Fire Code, and the other adopted codes from the International Code Council, as adopted or amended by Title 060 of this Code. Such power shall not include matters of interpretation arising under the Code. 
(2)  To issue and revoke or suspend a City's contractor's license as provided in Title 050. 
(3)  To investigate, study and report to the City Council such other matters concerning contractor licensing and regulations as the Board may deem in the best interests of the City. 
(4)  To investigate, study and report to the City Council matters of fire protection and prevention coordination and cooperation between the City Fire Department and the Glenwood Springs Rural Fire Protection District. 
(d)  Powers and Duties of Finance Advisory Board. The Finance Advisory Board shall advise and assist the City Manager and Finance Director in the preparation of the City budget, the establishment of accounting systems for the City, the planning of expenses, the projection of revenues and the analysis of the other fiscal matters presented to the Board by the City Council. The Finance Advisory Board shall also be responsible for making recommendations to City Council regarding grants from the City's various grant programs as Council may establish from time to time. No decision of the Finance Advisory Board shall be binding upon the City or anyone acting on its behalf. 
(e)  Powers and duties of Parks and Recreation Commission. The powers and duties of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be: 
(1)  To investigate, study and report to the City Council all matters concerning City parks and recreation within the City and other matters concerning the subject of parks and recreation which may be pertinent to the City and requested of such Commission by the City Council. 
(2)  To investigate, study and report to the City Council on such other matters concerning parks and recreation within the City as the Commission may deem in the best interests of the City. 
(3)  To provide technical assistance, advice and planning support to the Parks and Recreation Director and City Council regarding tree planting and maintenance needs in the City. 
(4)  To provide recommendations from time to time regarding the administration and implementation of Article 090.050 of this Code. 
(5)  To investigate, study and report to City Council all matters concerning the burial and internment facilities of the City and other such matters as may be requested by City Council from time to time. 
(6)  To investigate, study and report to City Council on such other matters concerning burial and internment facilities and such other similar matters as the Commission may deem in the best interests of the City. 
(7)  To investigate, study and report to City Council any and all matters concerning the use and operation of the City's Community Center. 
(8)  To coordinate with other City boards and commissions on any aspect of the Community Center that may relate to the powers and duties of such other boards and commissions. 
(9)  To investigate, study and report to City Council on grants, donations and other forms of funding to assist in the operation of the Community Center, and to otherwise advise City Council on budgetary needs related to the operation of the Community Center. 
(f)  Powers and duties of Planning and Zoning Commission. The powers and duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be: 
(1)  To develop and recommend a master plan subject to the approval of the City Council and its environ in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the laws of the State. 
(2)  To recommend to the City Council boundaries of zone districts and regulations to be enforced therein, in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the laws of the State. 
(3)  To review proposals relating to subdivision, development and use of land and make decisions or recommendations on such proposals, in accordance with the procedures and provisions set forth in this Code. 
(4)  To hear and decide appeals wherein there is a question of interpretation of the zone district map, the master plan or related documents and similar questions as they may arise in the administration of this Code. 
(5)  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the duty and power to act on appeals with regard to matters arising from enforcement of provisions of Title 070 of this Code, including: 
a.  Review of administrative decisions. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any action, including any order, interpretation, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official of the city in the enforcement of Title 070 of this Code. 
b.  Variances. To hear and decide requests for variances from the zoning provisions and sign regulation provisions where there are unique, unnecessary and unreasonable hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of said provisions; and to hear and decide requests for variances to allow deviations from restrictions upon the construction and placement of buildings and other structures on site. Examples of such variances include, but are not limited to, modifications of minimum area requirements, building coverage and setback restrictions. Variances from permitted and special review uses in zone district text shall not be considered. 
(6)  To perform such other functions as required by the provisions of Title 070. 
(g)  Powers and duties of River Commission. The powers and duties of the River Commission shall be: 
(1)  To investigate, study, and report to the City Council any and all matters concerning the use, enjoyment, conservation of the, rivers and streams in the City and its environs and the open space adjacent thereto, including water quality issues, the protection of valuable riparian ecosystems, and water rights matters. 
(2)  To advise the City Council on public access to and use of rivers and streams in the City and the adjacent environs and maintain and update a map related thereto as necessary. 
(3)  To advise the City Council on the use of municipally owned property adjacent to the rivers and City construction projects in the rivers or adjacent open space. 
(4)  To promote and celebrate riverfront cleanup efforts and public awareness of non-point source water pollution. 
(5)  To investigate, study and report to the City Council on grants, donations and other forms of funding to assist in the acquisition and improvement of the rivers and adjacent open space, and to otherwise advise the City Council on budgetary needs related to preservation of open space and river improvement. 
(6)  To appoint subcommittees as necessary to carry out the foregoing functions. 
(7)  To coordinate with the Parks and Recreation Commission, Roaring Fork Conservancy, Middle Colorado Watershed Council, and other organizations, stakeholders groups, and property owners as is necessary to carry out the foregoing functions. 
(8)  At the request of City Council hold an annual work session with the City Council to review the actions taken by the River Commission regarding the foregoing functions and discuss future plans. 
(h)  Powers and duties of the Victim's and Witnesses Assistance and Law Enforcement Board. 
(1)  The Board shall designate one (1) of its members as chairman, shall establish rules of procedure and order and shall hold meetings as it might deem necessary. 
(2)  A surcharge equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the fine imposed for violation of all municipal ordinances, including ordinance violations under the Model Traffic Code, is hereby levied on each Municipal Court action resulting in a conviction, plea of guilty or no contest or in a deferred judgment and sentence, which municipal ordinance violation is charged pursuant to City ordinances. All calculated surcharge amounts resulting in dollars and cents shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. In the event a portion of the fine is suspended, the surcharge levied shall be computed based upon the original fine, regardless of whether a portion of said fine has been suspended. Said surcharges shall be paid to the Clerk of the Court by the defendant, and said Clerk shall deposit the money so received in the fund hereinafter created. 
(3)  The Victim's and Witnesses Assistance and Law Enforcement Fund, hereinafter referred to as the "Fund," consist of all monies paid as a surcharge as provided in Subsection (2) above. All monies deposited in the Fund shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account, and all interest earned by monies in the Fund shall be credited to the Fund. The City Manager, by and through the Finance Director, shall be responsible for establishing a separate fund for purposes of accounting for the revenues and expenditures. At the conclusion of each fiscal year, all monies remaining in the Fund shall remain in the Fund for allocation as hereinafter set forth. 
(4)  The Board shall disburse monies from the Fund in the following manner: 
a.  First, to the payment of all reasonable and necessary expenses and costs incurred by the Board in the performance of its duties, including but not limited to professional fees, office supplies and meeting expenses. 
b.  Second, not less than fifty (50) percent of the monies remaining in the Fund after the deduction of reasonable expenses and costs shall be allocated for the purchase of victims (and witnesses) services and reimbursements, as hereinafter set forth. No funds shall be paid except in those specific instances where a police report has been filed by the Police Department for an alleged violation of a municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the perpetrator has been identified, arrested or prosecuted. 
c.  Third, any remaining monies may be allocated to the Police Department for the following purposes, including, but not limited to: equipment purchases, training programs for personnel and the employment of additional personnel. Such funds shall not be used by the Police Department for defraying the costs of routine and ongoing operating expenses. No disbursement within this category of expenditure shall be made without the approval of the City Council following a written recommendation by the Board. 
(5)  Disbursement of funds by the Board on behalf of the victim's and witnesses assistance services may be used for the following purposes: 
a.  Provision of services for early crisis intervention; 
b.  Assistance in prompt return of victims' property; 
c.  Assistance to victims and witnesses in arranging transportation to and from court; 
d.  Provision of translator services; 
e.  Protection from threats of harm and other forms of intimidation; 
f.  Reasonable medical and hospital expenses and expenses incurred for dentures, eyeglasses, hearing aids or other prosthetic or medically necessary devices; and 
g.  Losses resulting from property damage, including repair or replacement of property damaged as a result of crime or payment of the deductible amount on a residential insurance policy in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Victims' recovery due to property damage shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any crime, but in no case shall a loss be compensable if the aggregate property damages are less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(6)  The Board is authorized to accept and evaluate all applications for disbursement of funds, whether emanating from victims, witnesses or law enforcement agencies. Applications for disbursement shall be made upon forms prescribed by the Board, and made available by the Municipal Court and the Police Department. The Board shall establish its own criteria for evaluating applications for disbursement, and nothing herein contained shall obligate the Board to make disbursement of any funds available to it. Upon a finding by the Board that a disbursement shall be made from the Fund, the Board shall submit a written request for payment to the Finance Department, which shall then remit payment in accordance with the request. 
(7)  The Board is required to submit minutes of its meetings to the City Council at the next regular Council meeting following the Board's meeting. 
(i)  Powers and duties of Transportation Commission. The powers and duties of the Transportation Commission shall be: 
(1)  To investigate, study and report to the City Council any and all matters concerning transportation issues which directly affect the City. 
(2)  To investigate, study and report to the City Council on other intergovernmental committees, boards or commissions working on transportation issues in the Tri-County (Pitkin, Garfield and Eagle) area. 
(3)  To meet with the City Council on an annual basis to identify which transportation issues require priority attention. 
(4)  To investigate, study and report to the City Council on grants, donations and other forms of funding to assist in meeting the transportation needs of the City. 
(5)  To perform functions concerning oversight of transportation issues or functions as delegated by the City Council. 
(6)  To appoint subcommittees as necessary to carry out the foregoing functions subject to the approval of the City Council. 
(j)  Reserved. 
(k)  Powers and duties of Glenwood Springs Housing Commission. The powers and duties of the Housing Commission shall be: 
(1)  To investigate, study and report to the City Council any and all matters concerning housing issues which directly affect the City, including the preparation of a Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS). 
(2)  To assist City Council in defining the nature and scope of housing opportunities in the City. 
(3)  To meet with the City Council on an annual basis to identify which housing issues require priority attention. 
(4)  To investigate, study and report to the City Council on grants, donations and other forms of funding to assist in meeting the housing needs of the City. 
(5)  To perform functions concerning oversight of housing issues or functions as delegated by the City Council, including monitoring the implementation of activities as described in the CHAS. 
(6)  To appoint subcommittees as necessary to carry out the foregoing functions subject to the approval of the City Council. 
(l)  Powers and duties of Historic Preservation Commission. The powers and duties of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be: 
(1)  To recommend to City Council methods for the protection and preservation of the City's historic and cultural heritage, including, but not limited to, the designation of historic landmarks and districts by appropriate regulations. 
(2)  To recommend to City Council methods for enhancing property values and the stabilization of historic neighborhoods. 
(3)  To recommend to City Council methods for increasing economic and financial benefits, including, but not limited to, City attractions. 
(4)  To provide educational opportunities to increase public appreciation of the City's unique heritage. 
(5)  To do any other tasks related to the historic preservation of resources in the community of Glenwood Springs. 
(m)  Powers and duties of Tourism Promotion Board. The powers and duties of the Tourism Promotion Board shall be: 
(1)  To investigate, study and report to the City Council: 
a.  All matters concerning tourism marketing and promotion that pertain to the benefit of Glenwood Springs and the area within the 81601 postal zip code; and 
b.  Other matters concerning the subject of tourism marketing and promotion which may be pertinent to the benefit of the City and the area within the 81601 postal zip code. 
(2)  To coordinate with City staff, community organizations, community businesses, and other boards and commissions, when applicable to efficiently market and promote tourism to the benefit of Glenwood Springs and the area within the 81601 postal zip code. 
(3)  To, at its discretion, and in addition to initiatives that directly market and promote features and attractions within the City and the area within the 81601 postal zip code, market and promote the geographical proximity of Glenwood Springs to other features and attractions outside of the 81601 postal zip code in ways that could reasonably be expected to benefit the City. 
(4)  To establish rules of procedure and order for the Board to follow. 
(5)  To review tourism marketing plans; to set tourism marketing goals, to determine the methods to accomplish and measure success in accomplishing those goals; to determine the appropriate staff and marketing contractor(s)/vendor(s) resources needed; to recommend to the City Council an annual tourism marketing budget; to recommend, to the City Council, award of contract(s) for the best candidate for contract staff and marketing contractor(s)/vendor(s), deemed necessary, based upon an approved Request for Proposal, Request for Qualification or other process; and to provide oversight of performance of contract staff and marketing vendor(s)/contractor(s) contract terms to ensure the efficient and effective implementation of the marketing goals and to report problems with performance to City Council. 
(6)  To meet with the City Council on an annual basis, or as often as requested by the City Council, to identify marketing priorities of the City. 
(7)  To complete all other duties as may be directed by City Council. 
(n)  Powers and duties of Arts and Culture Board. The powers and duties of the Arts and Culture Board shall be: 
(1)  To promote awareness, access, and appreciation of the fine, performing, and practical arts for City residents and visitors. 
(2)  To advise the City Council in connection with all matters relating to the artistic and cultural development of the City. 
(3)  To provide opportunities for cultural and art experience and education for children and adults. 
(4)  To promote increased interaction and collaboration among artists, art-related organizations, and opportunities for growth and exposure. 
(5)  To promote knowledge and appreciation for cultural forms of artistic expression. 
(6)  To make recommendations to the City Council with respect to fundraising and annual budget appropriations for the arts. 
(7)  To advise and consult with local arts groups as requested by such groups or by the City Council. 
(Code 1971 §§ 2-64.1, 2-2, 2-65[a], [b], 2-65.1, 4-78, 4-232, 4-155, 15-2; 26-84 § 3; 19-89 § 3; 12-90 § 1; 54-90 § 3; 39-91 § 3; 10-93 § 2; 29-93 § 3; 7-94 § 3; 17-94 § 1; 23-94 § 3; 10-95 § 3; 11-95; 19-95 § 3; 46-95 § 1; 55-95 § 1; 28-97 § 3; 29-97 § 5; 32-97 § 1; 42-00 § 1; 61-01 § 3, 4, 5; 61-02 § 4; 9-04 § 1; 20-04, § 1; 33-05, § 2; 7-06 § 3; 13-06, § 2; 6-08 § 2; 12-10 § 2; 2-12 § 2; Ord. No. 16-2017 , § 4, 8-17-2017; Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 3, 1-18-2018; Ord. No. 6-2018 , § 3, 3-1-2018; Ord. No. 21-2018 , § 3, 9-20-2018) 
020.020.040 - Appointment, removal, term and vacancies of boards and commissions. 
(a)  Appointment and term of members. Except as otherwise provided, all appointments to the boards and commissions shall be by the City Council for terms of three (3) years each, and each member shall serve until his/her successor is appointed and takes office; provided, however, that the initial terms of office may be shortened by the City Council so as to provide overlapping terms of office. Appointments shall expire the day before the first regular meeting of the City Council in each month according to the following schedule: 
(1)  February: 
Planning and Zoning Commission; 
Finance Advisory Board; 
Tourism Promotion Board; 
Building Board of Appeals. 
(2)  March: 
Transportation Commission; 
Arts and Culture Board; 
Parks and Recreation Commission; 
Airport Board; 
River Commission. 
(3)  April: 
Local Liquor Licensing Authority; 
Victim's Witnesses Assistance and Law Enforcement Board; 
Historic Preservation Commission; 
Glenwood Springs Housing Commission. 
(b)  Alternate members. The City Council at its discretion may appoint up to three (3) persons as alternate members for each board or commission. If a regular member of a board or commission is to be absent from a meeting, the presiding officer for the meeting may select an alternate member to fill such absence and to attend and serve at the meeting. The alternate member may exercise all powers at the meeting which the absent regular member could exercise, and the alternate's powers and privileges shall terminate at the end of the meeting attended. The presiding officer may at his/her discretion select the same alternate to serve at successive meetings in the absence of any member. 
(c)  Limit to term of members. Unless it is deemed vital by the City Council that an appointed member of a board or commission be retained in office, each member shall be replaced after having served for six (6) years on a board or commission; however, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the appointment of a member to a new term where, at the expiration of his/her current term, he/she will have served for less than six (6) years. 
(d)  Removal of members. All appointed members of a board or commission shall be subject to removal, at any time, by the City Council. In the event an appointed member of a board or commission ceases to qualify for membership, his or her appointment is immediately terminated. 
(e)  Vacancies. The City Council shall fill all vacancies on boards and commissions by appointment for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1971 §§ 2-63, 2-64, 2-67; 6-95 § 1; 10-07 § 2; Ord. No. 9-2018 , § 2, 4-20-2018) 
020.020.050 - Organization and record keeping of boards and commissions. 
(a)  Officers. Each board and commission shall use its own chairman, vice-chairman and secretary, except the City Manager may provide a city employee to a board or commission to act as secretary. 
(b)  Minutes and records. Excepting as may otherwise be provided in this Code, minutes shall be kept of all meetings of boards and commissions. Copies of all minutes and other records of the boards and commission shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. Minutes and reports of all meetings of boards and commissions shall be made to the City Council within thirty (30) days following each meeting. 
(Code 1971 § 2-64) 
020.020.060 - Appointment of additional advisory boards and committees. 
    The City Council may appoint by resolution or ordinance such other advisory boards or committees as it may from time to time deem necessary. 
ARTICLE 020.030 - CONDUCT AND PROCEDURES FOR MEETINGS 

020.030.010 - Place and dates of regular and special meetings of Council. 
(a)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held at City Hall, or other designated assembly room, on the first and third Thursdays of each month. Any regular meeting of City Council may be canceled or rescheduled to a different date by resolution of City Council. The first regular meeting of each month shall convene at 6:00 p.m. unless another time is set by prior approval of a majority of the City Council. The second regular meeting of each month shall convene at 6:00 p.m. Regular meetings shall adjourn no later than 11:00 p.m. unless a later time is agreed upon by unanimous vote of all Council Members present at said meeting. In the event one (1) or more agenda items has not been called prior to 11:00 p.m. and unanimous approval for extension of the meeting has not been obtained, such items shall be automatically continued to the next regular City Council meeting or to a special meeting called in accordance with the Charter. 
(b)  Special meetings. Special meetings of the City Council shall be held in accordance with the Charter. 
(Code 1971 § 2-76; 4-84 § 1; 39-87 § 1; 34-05 § 1; Ord. No. 39-2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-5-2017; Ord. No. 14-2019 , § 2, 4-4-2019) 
020.030.020 - Regular and special meetings of boards and commissions. 
    Regular and special meetings of boards and commissions established by the City Council shall be held as follows: 
(1)  Regular meetings. All boards and commissions shall designate a regular meeting time and place and shall publish notice thereof in the official newspaper of the City. 
(2)  Special meetings. Special meetings of the boards and commissions shall be called by the City Clerk on the request of the board or commission chairperson, or one-half (1/2) of the members of a board or commission. At least twenty-four (24) hours' written notice shall be given to each member, served personally, or left at his/her usual place of residence. A special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the board or commission are present or have waived notice thereof in writing. 
(Code 1971 § 2-77) 
020.030.030 - Meetings in addition to regular and special meetings. 
    In addition to regular and special meetings of the City Council and boards and commissions, the following meetings of each may be held in conformity with the following, to wit: 
(1)  Work sessions. Work sessions may be held at such time and place as a majority of the members may determine. The Mayor, City Manager or chairperson may call the City Council or a board or commission together for a work session at any time deemed necessary. Each work session shall be devoted exclusively to matters regarding which the interchange of information preliminary to taking action thereon is deemed to be essential. At a work session, no formal vote shall be taken on any matter under discussion nor shall any member enter into a commitment with another respecting a vote to be taken subsequently in a formal meeting. To encourage the interchange of ideas at work sessions, it shall be a standing policy that individual members not be quoted on ideas that they propose. Minutes of the proceedings of the study sessions shall not be required. 
(2)  Conference sessions. Conference sessions may be held prior to each regular or special meeting at such time and place as a majority of the members may determine. The Mayor or the City Manager may call the Council together for a conference session at any time deemed necessary, and the chairperson or City Manager may call a board or commission together for a conference session at any time deemed necessary. Each conference session shall be devoted exclusively to matters regarding which the interchange of information preliminary to public action is deemed to be essential. At a conference session no formal vote shall be taken on any matter under discussion, nor shall a Council or board or commission member enter into a commitment with another respecting a vote to be taken subsequently in a formal meeting. To encourage the interchange of ideas at conference sessions, it shall be a standing policy that individual members not be quoted on ideas that they propose. Minutes of the proceedings of conference sessions shall not be required. 
(Code 1971 § 2-79) 
020.030.040 - Quorum, continuance of meetings. 
    For the transaction of business by the City Council and boards and commissions, there shall be present: 
(1)  City Council. Four (4) Council Members. 
(2)  Boards and commissions. Except as may be otherwise provided in this Code, no fewer than one-half (1/2) of the members thereof. 
(3)  Continuances. Any meetings of the City Council or of a board or commission may be continued from day to day for more than one (1) day, but no continuance shall extend beyond the next regular meeting thereafter. 
(Code 1971 § 2-78) 
020.030.050 - Open meetings, executive sessions. 
(a)  Open meetings. All regular or special meetings and all work sessions and conference sessions of the City Council and boards and commissions shall be public meetings and open to the public at all times; however, the City Council may conduct an executive session upon motion made, seconded and carried by the City Council. 
(b)  Executive sessions. Executive sessions may be conducted only during a regular or special meeting of City Council; however, no final policy decision, resolution, rule, regulation, formal action or any action approving a contract or calling for the payment of money shall be adopted or approved at any executive session. Executive sessions only for consideration of the following, to wit: 
(1)  Consider the appointment, employment or dismissal of the City Manager, Municipal Judge or City Attorney. 
(2)  Hear charges or complaints brought against the City Manager, Municipal Judge or City Attorney. 
(3)  Hear testimony and statements concerning persons proposed as members of a board or commission. 
(4)  Legal matters which come within the attorney-client privilege. 
(5)  Discussions with the Chief of Police, District Attorney or their appointed representatives on matters posing a threat to the security of public buildings, public services or facilities. 
(6)  To determine the City's position relative to issues that may be subject to negotiation, to receive reports on negotiation progress and status, to develop strategy and to instruct the City's negotiators. 
(Code 1971 § 2-80) 
020.030.060 - Public hearings. 
    Except for regular and special meetings and work and conference sessions of the City Council and boards and commissions, all public hearings required by this Code shall be held only after public notice of the same is given by the City in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published two (2) times in two (2) weekly successive publications of the official newspaper designated by the City, the first of which shall be at least ten (10) days and no more than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. 
(2)  Written notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be sent by United States mail, first class postage prepaid, properly addressed, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date to all persons as are entitled to receive such notice under this Code. 
(3)  All notices shall contain such additional information as may be required by this Code for the particular hearing to be held. 
(4)  A fee of not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be charged for publication and actual administrative costs, unless otherwise provided in this Code. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the City shall cause all publications to be made and notices to be mailed; however, the responsibility for the accuracy of any notice, publication and mailing shall, in each case and in all particulars, remain that of the person or entity initiating the same. 
(Code 1971 § 1-15) 
020.030.070 - Agenda for Council meetings. 
(a)  Preparation and delivery of agenda items. All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or other matters to be submitted to the Council shall be delivered to the City Clerk no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Thursday preceding the Thursday of each regular meeting of the City Council. The City Clerk and City Manager shall immediately arrange a list of such matters according to the order of business and furnish each member of the Council with a copy of the same no later than 12:00 noon on the Monday preceding the Thursday of each regular meeting of the City Council. No other items shall be considered by the Council except as a majority of the Council shall approve. Matters to be considered at special meetings shall be only those as stated in the call thereof. 
(b)  Order of business on agenda. All business of the Council shall be considered in the order of the agenda, which agenda shall be established by resolution of the Council from time to time; however, the first order of business shall be a roll call. An agenda shall also include approval of minutes of previous meetings, reports from boards and commissions, old business, new business, communications, citizens appearing before the Council, introduction and adoption of resolutions and ordinances, departmental reports and adjournment. An agenda item may be removed to another place on the agenda by motion of Council during the meeting. 
(20-11, § 2) 
020.030.080 - Presiding officer, call to order. 
    The Mayor or, in his/her absence, the Mayor Pro Tem shall take the chair of City Council meetings at the hour appointed and shall immediately call the Council to order. The roll shall then be called by the City Clerk who shall enter in the minutes of the meeting the names of the Council Members present. In the absence of the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the City Clerk shall call the Council to order whereupon a temporary chairman shall be elected by the members of the Council present. Upon arrival of the Mayor at the meeting, the Mayor Pro Tem, if then presiding, shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council. If a temporary chairman is presiding, he/she shall relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council to the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem upon the arrival of either. 
020.030.090 - Conduct of meetings. 
    Discussion of an issue before Council shall conform to the following procedures: 
(1)  Debate before Council. Debate by the City Council shall be conducted as follows: 
a.  The Mayor, or such other Council member as may be presiding, may move, second and debate from the chair subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members, and the presiding officer shall not be deprived of any privileges of a Council Member by reason of his/her acting as the presiding officer. 
b.  Every Council Member desiring to speak shall address the chair and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. 
c.  A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted while speaking unless it be to call him/her to order or as may be otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he/she shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined; and, if in order, he/she shall be permitted to proceed. 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  A Council Member shall have the privilege of having an abstract of his/her statement on any subject under consideration by the Council entered in the minutes. 
f.  The presiding officer may direct the City Clerk to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question under consideration by the Council. 
(2)  Persons addressing Council. Persons addressing the Council shall do so as follows: 
a.  Interested parties. or their authorized legal representatives, may address the Council by a written communication in regard to matters then under discussion. 
b.  Interested parties, or their authorized legal representatives, may address the council by oral communication on any matter then under discussion by the council or at the point in agenda for citizens appearing before council. 
c.  Each person addressing the council shall state his/her name and address and shall limit his/her statements to no more than five (5) minutes. The allotted period of five (5) minutes may be shortened by the presiding officer as provided below. If a period in excess of five (5) minutes is requested, express permission must be first obtained from the presiding officer. 
d.  All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a body and not to any specific member. No person, other than the Council and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Council, without the permission of the presiding officer. No questions shall be asked of a Council Member except through the presiding officer. 
e.  Council members shall have the right to question any person addressing remarks to the council. Questioning by Council Members shall not be deemed a part of the five (5) minutes allotted to each person addressing the Council. 
f.  After all persons have completed their presentations to council on any issue then being considered by council, the matter shall be closed to public participation and all further debate shall be by council only. 
g.  Prior to consideration of any item by council, the presiding officer shall determine from the persons in attendance at the council meeting those who wish to speak on the subject. Only those persons indicating a desire to speak shall be allowed to address the Council on the subject. If the number of persons wishing to address the Council on any subject are more than five (5), the presiding officer may shorten the five-minute period allotted to each person. 
(3)  Violation of order and decorum. Any person who makes personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks while Council is in session or who shall become boisterous while addressing the Council shall be forthwith barred from further audience before the Council by the presiding officer unless permission to continue is granted by a majority vote of the Council. The Chief of Police, or such member or members of the Police Department as he/she may designate, shall be the sergeant-at-arms of the Council meetings. He/she shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the Council meeting. Upon the instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms to remove any person from the Council meeting who violates the order and decorum of the meeting. 
(4)  Robert's Rules of Order. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order. 
(34-86) 
020.030.100 - Voting. 
    Voting by the Council on all matters except procedural matters shall be as follows, to wit: 
(1)  The City Clerk shall call the name of each Council Member and the "yes" or "no" of each shall be recorded in the minutes and records of the Council proceedings. 
(2)  All voting upon ordinances, resolutions and motions shall be in conformity with the Charter. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in the Charter or in this Code, a motion shall be deemed carried if a quorum is present and a majority of those voting vote "yea." 
(4)  No affirmative action may be taken upon a tie vote; and, in the event the matter being voted upon action of Council, including but not limited to, liquor licenses and items pursuant to Title 070, a tie vote shall be considered to be a denial of the matter. 
(5)  Council Members not entitled to vote on a motion because of a personal or private interest shall be deemed present for purposes of determining whether or not there is a quorum present. 
(34-86) 
Cross reference- § 4.2 Charter. 
020.030.110 - Conduct of meetings of boards and commissions. 
    Meetings of boards and commissions shall be conducted in as nearly a like fashion as provided above for the City Council except as the same pertains to the preparation of the meeting's agenda. 
(Code 1971 § 2-88) 
ARTICLE 020.040 - CONFLICTS OF INTEREST 

020.040.010 - Title. 
    This Article shall be known and cited as the Glenwood Springs Conflict of Interest Code. 
(31-87 § 1) 
020.040.020 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Affiliate or affiliated with means the present status of being an employer, employee, partner, agent, stockholder, joint venturer, officer or corporate director of any business organization, or a person who shares office space with such an organization. 
    Appear on behalf of another means to act as a witness, advocate or expert or otherwise to support the position of another person. 
    Appointee means a person appointed to a City board or commission as set forth in Article 020.020 of this Code. 
    Family relation means a spouse or relative up through the second degree of consanguinity. 
    Pecuniary stake means a present interest which may yield directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit, except for duly authorized salary or other compensation from the City, to the individual or to a person or organization with whom the individual is affiliated. 
    Substantial interest means any present interest by a Council Member or appointee, including without limitation a pecuniary interest in the outcome of a transaction or a family relation with a person directly involved in a transaction, which would cause a reasonably prudent person observing the transaction to expect a marked tendency by the Council Member or appointee to make a decision other than an objective decision. The term substantial interest shall not be construed to include an interest which is purely speculative or hypothetical. 
    Transaction means any contract; any sale or lease of any interest in land, material, supplies or services; or any decision upon any land development right, license, permit, application, appointment, request for ruling or determination, or any other claim or controversy. 
(31-87 § 1) 
020.040.030 - Appearances by Council Members. 
(a)  No Council Member shall personally appear before the City Council or any board or commission. However, a Council Member may be affiliated with a person or organization appearing before the City Council or any board or commission if the Council Member follows the procedures prescribed by Section 020.040.060 of this article. 
(b)  No Council Member shall appear on behalf of another person concerning any matter before the Municipal Court, unless ordered to do so by subpoena of the Court. A Council Member may appear on his/her own behalf in Municipal Court. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit a Council Member from addressing any body of which he/she is a member on a subject in which he/she does not have a substantial interest. 
(31-87 § 1) 
020.040.040 - Appearances by appointees. 
    An appointee may appear or be affiliated with a person or organization appearing concerning any transaction with the City under the following circumstances only: 
(1)  An appointee may appear on his/her or her own behalf before the body of which he/she or she is a member, subject to the procedures prescribed by Section 020.040.060 of this article, or before the City Council. 
(2)  An appointee shall not appear on behalf of another person before the board or commission of which the appointee is a member or before the City Council. However, an appointee may appear on behalf of another person before any other board or commission of the City. 
(3)  An appointee may be affiliated with a person or organization appearing on behalf of another person concerning any transaction before the City Council or the body of which the appointee is a member if the appointee does not personally appear on behalf of the person and follows the procedure prescribed by Section 020.040.060 of this article. 
(4)  An appointee may appear before the Municipal Court and may be affiliated with a person or organization appearing before the Municipal Court. 
(5)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit an appointee from addressing the board or commission of which he/she is a member on a subject in which he/she does not have a substantial interest, or from addressing the City Council or other boards and commissions upon matters of general public policy. 
(31-87 § 1) 
020.040.050 - Participation in civil lawsuits. 
    No Council Member or appointee shall be a party, or personally or as an affiliate of a firm appearing on behalf of a party, in a civil lawsuit wherein the City is an adverse party, unless the Council Member or appointee first obtains the consent of the City Council. 
(31-87 § 1) 
020.040.060 - Disclosure and disqualification. 
(a)  Applicability. A Council Member or appointee shall follow the procedures set forth in this section if he/she has a substantial interest in a transaction with the City. 
(b)  Disclosure. 
(1)  Any Council Member with a substantial interest in a transaction with the City shall give notice of the interest to the City Council and to the City Manager as soon as reasonably possible after the interest has arisen. 
(2)  Any appointee with a substantial interest in a transaction before the board or commission of which he/she is a member shall give notice to the board or commission as soon as reasonably possible after the interest has arisen. 
(c)  Disqualification. Any Council Member or appointee with a substantial interest in a transaction with the City shall: 
(1)  Not discuss the matter with any other member of the City Council or of any board or commission involved in the transaction, except for appearances by appointees which are specifically permitted under Section 020.040.040. 
(2)  Refrain from voting upon or otherwise acting in an official capacity in such transaction. 
(31-87 § 1) 
020.040.070 - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
(b)  The City Council may remove any appointee who willfully violates any provision of this Chapter. 
(c)  If a transaction is consummated contrary to the provisions of Section 020.040.060, the City Council may void the transaction. 
(d)  Upon the sworn complaint of any person alleging facts which, if true, would constitute improper conduct under the provisions of this article, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with all of the requirements of due process of law and, in written findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, make a determination concerning the propriety of the conduct alleged and shall take whatever action necessary to address the improper conduct. The exhaustion of the foregoing administrative remedy shall be a prerequisite to the bringing of a civil action to enforce any claim of the complainant, based in whole or in part upon a violation of this article. 
(31-87 § 1) 
020.040.080 - City Attorney to advise. 
    Upon the request of any Council Member or appointee, the City Attorney shall render an advisory opinion regarding the applicability of this ordinance. However, nothing contained herein shall relieve the Council Member or appointee from obtaining the advice of private counsel in any situation where personal civil or liability may accrue. 
(31-87 § 1) 
TITLE 030 - CITY ADMINISTRATION AND MUNICIPAL COURT 
ARTICLE 030.010 - CITY ADMINISTRATION 

030.010.010 - City Manager. 
    The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City and directly responsible to the City Council for the administration of the City. All Council direction to the City shall be through the City Manager who shall have the powers and duties enumerated in the Charter. 
030.010.020 - Administrative departments. 
(a)  Departments established. All departments of the City, save and except the City Attorney and Municipal Judge, shall be under the control and supervision of the City Manager. The administrative functions of the City shall be performed by the following departments: 
(b)  City Clerk. The City Clerk shall have general supervision and control over the City's official records, shall keep the City seal and shall affix such to City documents, shall attest to the signatures of the Mayor and City Manager, shall conduct municipal elections in accordance with state statutes and local ordinances, shall keep a complete record of all proceedings of the City Council, and any other services as deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(c)  Community Development. Community Development shall be conducted under the direction of the Community Development Director and shall include the areas of planning and zoning, building inspections, and other community development services as deemed appropriate by the City Manager. 
(d)  Engineering. Engineering shall be conducted under the direction of the City Engineer and shall include all operations necessary to maintain and improve the City's infrastructure, transportation services, and any other services as deemed necessary by the City Manager. The City Engineer shall also serve as the Traffic Engineer. 
(e)  Financial Services. Financial Services shall be conducted under the direction of the Director of Finance and shall include all duties set forth in Section 6.6(A) of the Charter, accounts receivable/payable, and other financial services as deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(f)  Fire Department. The Fire Department shall be conducted under the direction of the Fire Chief and shall include the areas of fire protection, ambulance services, disaster emergency services and other emergency services as deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(g)  Human Resources. The Director of Human Resources shall be responsible for the administration of all personnel and employment services of the City and for the maintenance of all City personnel records, and any other services as deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(h)  Information Systems. The Director of Information Systems shall have management oversight to ensure the continued integrity and availability of City systems and data, including Community Broadband Network, and any other services as deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(i)  Parks and recreation. Parks and Recreation shall be conducted under the direction of the Parks and Recreation Director and shall include the areas of parks, cemeteries, and recreation, and any other services as deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(j)  Public Safety. Public Safety shall be conducted under the direction of the Police Chief and shall include all police services of the City and other public safety operations as deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(k)  Public Works and Utilities. Public Works and Utilities shall be conducted under the direction of the Director of Public Works and shall include all operations of the utility systems owned by the City, all City field operations, special works activity team (SWAT), streets and alleys, mechanical services, and other public works and utilities functions as deemed necessary by the City Manager. 
(l)  No authority to contract for City. Nothing in this section shall be construed to grant to the director of the department the authority to enter into any contract, written, oral or otherwise, without the authorization of the City Manager or City Council as provided in this Code and by the Charter. 
(m)  Responsibilities of directors of departments. The director of a department shall be immediately responsible to the City Manager for the effective administration of the department and the activities assigned to the department. The City Manager may set aside any action taken by a director of a department and may supersede the director in the functions of the director's office. All directors of a department shall keep themselves informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the City Manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service of the public. 
(n)  Reports. Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the City Manager at the end of each month. A summary of all such reports shall be made by the City Manager and submitted to the City Council. Each director of a department shall establish a system of records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the monthly reports to the City Manager. 
(o)  Preservation of records. Each director of a department shall be held responsible for the preservation of all public records under his/her jurisdiction and shall provide a system of filing and indexing the same. No public records, reports, correspondence or other data relative to the business of any department shall be destroyed or removed permanently from the files without the approval of the City Manager. All records and accounts of every office and department of the City shall be open to inspection by any citizen at all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by the City Manager, except such records and documents the disclosure of which would tend to defeat the lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish, and except as provided in C.R.S. § 24-72-201 et seq., as amended. 
(p)  Inter-departmental coordination during emergencies. In cases of emergency, it shall be the duty of every department, subject to such rules as the City Manager may prescribe, to furnish to any other department such service, labor and material as may be needed by the director of such department. Any labor or material which may be furnished by any department for any other department during such emergency shall be charged to the department and credited to the furnishing department, subject to applicable state law. 
(Code 1962 §§ 7.2-2, 7.3-2-7.3-5; Code 1971 §§ 2-1.5, 2-2, 2-16-2-18; 40-87 § 1; 38-90 § 1; 8-91 § 1; 1-93 § 1; 26-99 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 38-2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-5-2017) 
030.010.030 - Engaging services of persons not employed by City. 
    From time to time, the City may engage the services of those not employed by the City to assist the City administration in the performance of its duties. 
(Code 1971 § 2-2.6) 
ARTICLE 030.020 - LEGAL SERVICES 

030.020.010 - City Attorney. 
    The City Attorney shall be the legal representative of the City and shall advise the Council and City officials in matters relating to their official powers and duties. The City Attorney shall be an attorney-at-law admitted to practice in Colorado. The Council may provide the City Attorney with such assistants as the Council may deem necessary. The Council shall establish compensation for the City Attorney, his assistants and special counsel. 
030.020.020 - Duties. 
    The City Attorney, or his assistants, shall represent the City in all legal proceedings, supervise the drafting of all ordinances, and the preparation of all other legal documents. He or his assistants shall attend all Council meetings and shall perform all services incident to this position as may be required by the City Charter or the ordinances of the City. 
030.020.030 - Special Counsel. 
    The Council may, on its own motion, or upon request of the City Attorney, in special cases employ special counsel to serve under the direction of the City Attorney. Special counsel engaged in regard to irregularities found by audit or any alleged dereliction in the duties of any officer or employee, shall serve independently of the City Attorney. 
030.020.040 - Billing for Legal Services. 
    The City Attorney shall bill for time provided on legal services including recording fees and other reimbursable expenses related to building, development and utility matters that are regulated by Article 060, 070 and 080, respectively, of the Municipal Code. 
(5-93 § 1; 17-03 § 2) 
ARTICLE 030.030 - MUNICIPAL COURT 

030.030.010 - Jurisdiction. 
    The Municipal Court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction to hear, try and determine all causes arising under this Code or any of the ordinances of the City. 
(Code 1962 § 8-1; Code 1971 § 13-1) 
030.030.020 - Procedure governed by Colorado Municipal Court Rules and Court. 
    The procedure, unless otherwise provided in this article, in the Municipal Court shall be governed by Colorado Municipal Court Rules. The Municipal Court Judge may make rules for procedures which are not inconsistent with such Colorado Municipal Court Rules, including powers incident to compelling attendance of witnesses, punishment for contempt and enforcement of orders of Court. 
(Code 1962 § 8.2; Code 1971 § 13-2) 
030.030.030 - Penalty assessment tickets. 
    Except where the City Council has otherwise established penalty assessment fines by ordinance, the Municipal Judge is authorized to establish penalty assessment fines for violations of this Code. Upon-the establishment of penalty fines, the Police Department shall be authorized to issue penalty assessment tickets utilizing the fines ordered by the Court. Procedures for the issuance and adjudication of penalty assessment tickets shall be substantially in conformance with the procedures set forth in Article 120.040 regarding traffic infraction penalty assessments, except that such matters shall be considered criminal. 
(56-86 § 1; 9-90 § 2) 
030.030.040 - Release on bail. 
    All persons charged with a violation of this Code or any of the ordinances of the City shall be bailable before conviction. The terms and conditions of such bail shall be governed, where applicable, by the provisions of C.R.S. § 16-4-101 et seq., as amended. The maximum amount of any bail shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The City may enter into a contract with the Garfield County Bond Commissioner's office upon the recommendation of the Municipal Judge. 
030.030.050 - Appointment of counsel. 
(a)  Appointment . The Municipal Judge shall have the authority to appoint an attorney for indigent defendants in accordance with the United States and Colorado Constitutions. Before such appointment, the Municipal Judge shall make a finding of indigence in accordance with standards established by the Colorado Supreme Court for appointment of the public defender. 
(b)  Fees . Each attorney appointed by the Municipal Judge to represent an indigent defendant shall be entitled to fees in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Seventy five dollars($75.00) per hour for court appointed attorneys; maximum two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for trial, one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) for non-trial. 
(2)  Thirty dollars ($30.00) per hour for paralegal/legal assistants (this amount will be included in the maximum amount for the attorneys). 
(c)  Partial indigence . In the event the Municipal Judge determines a defendant to be partially indigent, he/she may, at his/her discretion, appoint an attorney for that defendant. As a condition of such appointment, the Court may require the defendant to repay all, or part of, the attorney's fees incurred to represent such defendant. Such repayment may also be required of a defendant who becomes no longer indigent during the course of the proceedings. Such repayment may be charged regardless of whether or not the defendant is convicted of the charges for which the appointment is made. 
(Code 1971 § 13-4; 37-91 § 1; 3-11, § 2) 
030.030.060 - Plea agreements. 
(a)  In general. Where it appears that the efficient administration of criminal justice will be served, the City Attorney may engage in plea discussions for the purpose of reaching a plea agreement. A plea agreement shall be discussed and reached in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. § 16-7-301 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  Deferred prosecution. The Court may, prior to the entry of a plea of guilty and with the consent of the defendant, his/her attorney and the City Attorney, order the prosecution of the offense to be deferred for a period not to exceed one (1) year. During such time, the Court may place the defendant on supervised or unsupervised probation on such reasonable terms and conditions as the defendant, his/her attorney and the City Attorney may agree; however, no jail time may be imposed as a condition of such deferred prosecution. 
(c)  Deferred judgment and sentence. In any case in which the defendant has entered a plea of guilty, the Court has the power, with the written consent of the defendant, his/her attorney and the City Attorney, to continue the case for a period of one (1) year from the date of entry of such plea for the purpose of entering judgment and sentence upon such plea of guilty. This one-year period may be continued for a not-to-exceed period of one (1) additional year in those circumstances when the Court deems that it is in the interest of justice, upon the written request of the City Attorney, the defendant, and the defense counsel. During such time, the Court may place the defendant on supervised or unsupervised probation on such reasonable terms and conditions as the defendant, his/her attorney and the City Attorney may agree; however, the Court may, as an additional condition of such deferred sentence, commit the defendant to jail, during such deferred period of time, for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) days. Such commitment, at the Court's discretion, need not be served on consecutive days. 
(d)  Dismissal of action or revocation. Any charges deferred pursuant to Subsections 030.030.060(b) and (c) shall be dismissed, with prejudice, upon the defendant's satisfactory completion of the conditions during the period of probation. If the conditions imposed on the defendant pursuant to Subsections 030.030.060(b) and (c) are violated, the City Attorney may file a motion to revoke the deferred prosecution or deferred judgment and sentence. The determination of whether or not a violation has occurred shall be made by the Court after a hearing held upon notice of the same of not less than five (5) days, unless such notice is waived, to the defendant and his/her attorney of record. The motion to revoke the deferred prosecution or deferred judgment and sentence shall be filed with the Court either during the period of probation or within thirty (30) days thereafter. The burden of proof at such hearing shall be by a preponderance of the evidence, and the defendant shall be granted procedural due process rights. 
(11-94 § 1) 
030.030.070 - Imposition of court costs. 
    The Municipal Judge is empowered, in his/her discretion, to assess the following costs against any defendant who is found guilty of violating any provision of this Code or any of the ordinances of the City, or against any defendant who is granted a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence: 
(1)  Court costs. Court costs for ordinance violations shall be established annually by City Council resolution and may be assessed against every defendant who is found guilty or who has pled guilty or no contest to any ordinance or Charter violation. 
(2)  Victim's and witnesses assistance. A surcharge equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the fine imposed for violation of all municipal ordinances, including ordinance violations under the Model Traffic Code, shall be levied on each Municipal Court action resulting in a conviction, plea of guilty or no contest, or in a deferred judgment and sentence. All calculated surcharge amounts resulting in dollars and cents shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. In the event a portion of the fine is suspended, the surcharge levied shall be computed based upon the original fine, regardless of whether a portion of said fine has been suspended. Said surcharge shall be paid to the Clerk of the Court by the defendant, and said Clerk shall deposit the money so received in the Victim's and Witnesses Assistance Fund. Disbursement of funds shall be in accordance with the guidelines set forth in Subsection 020.020.030(h) 
(3)  Jury fee. Six dollars ($6.00) per day for actual jury service or three dollars ($3.00) per day of service on the jury panel alone, plus mileage of fifteen cents ($0.15) per mile for each mile actually and necessarily traveled from the juror's residence to the Court, but in any event not less than the twenty-five-dollar fee to be paid to the Court pursuant to the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
(4)  Bench warrant fee. Court costs shall be established annually by City Council resolution per warrant issued plus any costs incurred for transporting the defendant from his/her place of arrest to the City. 
(5)  Probationary or other services. Actual costs incurred either by the City or the defendant for probationary or treatment services for the defendant or useful public service by the defendant as such may be ordered by the Court. 
(6)  Letter fee. Court costs shall be established annually by City Council resolution per regular letter or certified letter for any letter sent to a defendant where the defendant has failed to respond to a written notice of Court or a summons. Such letter fee shall not limit the Court's ability to fine or sentence a defendant for contempt for such failure to respond. 
(7)  Jail costs. Actual per day cost charged to the City for each day a defendant is sent to jail, plus any fees charged to the City for services of the Bond Commissioner for such defendant. 
(8)  Other state-mandated costs. Any and all costs mandated by the State of Colorado from time to time. 
(9)  Detoxification surcharge. In addition to any other surcharges, fees or fines, a surcharge equal to ten (10) percent of the fine imposed for violation of all alcohol- and/or drug-related municipal ordinances shall be levied on each such action resulting in a conviction, plea of guilty or no contest, or in a deferred judgment and sentence. The surcharge shall also be levied on all actions resulting in a conviction, plea of guilty or no contest, or in a deferred judgment and sentence in actions in which alcohol and/or drugs were factors contributing to the violation, whether such violation is alcohol- and/or drug-related itself. All calculated surcharge amounts shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. In the event a portion of the fine is suspended, the surcharge levied shall be computed on the original fine. The surcharge shall be paid to the Clerk of the Court by the defendant and shall then be deposited in a fund used to offset the costs to the City for detoxification services. 
(31-92 § 1; 29-93 § 4; 6-98 § 1; 31-02 § 1; 36-02 § 1; 1-05 § 1; 10-09 § 2) 
030.030.080 - Imposition of sentence. 
    The Municipal Judge is empowered to impose the penalties for violations of this Code or any of the ordinances of the City in accordance with Section 010.020.080, except as may be otherwise provided in this Code and except as the sentencing authority of this Court may be limited by C.R.S. § 13-10-103, as amended. 
030.030.090 - Restitution. 
    The Municipal Judge is empowered to order a defendant who is found guilty of violating any provision of this Code or any of the ordinances of the City or who is granted a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence to make restitution or reparation, or both, to the victim of the defendant's conduct for the damage or injury which was sustained. 
030.030.100 - Probation. 
    The Municipal Judge is empowered to place a defendant who is found guilty of violating any provision of this Code or any of the ordinances of the City, or who is granted a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence, on probation for a period not to exceed one (1) year. Such probation may be supervised or unsupervised and may be made conditional upon the successful completion of reasonable terms and conditions. Revocation of probation shall occur in the same manner as revocation of a deferred prosecution or deferred sentence. The Municipal Judge is empowered to utilize probationary services as are provided by the City Council or with which the Court may contract at no cost to the City. 
030.030.110 - Incarceration of certain offenders. 
    Each person sentenced to jail by the Municipal Court shall serve the sentence in the nearest county jail with space available and shall be entitled to the same treatment as those prisoners in the respective county jail sentenced for violations of criminal statutes of the State. 
(Code 1971 § 10; A 6-98 § 2) 
030.030.120 - Failure to appear. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to fail to appear in Court when directed to do so by a summons or when ordered to do so by the Court. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, such person shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
TITLE 040 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE 040.010 - IN GENERAL 

040.010.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Title, certain terms are defined as follows unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning was intended by the City Council. 
    Auction means any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer who is either the agent for the owner of such property or is in fact the owner thereof. 
    Automotive vehicle means any vehicle or device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, or any device used or designed for aviation or flight in the air. Automotive vehicle includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers, semitrailers or mobile homes. Automotive vehicle shall not include devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Business means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, direct or indirect. 
    Carrier access services means the services furnished by a local exchange company to its customers who provide telecommunications services which allow them to provide such telecommunications services. 
    Charitable organization means any entity which: (1) has been certified as a nonprofit organization under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code, and (2) is an organization which exclusively, and in a manner consistent with existing laws and for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons or animals, freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental, or spiritual needs of persons or animals, and thereby lessens the burden of government. 
    City means the municipality of Glenwood Springs. 
    City Retail Sales and Use Tax Ordinance includes the provisions of Articles 040.010 through 040.040, inclusive. 
    Construction materials means tangible personal property which, when combined with other tangible personal property, loses its identity to become an integral and inseparable part of a completed structure or project, including public and private improvements. Construction materials include, but are not limited to, such things as: asphalt, bricks, builders' hardware, caulking material, cement, concrete, conduit, electric wiring and connections, fireplace inserts, electrical heating and cooling equipment, flooring, glass, gravel, insulation, lath, lead, lime, lumber, macadam, millwork, mortar, oil, paint, piping, pipe valves and pipe fittings, plaster, plumbing fixtures, putty reinforcing mesh, road base, roofing, sand, sanitary sewer pipe, sheet metal, site lighting, steel, stone, stucco, tile, trees, shrubs and other landscaping materials, wall board, wall coping, wallpaper, weather stripping, wire netting and screen, water mains and meters, and wood preserver. The above materials, when used for forms or other items which do not remain as an integral or inseparable part of a completed structure or project, are not construction materials. 
    Director of Finance includes the Director of Finance as defined in the Charter and his/her duly appointed deputies or agents. 
    Fuel means gas, electricity, nuclear, steam, coal, wood, fuel oil or coke. 
    Gross sales means the total amount received in money, credit, property or other consideration valued in money for all sales, leases or rentals of tangible personal property or services. 
    License means a City business and/or sales and use tax license. 
    Medical equipment means any and all equipment used in the diagnosis and treatment of patients by a medical practitioner licensed in Colorado. Such items shall include, but not be limited to, x-ray, computer programs used specifically for diagnosis, magnetic resonance imaging, stethoscopes, physical therapy equipment and similar equipment. It shall be the practitioner's burden to establish to the City's satisfaction that the respective piece of equipment is used in the treatment and diagnoses of his/her/her patients. 
    Medical supplies means insulin in all of its forms dispensed pursuant to the direction of a medical practitioner licensed in Colorado; glucose useable for treatment of insulin reactions; urine and blood-testing kits and materials; insulin-measuring and -injecting devices, including hypodermic syringes and needles; wheelchairs and hospital beds; prescription drugs for humans; all sales of therapeutic devices, appliances or related accessories that are sold in accordance with a written recommendation from a medical practitioner licensed in Colorado, which are sold to correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically created abnormality; therapeutic devices, appliances or related accessories, which are sold to correct or treat a human physical disability or surgically created abnormality. 
    Municipality means any municipal corporation or similar form of local government in Colorado or another state, except counties, school districts or special districts, and the City of Glenwood Springs, including any city, town, and city and county, whether organized pursuant to charter, constitution or statute. 
    Newspaper means a publication printed on newsprint, intended for general circulation and published regularly at short intervals, containing information and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The term newspaper does not include: magazines, trade publications or journals, credit bulletins, advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs, reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications that include an updating or revision service, or books or pocket editions of books. 
    Pay television shall include, but not be limited to, cable, microwave or other television service for which a charge is imposed. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in the fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by court or otherwise or any group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Prescription drugs for humans means a drug which, prior to being dispensed or delivered, is required by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. Section 301 et seq., as amended, to state at a minimum the symbol "RX only," and is dispensed in accordance with any written or electronic order dated and signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, or given orally by a practitioner and immediately reduced to writing by the pharmacist, assistant pharmacist, or pharmacy intern, specifying the name and any required information of the patient for whom the medicine, drug or poison is offered and directions, if any, to be placed on the label. 
    Price or purchase price means the aggregate value measured in currency paid or delivered or promised to be paid or delivered in consummation of a sale, without any discount from the price on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost and exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal government or by this article and, in the case of all retail sales involving the exchange of property, also exclusive of the fair market value of the property exchanged at the same time and place of the exchange, if: 
(1)  Such exchanged property is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business; or 
(2)  Such exchanged property is a vehicle and is exchanged for another vehicle and both vehicles are subject to licensing, registration or certification under the laws of this State, including, but not limited to, vehicles operating upon public highways, off-highway recreation vehicles, watercraft and aircraft any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax; or 
(3)  Any money or other consideration paid over and above the value of the exchanged property is subject to tax. 
    Price or purchase price includes: 
a.  The amount of money received or due in cash and credits. 
b.  Property at fair market value taken in exchange but not for resale in the usual course of the retailer's business. 
c.  Any consideration valued in money, whereby the manufacturer or someone else reimburses the retailer for part of the purchase price and other media of exchange. 
d.  The total price charged on credit sales, including finance charges which are not separately stated. Any amount charged as interest on the unpaid balance of the purchase price is not part of the purchase price unless the amount added to the purchase price is included in the principal amount of a promissory note; except that the interest or carrying charge set out separately from the unpaid balance of the purchase price on the face of the note is not part of the purchase price. An amount charged for insurance on the property sold and separately stated is not part of the purchase price. 
e.  Installation, applying, remodeling, or repairing the property, delivery and wheeling-in charges included in the purchase price and as separately stated. 
f.  Transportation and other charges to effect delivery of tangible personal property to the purchaser. 
g.  Indirect federal manufacturers' excise taxes, such as taxes on automobiles, tires and floor stock. 
h.  The gross purchase price of articles sold after manufacturing or after having been made to order, including the gross value of all the materials used, labor and service performed and the profit thereon. 
    Price or purchase price shall not include: 
a.  Any sales or use tax imposed by the State or by any political subdivision thereof. 
b.  The fair market value of property exchanged if such property is to be sold thereafter in the retailer's usual course of business. This is not limited to exchanges in Colorado. Out-of-state trade-ins are an allowable adjustment to the purchase price. 
c.  Discounts from the original price if such discount and the corresponding decrease in sales tax due is actually passed on to the purchaser and the seller is not reimbursed for the discount by the manufacturer or someone else. An anticipated discount to be allowed for payment on or before a given date is not an allowable adjustment to the price in reporting gross sales. 
    Private communications services means telecommunications services furnished to a subscriber, which entitles the subscriber to exclusive or priority use of any communication channel or groups of channels, or to the exclusive or priority use of any interstate intercommunications system for the subscriber's stations. 
    Prosthetic devices for humans means any artificial limb, part, device or appliance for human use which replaces a body part or aids or replaces a bodily function; is designed, manufactured, altered or adjusted to fit a particular individual; and is prescribed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. Prosthetic devices include but are not limited to prescribed auditory, ophthalmic, ocular, cardiac, dental or orthopedic devices or appliances, oxygen concentrators with related accessories. 
    Purchase or sale means the acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property other taxable products or taxable services that are purchased, leased, rented, sold, used, stored distributed or consumed. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales, and property and services acquired by: 
(1)  Transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property. 
(2)  A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property or taxable services. 
(3)  Performance of taxable services. 
(4)  Barter or exchange for other property or services, 
    The terms "purchase" and "sale" do not include: 
(1)  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership; 
(2)  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of professional corporations, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(3)  The dissolution and the pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its stockholders, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(4)  A transfer of a partnership or limited liability company interest; 
(5)  The transfer of assets to a commencing or existing partnership or limited liability company, if no consideration including, but not limited to, the assumption of a liability is paid for the transfer of assets; 
(6)  The repossession of personal property by a chattel mortgage holder or foreclosure by a lienholder; 
(7)  The transfer of assets from a parent company to a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty (80) percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary company; 
(8)  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary company or companies which are owned at least eighty (80) percent by the parent company to a parent company or to another subsidiary which is owned at least eighty (80) percent by the parent company, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets; 
(9)  The transfer of assets between parent and closely held subsidiary companies, or between subsidiary companies closely held by the same parent company, or between companies which are owned by the same shareholders in identical percentage of stock ownership amounts, computed on a share-by-share basis, when a tax imposed by this article was paid by the transferor company at the time it acquired such assets, except to the extent that there is an increase in the fair market value of such assets resulting from the manufacturing, fabricating, or physical changing of the assets by the transferor company. To such an extent any transfer referred to in this Paragraph (9) shall constitute a sale. For the purposes of this Paragraph (9), a closely held subsidiary corporation is one in which the parent company owns stock possessing or membership interest at least eighty (80) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and owns at least eighty (80) percent of the total number of shares of all other classes of stock. 
    Rent means the consideration received, or compensation charged, for the providing of transient lodging services. 
    Retail sales means all sales except wholesale sales. 
    Retailer or vendor means any person selling, leasing or renting or granting a license to use tangible personal property or services at retail. Retailer shall include but not be limited to any: 
(1)  Auctioneer. 
(2)  Salesperson, representative, peddler or canvasser, who makes sales as a direct or indirect agent of or obtains such property or services sold from a dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer. 
(3)  Charitable organization or governmental entity which makes sales of tangible personal property to the public, notwithstanding the fact that the merchandise sold may have been acquired by gift or donation or that the proceeds are to be used for charitable or governmental purposes. 
(4)  Retailer-contractor, when acting in the capacity of a seller of building supplies, construction materials, and other tangible personal property. 
    Retailer-contractor means a contractor who is also a retailer of building supplies, construction materials, or other tangible personal property, and purchases, manufactures, or fabricates such property for sale (which may include installation), repair work, time and materials jobs, and/or lump sum contracts. 
    Return means any form prescribed by the City/City administration for computing and reporting a total tax liability. 
    Sales tax means the tax to be collected and remitted by a retailer on sales taxed under this Code. 
    Tangible personal property means personal property that can be one (1) or more of the following: seen, weighed, measured, felt, touched, stored, transported, exchanged, or that is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. 
    Tax means the use tax due from a consumer or the sales tax due from a retailer or the sum of both due from a retailer who also consumes. 
    Tax deficiency means any amount of tax that is not reported or not paid on or before the due date. 
    Taxable sales means gross sales less any exemptions and deductions specified in this Code. 
    Taxable services means the term taxable services means services subject to tax pursuant to this Code. 
    Taxpayer means the term taxpayer means any person obligated to collect and/or pay tax under the terms of this Code. 
    Telecommunications service means the service of which the object is the transmission of any two-way interactive electromagnetic communications, including but not limited to voice, image, data and any other information, by the use of any means but not limited to wire, cable, fiber optical cable, microwave, radio wave, Voice Over Internet Protocol (VOIP), or any combinations of such media, including any form of mobile two-way communication. 
    Tourism means the guidance, management, promotion, encouragement or accommodation of persons who are traveling for recreation, pleasure or culture. 
    Transient lodging means the occupancy of a bedroom, sleeping unit, or a dwelling unit for compensation to any person(s), partnership, association, corporation, estate, representative, or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known, for any period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
    Use tax means the tax paid or required to be paid by a consumer for using, storing, distributing or otherwise consuming tangible personal property or taxable services inside the City. 
    WATS/800 service means any outbound or inbound interstate-wide area telecommunications service or other similar service which entitles the subscriber, upon payment of a periodic charge, based upon a flat amount and/or usage, to make or receive a large volume of telephonic communications to or from persons having telephone or radio telephone stations in specified areas which are outside the telephone system area in which the subscriber's station is located. 
    Wholesale sales means a sale by wholesalers to retailers, jobbers, dealers or wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by wholesalers to users or consumers not for resale; latter types of sales shall be deemed retail sales and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Wholesaler means any person doing an organized wholesale or jobbing business and selling to retailers, jobbers, dealers, or other wholesalers, for the purpose of resale, and not for storage, use, consumption, or distribution. 
(Code 1971 § 9-53; 9-00 § 1; 38-91 § 1; Ord. No. 16-2015 , § 5(Exh. D), 8-20-2015; Ord. No. 12-2018 , § 2, 6-7-2018) 
040.010.020 - General exemptions from Tax Ordinance. 
(a)  Exemption for raw materials . Sales to and purchases of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit or use of any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product which is manufactured, compounded or furnished, or the container, label or the furnished shipping case thereof, shall be deemed to be wholesale and to be exempt from taxation under the Tax Ordinance. 
(b)  Exemption for industrial fuels, newsprints and ink . Sales and purchases of fuel for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, building construction, telecommunication services, street and railroad transportation services and all industrial uses and newsprint and printers' ink for use by publishers of newspapers and commercial printers shall be deemed to be wholesale sales and shall be exempt from taxation under the provisions of the Tax Ordinance. 
(Code 1971 §§ 9-54, 9-55; 38-91 § 2) 
040.010.030 - Amount of sales and use tax levied. 
(a)  Sales tax. There is hereby imposed upon all sales of commodities and services specified in Article 040.020 a three and seventy one-hundredths (3.70) percent sales tax in accordance with schedules set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the Department of Revenue of the State of Colorado. There is hereby imposed an accommodations tax of two and one-half (2.5) percent upon the rent paid or charged for accommodations as defined in Article 040.010.010 provided by a vendor to a purchaser at a taxable premises. 
(b)  Use tax . There is hereby levied and shall be collected from every entity subject to the business licensing requirements of Title 050 a tax or excise of three and seventy one-hundredths (3.70) percent of storage or acquisition charges or costs for the privilege of storing, using or consuming in the City any articles of tangible personal property purchased at retail as specified in Article 040.030. Such tax shall be payable to and shall be collected by the Director of Finance in accordance with Schedules set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the Department or Revenue of the State of Colorado. 
(c)  Other personal property . Every entity subject to the business licensing requirements of Title 050 shall become subject to the payment of a use tax upon the storage or acquisition charges or costs for the privilege of storing, using or consuming in the City any articles of tangible personal property purchased at retail, except as set forth in this article. Such entities shall file a return with the Department of Finance on or before the twentieth day of January following the year in which the purchase was made and shall pay to the City the full amount of such tax due thereon. Any undue delay or effort to evade the payment of such shall be a violation of this Title. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(Code 1971 §§ 9-55, 9-79; 5-83 § 5; 10-85 § 2[B]; 10-85 § 2[C]; 32-86 §§ 1, 2; 51-87 § 2[A]; 27-91 § 1; 38-91 §§ 2, 3; 31-94 § 2; 41-96 § 1; 9-00 § 4; 29-00 § 1; 29-01 § 2; 16-05 § 4) 
040.010.040 - Purpose of tax; use of proceeds. 
(a)  General sales and use tax . The City Council hereby declares that the purpose of the levy of two cents ($0.02) of the tax imposed by the Tax Ordinance is for the production of revenue in order to defray the cost of municipal government in the City; and in accordance with this purpose, the proceeds of two cents ($0.02) of such tax shall be allocated and placed in the funds and in the priority as follows: 
(1)  Seventy-five (75) percent in the general fund; and 
(2)  Twenty-five (25) percent in the capital project fund. 
(b)  Additional sales and use tax. The City Council hereby declares the revenue from the levy of one cent ($0.01) of the tax imposed by the Tax Ordinance shall be placed in the acquisition and improvement fund and shall be appropriated and distributed as determined by ordinance of the City Council as follows: 
(1)  To defray the costs of operating and maintaining the Frontier Historical Museum, and at a minimum to help pay and/or defray the executive director's salary; subject, however, to annual appropriations at the discretion of the City Council. 
(2)  To defray the costs of operating and maintaining the Glenwood Springs Arts Center, and at a minimum to help pay and/or defray the executive director's salary; subject, however, to annual appropriations at the discretion of the City Council. 
(3)  To defray the costs of operating and maintaining human services program and special events in the City; subject, however, to annual appropriations at the discretion of the City Council. 
(4)  To defray the costs of capital improvements of every kind and nature which the City is, from time to time, authorized to undertake, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, maintenance and operation of a community center and municipal complex; acquisition of land, easements and rights-of-way; and acquisition, construction and installation of buildings, public works, storm drainage, treatment facilities, trails, broadband, and necessary appurtenances; provided, however, that such improvements shall not include improvements to the City's water system, wastewater system, or electrical system. Prior to making an appropriation for any improvements pursuant to this paragraph, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing and consider public comments on such improvements. 
(5)  Expenditures authorized pursuant to this section may include the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on securities issued or other forms of indebtedness incurred for the purpose of providing capital improvements. Revenues described in this section shall be segregated and applied by the Director of Finance in accordance with this section or the provisions of any ordinance pursuant to which securities are issued or other forms of indebtedness are incurred and are payable from such revenues. 
(c)  Accommodations tax . 
(1)  Receipts; disposition. All accommodations tax monies collected or remitted shall be credited to the separate Tourism Promotion Fund (as described in Paragraph 2 below), and shall be kept separate and distinct from the General Fund or any other separate funds maintained by the City. 
(2)  Tourism Promotion Fund; creation, nature, purpose. 
a.  There is hereby created a special separate fund to be known as the Glenwood Springs Tourism Promotion Fund. Said Fund shall be separate and distinct from any other funds or accounts used or maintained by the City for any other purposes. The monies of said fund shall be expended only for the purposes set forth herein and no other, and shall be expended as provided for herein. 
b.  The Fund shall consist of: 
1.  All monies deposited or transferred thereto in accordance with Paragraph (1) above; 
2.  Contributions of money, property or services received for use in carrying out the purposes of the Fund from any state, state agency, county, municipality, federal agency, person, corporation or association; and 
3.  All monies otherwise made available to the Fund from whatever source. 
c.  Any monies not appropriated shall remain in the Fund and shall not be transferred to or revert to the General Fund of the City at the end of any fiscal year. Any interest earned on the investment or deposit of monies of the Fund shall also remain in the Fund and shall not be credited to the General Fund of the City. 
d.  All appropriation of monies of the fund shall be made by the City Council. 
e.  The monies of the Fund may be budgeted, appropriated and expended only for the following purposes: 
1.  Planning and implementing the advertisement, promotion and development of tourism in the City; 
2.  Tourism advertising, written and graphic materials and cooperative and matching promotional programs; 
3.  Gathering and disseminating information on the tourist industries and attractions of the City; 
4.  Purchasing such equipment, materials and supplies as shall be necessary to be used solely for tourist promotion; 
5.  Contracting for those services and materials as may be incidental, necessary and appropriate to the accomplishment of the purposes of the Fund, including but not limited to administrative, secretarial, clerical or professional services deemed necessary; 
6.  Attracting conferences, conventions and meetings of a commercial, cultural, educational or social nature to the Glenwood Springs area; and 
7.  Defraying administrative and clerical costs of collecting and administering the tax. 
(d)  Street Maintenance and Construction Tax . The City Council hereby levies a one-half cent ($0.005) sales and use tax, which shall expire at midnight on December 31, 2026. The City Council hereby declares the revenue from the levy of such tax shall be placed in a special Street Maintenance and Construction Tax Fund and shall be used for street operations, maintenance, construction traffic efficiencies and related debt service. 
(e)  Local bus service tax . The City Council hereby levies a two-tenths (0.2) percent sales and use tax. The City Council hereby declares the revenue from the levy of such tax imposed by the Tax Ordinance shall be placed in a special Local Bus Service Tax Fund and shall be distributed solely for the operation, maintenance and purchase of buses and other bus-related facilities. Such operation includes, but is not limited to: contracting for local bus services, hiring of bus employees., purchase of additional or replacement buses, repairing the buses and purchasing property and/or constructing bus-related improvements. 
(f)  Retail marijuana sales tax. The City Council hereby levies a five cent ($0.05) sales tax on the sale of retail marijuana within the City and declares the revenue from the tax imposed by the Tax Ordinance shall be used to fund the enforcement of regulations on the retail marijuana industry, other costs related to enforcement of marijuana laws, education and public health programs associated with marijuana consumption including prevention of underage consumption, and other city expenses as determined by the City Council from time to time. 
(g)  Retail marijuana excise tax. The City Council hereby levies an excise tax in the amount of five (5) percent of the market rate of retail marijuana, upon the sale or transfer of retail marijuana from a retail marijuana product manufacturing facility, cultivation facility, or testing facility to a retail marijuana store or another retail marijuana product manufacturing facility, cultivation facility, or testing facility or any other purchaser or transferee, within or without the City of Glenwood Springs; with the market rate of marijuana to equal, in any event, the average market rate for retail marijuana under C.R.S. § 39-28.8-101 et seq., as that code section may be amended; with the tax revenues being used to fund the enforcement of regulations on the retail marijuana industry, other costs related to enforcement of marijuana laws, education and public health programs associated with marijuana consumption including prevention of underage consumption, and other city expenses as determined by the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1971 § 9-123; 5-83 § 9; 10-85 § 2[D]; 19-89 § 4; 27-91 § 1; 37-95 § 1; 33-98 § 1; 28-00 § 1; 16-05 § 5; Ord. No. 22-2016 , § 4, 8-18-2016; Ord. No. 2-2017 , § 4, 2-2-2017, eff. 7-1-2017; Ord. No. 3-2017 , § 4, 2-16-2017, eff. 7-1-2017) 
040.010.050 - Period of limitations. 
(a)  Three-year limitation. The taxes for any period, together with interest thereon and penalties with respect thereto, imposed by the Tax Ordinance shall not be assessed or distraint warrant issued or suit for collection be instituted or any other action to collect the same be commenced more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was due or payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which cases such liens shall continue only for one (1) year after the filing of notice thereof. 
(b)  Fraudulent returns and failure to file return. In case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, or the failure to file a return, the tax, together with interest and penalties thereon, may be assessed or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may begin at any time. 
(c)  Extension of limitation period. Before the expiration of such period of limitations, the taxpayer and Director of Finance may agree in writing to an extension of such period. 
(d)  The commencement of collection proceedings shall be the date taxpayer is mailed written notice of collection proceedings, including the date that written notice of an audit is placed in the U.S. Mail. The commencement of collection proceedings shall toll the running of the statute of limitations set forth in subsection (a) above. For purposes of this section, "toll" is defined as an interruption of the statute of limitations set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1971 § 9-124; 56-85 § 7; 23-10 § 1) 
040.010.060 - Confidential nature of information. 
(a)  Confidentiality of information. Except in accordance with judicial order or as otherwise herein provided, employees shall not divulge any information gained from any returns filed under the provisions of the Tax Ordinance. 
(b)  Information cannot be compelled; limitations. The officials charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of them, or evidence of anything contained in them, in any action or proceedings in any court, except on behalf of the City or its employees in an action under the provisions of the Tax Ordinance to which it or they are a party, or on behalf of any party to an action or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Ordinance, or to punish a violator thereof when the reported facts shown by such report are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of such returns or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceedings and no more. 
(c)  Returns open to taxpayer; use of general information. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his/her duly authorized representative, a copy of any return or report filed in connection with his/her tax, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of a particular report or return and the items thereof, nor to prohibit the inspection by the City Attorney, or any other legal representative of the City, of the report or return of any person who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action or proceeding is contemplated or has been instituted under the Tax Ordinance. 
(Code 1971 § 9-95) 
040.010.070 - Wrongfully divulging information. 
    Any city officer or employee who shall divulge any information classified herein as confidential in any manner, except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, shall be guilty of a violation of this Title. 
(Code 1971 § 9-98) 
040.010.080 - Preservation of reports, returns. 
    Reports and returns by the Tax Ordinance shall be preserved for three (3) years and thereafter, until the Director of Finance, with the approval of the City Manager, orders them destroyed. 
(Code 1971 § 9-96) 
040.010.090 - Duty to keep books and records; availability for examination. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person engaged or continuing in business in the City subject to the provisions of the Tax Ordinance to keep and preserve suitable records of all sales made by him/her and such books and accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax for the collection or payment of which such person is liable under the provisions of the Tax Ordinance. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every such person to keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years all invoices of goods and merchandise purchased for resale and all other books, invoices and other records necessary to determine the amount of tax for the collection or payment of which such person is liable under the provision of the Tax Ordinance; and all such books, invoices and other records shall be open for examination at any time by the Director of Finance. 
(Code 1971 § 9-96) 
040.010.100 - Violations. 
    It shall be a violation of this Title for any retailer or vendor to refuse to make any return provided to be made in the Tax Ordinance; to make any false or fraudulent return or any false statement in any return; to fail or refuse to make payment to the Director of Finance of any taxes collected or due the City; in any manner to evade the collection and payment of any tax, including use tax, or any part thereof, imposed by the Tax Ordinance; for any person or purchaser to fail or refuse to pay such tax or evade the payment thereof; or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of any tax imposed by the Tax Ordinance. 
(Code 1971 § 9-127) 
040.010.110 - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
(Code 1971 § 9-128) 
ARTICLE 040.020 - SALES TAX 

040.020.010 - Property and transactions taxed. 
    There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax in the amount stated in Subsection 040.010.030(a) upon the following: 
(1)  On the purchase price paid or charged upon all sales and purchases of tangible personal property at retail in the City. 
(2)  Upon the price paid for all telecommunication services, including carrier access services, WATS/800 services and private communications services. 
(3)  Upon the price paid for any pay television services. 
(4)  Upon the price paid for gas and electric service, whether furnished by municipal, public or private corporations or enterprises, for gas and electricity sold for nonresidential consumption and not for resale. 
(5)  Upon the price paid for transient lodging services. 
(Code 1971 § 9-76; 5-83 § 2; 10-85 § 3; 27-91 § 2; 38-91 § 4; Ord. No. 16-2015 , § 6(Exh. E), 8-20-2015; Ord. No. 12-2018 , § 2, 6-7-2018) 
040.020.020 - Exempt items and transactions. 
    The following classes of tangible personal property and the following sales transactions are exempt from taxation under this article: 
(1)  Automotive vehicles, trailers, mobile homes and semitrailers registered or to be registered outside of the City. 
(2)  Farm implements, parts and accessories for the same. 
(3)  Neat cattle, horses, sheep, lambs, swine, goats, mares and stallions. 
(4)  Feed for livestock or poultry. 
(5)  Orchard trees. 
(6)  Sales of tangible personal property in which both of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sale to a person who is doing business or is a resident outside of the City, and 
b.  The tangible personal property purchased is to be delivered to the purchaser outside the City by common carrier or by the conveyance of the seller or by mail. 
(7)  Fuel used for operation of internal combustion engines. 
(8)  Sales of tangible personal property for which all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sale is made to a purchaser engaged in manufacturing, processing, mining, construction or railroading; 
b.  The tangible personal property sold is to be used by the purchaser in the conduct of his/her manufacturing business outside the City; and 
c.  Delivery of the tangible personal property sold is to be made to the purchaser at a point outside the City, to the railroad in case the railroad is the purchaser, or to a truck or vehicle of the manufacturing, processing, mining or construction company in case of a sale to such purchasers. 
(9)  Cigarettes. 
(10)  Prescription drugs for humans, prosthetic devices for humans and medical supplies and equipment used in the diagnosis and treatment of patients. 
(11)  Sales to the United States, to the State, its departments and institutions and the political subdivisions thereof in their governmental capacities only, and all sales to the City in any department thereof. 
(12)  Sales to charitable organizations. 
(13)  Sales which the City is prohibited from taxing under the constitution or laws or the United States or the State. 
(14)  Sales of transient lodging services to a consumer who enters into or has entered into a written agreement for transient lodging services for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(15)  The sale of fuel for the purpose of operating residential fixtures and appliances which provide light, heat and power for such residences and not for resale. 
(16)  The sale of construction materials if, at the time of sale, the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the City evidencing that a local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid. 
(17)  Newspapers. 
(18)  All occasional sales by a charitable organization. For purposes of this article, occasional sales means retail sales of tangible personal property, including concessions, for fundraising purposes: 
a.  The sales of tangible personal property or concessions by the charitable organization takes place no more than twelve (12) days, whether consecutive or not, during any one (1) calendar year; 
b.  The funds raised by the charitable organization through these sales do not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) during any one (1) calendar year; and 
c.  The funds raised by the charitable organization through these sales are retained by the organization to be used in the course of the organization's charitable service. 
(Code 1971 § 9-77; 5-83 §§ 3, 11; 27-91 §§ 1, 2; 38-91 § 5; 38-91 § 5; 17-96 § 1; 9-00 § 3; Ord. No. 16-2015 , § 6(Exh. E), 8-20-2015; Ord. No. 12-2018 , § 2, 6-7-2018) 
040.020.021 - Credit for sales or use taxes previously paid to another municipality. 
    The City's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule municipality. 
(Ad 56-85 § 3; 27-91 § 1; 41-96 § 2; 9-00 § 2) 
040.020.030 - Payment of tax by retailer. 
(a)  Retailer or vendor responsible for collection; returns filed. Every retailer or vendor shall be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equivalent to three and seven one-hundredths (3.7) percent of all sales made by him/her of commodities or services specified in Section 040.020.010. Vendors of accommodations shall be liable and responsible for payment of an additional amount equivalent to two and one-half (2.5) percent of the rent collected for accommodations. The retailer or vendor shall, before the twentieth (20th) day of each month following the applicable reporting period whether monthly, quarterly or annually, make a return to the Director of Finance for the preceding reporting period and remit an amount as required in this subsection. 
(1)  Return; content, form, etc. Such returns of the taxpayer, or his/her duly authorized agent, shall contain such information and be made in such manner and upon such forms as the Director of Finance may prescribe, and the Director of Finance may extend the time for making and paying the taxes due under such reasonable rules and regulations as he/she may prescribe, but no such extension shall be for a greater period than is provided in Section 040.020.080. 
(2)  Exemption; burden of proof . The burden of proof that any retailer is exempt from collecting a tax upon any goods sold and paying the same to the Director of Finance or from making such returns shall be on the retailer under such reasonable requirements of proof as the Director of Finance may prescribe. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Code 1971 § 9-78; 10-85 § 4; 51-87 § 2[B]; 27-91 § 1; 31-94 § 2; 41-96 § 3; 23-03 § 1; 28-05, § 2; 22-09 § 2; 27-09, § 2) 
040.020.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 47-89, § 3, repealed § 040.020.040, which derived from Code 1971, § 9-126. 
040.020.050 - Tax added to sales price. 
(a)  Retailers or vendors to add tax to sales price. Retailers or vendors shall add the tax imposed by Subsection 040.010.030(a), or the average equivalent thereof, to the sale price, charge or rent, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item. When thus added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price, charge or rent, shall be a debt from the consumer or purchaser to the retailer or vendor until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. The retailer or vendor shall be entitled, as collecting agent of the City, to apply any credit tax sums payable to him/her against amounts to be paid by the retailer or vendor to the City under the provisions of Subsection 040.010.030(a) remitting said sums payable to the Director of Finance as said sums are actually collected by the retailer or vendor. 
(b)  Retailer of malt, vinous and spirituous liquors by drink may include tax in sales price. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any retailer selling fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink from including in his/her sales price any tax levied by Subsection 040.010.030(a); however, no retailer selling fermented malt beverages or malt, vinous or spirituous liquors by the drink shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that such tax is not considered as an element in the sales price to the consumer. 
(Code 1971 § 9-80; 5-83 § 6; 10-85 § 5; 22-09 § 2) 
040.020.060 - Rules governing adding tax to price authorized. 
    To provide uniform methods of adding the tax, or the average equivalent thereof, to the selling price, it shall be the duty of the Director of Finance, with the approval of the City Manager, to formulate and promulgate, after hearing, appropriate rules and regulations to effectuate the purpose of this article. 
(Code 1971 § 9-81) 
040.020.070 - Assuming or absorbing tax prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any retailer to advertise, hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax, or any part thereof, imposed by Subsection 040.010.030(a) shall be assumed or absorbed by the retailer, that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold or, if added, that it, or any part thereof, shall be refunded. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
(Code 1971 § 9-82) 
040.020.080 - Special accounting basis for remittance of tax. 
    If the accounting methods employed by the vendor in the transaction of his/her business or other conditions are such that reports of sales made on the calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the Director of Finance may, upon request of the vendor, accept reports of such sales at such intervals as will, in his/her opinion, better suit the convenience of the taxpayer, and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax; however, the Director of Finance may, by rule, permit a taxpayer whose monthly tax collections are less than twenty dollars ($20.00) to make returns and pay taxes at intervals not greater than three (3) months. 
(Code 1971 § 9-83) 
040.020.090 - Consolidation of returns. 
    A retailer doing business in two (2) or more places or locations taxable hereunder may file one (1) return covering all such business activities in the City. 
(Code 1971 § 9-84) 
040.020.100 - Tax on credit sales. 
    Whenever an article is sold under a conditional sales contract, or under other forms of sale where the payment of the principal sum thereunder is extended over a period longer than sixty (60) days from the date of sale thereof, there shall be paid upon each payment upon the account of the purchase price that portion of the total tax which the amount paid bears to the total purchase price; however, the retailer may report and pay the entire tax at the time of the sale without regard to any deferred payment. This tax shall be charged and collected by the seller and no refund or credit shall be allowed to either party to the on in case of repossession. 
(Code 1971 § 9-85) 
040.020.110 - Duty to remit excess collections. 
    If any vendor shall, during any reporting period, collect as a tax an amount in excess of the tax required by Subsection 040.010.030(a), he/she shall remit to the Director of Finance the full net amount of said tax and also such excess. The retention by the retailer of any excess tax collections or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the Director of Finance the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of the Tax Ordinance is hereby declared to be a violation of this Title. 
(Code 1971 § 9-86; 5-83 § 7; 10-85 § 6) 
040.020.120 - Trust status of tax in possession of retailer. 
    All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the retailer as taxes imposed by this article shall be and remain public money, the property of the City, in the hands of such retailer, and he/she shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the City until paid to the Director of Finance as herein provided, A failure so to pay to the Director of Finance shall be a violation of this Title. 
(Code 1971 § 9-110) 
040.020.130 - Unpaid tax declared prior lien. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be a lien upon the goods and business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title retaining contract or other contract arrangement, excepting stock of goods sold or held for sale in the ordinary course of business. 
(Code 1971 § 9-107) 
040.020.140 - Sale or discontinuance of business. 
    Any retailer who shall sell out his/her business or stock of goods or shall quit business shall be required to make out a return as provided in this article within ten (10) days after the date of cessation of business or selling of stock of goods, and his/her successor in business shall be required to withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover the amount of said tax due and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall produce a receipt from the Director of Finance showing that the taxes have been paid, or a certificate that no taxes are due. 
(Code 1971 § 9-108) 
040.020.150 - Purchaser of business subject to tax lien. 
    If the purchaser of business or stock of goods shall fail to withhold the purchase money as above provided, the tax shall be due and payable after the ten-day period allowed, and he/she shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes unpaid by the former owner. Likewise, anyone who takes stock of goods or business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title-retaining contract or other contract arrangement, by purchase, foreclosure sale or otherwise, takes the same subject to the lien of any delinquent taxes owed by such retailer, and shall be liable for the payment of all delinquent sales taxes of such prior owner not, however, exceeding the value of property so taken or acquired. 
(Code 1971 § 9-109) 
040.020.160 - Sales and use tax rebate. 
(a)  Tax rebate . There is hereby granted to all persons who meet the criteria in Subsection (b) hereof a tax rebate for sales tax, which rebate shall be granted in conformity with Subsection (c) hereof. 
(b)  Persons eligible . Any person sixty-five (65) years of age or older residing in the City and who has been a resident of the City for at least one (1) full year next preceding the year in which the rebate is sought and whose adjusted gross income as shown on Colorado Individual Income Tax Return Form 104 or 104A, or whose total income (minus Social Security benefits) as shown on the Income Schedule on Form 104PTC, for the year a rebate is sought does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) is eligible for a rebate in the amount set forth in Subsection (c) hereof. Only one (1) rebate per household may be granted. For purposes of this section, the adjusted gross income or total income shall be the adjusted gross income or total income of all persons who are members of the household for which the rebate is sought. 
(c)  Amount of rebate . 
Rebate Annual Income One Person Two Persons Under $5,000.00 $50.00 $ 75.00 $5,000.00 to $5,999.00 55.00 82.50 $6,000.00 to $6,999.00 60.00 90.00 $7,000.00 to $7,999.00 65.00 97.50 $8,000.00 to $8,999.00 70.00 105.00 $9,000.00 to $10,000.00 75.00 112.50  
(d)  Application for rebate . All persons who qualify for such sales tax rebates shall apply for the same by making application to the Director of Finance upon forms to be provided by him/her and by delivery to the Director of Finance a copy of the applicant's Colorado Individual Tax Return Form 104 or 104A, or a copy of the applicant's Colorado Property Tax/Rent/Heat Rebate Form 104PTC for the year for which the rebate is sought. 
(e)  Application deadline . All applications for sales tax rebate shall be made to the Director of Finance on or before July 15 of the year following the year for which the tax rebate is sought. 
(Code 1971 § 9-130; 5-88 §§ 1, 2) 
040.020.170 - Economic incentives; sales tax rebate. 
(a)  Qualified businesses may apply for a Tier one or Tier two City sales tax rebate for up to five (5) consecutive years provided that: 
(1)  The amount of the annual Tier one rebate shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of their annual City sales tax remittance in any one year; and 
(2)  The amount of the annual Tier two rebate shall not exceed eighty (80) percent of their annual City sales tax remittance in any one year, as further detailed in Subsection (c)(5) below; and 
(3)  The total amount of all rebates received shall not exceed the total amount of fees and costs identified in Paragraph (b) below. 
(b)  The City sales tax rebate may be applied against the following City-imposed fees, costs and tax: 
(1)  Water and sewer system improvement fees may be available for Tier one and Tier two rebates. 
(2)  Fire and emergency services impact fees may be available for Tier one and Tier two rebates. 
(3)  Cost incurred pursuant to the City Electric Department's Line Extension Policy may be available for Tier one and Tier two rebates. 
(4)  Building fees may be available for Tier two rebates only. 
(5)  The costs of City required public improvements at fifty (50) percent of the installation costs to a maximum of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) may be available for Tier two rebates only. 
(c)  Qualifications for application . 
(1)  If applicable, the applicant has collected and remitted on time to the City all applicable sales, use or accommodation taxes; and 
(2)  The applicant is not currently in violation of any development permit or building permit conditions; and 
(3)  The applicant is not in default under any agreement with the City; and 
(4)  The applicant has paid all other applicable City-imposed fees including those for which the rebate is being applied; and 
(5)  Tier two applicants shall use either (a) local contractors and suppliers or (b) local contractors, as defined in Subsection 010.050.080(b) of the Municipal Code, for construction of the project. At issuance of the certificate of occupancy the applicant shall provide documentation of the amounts paid to local contractors and suppliers or local contractors as a percentage of the total costs of the project excluding land. Projects using either (a) local contractors and suppliers or (b) local contractors for less than fifty (50) percent but more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total costs of the project, excluding land, will be eligible for a forty (40) percent Tier two rebate. Projects using either (a) local contractors and suppliers or (b) local contractors for fifty (50) percent or more of the total costs of the project, excluding land, will be eligible for an eighty (80) percent Tier two rebate. Tier two applicants must provide detailed calculation documentation upon request by the City. 
(d)  Application for rebate . 
(1)  All businesses which qualify for such City sales tax rebates shall apply for the same by making application to the Director of Finance upon forms to be provided by him/her. 
(2)  All applications for City sales tax rebate shall be made to the Director of Finance on or before July 15 of the year following the year for which the tax rebate is sought. 
(e)  Effective date . This section shall apply to all City-imposed fees after the effective date of Ordinance No. 27, Series of 2005. 
(f)  Tier two (2) applicants will only be accepted from May 22, 2009 until July 15, 2020. To apply for a tier two (2) rebate, an applicant must have a building permit issued on or before July 15, 2020. The amendments contained in Ordinance No. 8, Series of 2009, Ordinance No. 11, Series of 2010, Ordinance No. 12, Series of 2011, Ordinance No. 5, Series of 2012, Ordinance No. 14, Series of 2014, Ordinance No. 11, Series of 2016, and Ordinance No. 18, Series of 2018 shall be repealed, effective July 15, 2020, unless otherwise extended by further action of City Council. 
(4-04 § 2; 27-05, § 2; 8-09, § 2; 11-10 § 2; 12-11, § 2; 5-12, § 2; Ord. No. 11-2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-16-2016; Ord. No. 18-2018, § 2, 7-19-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 040.030 - USE TAX 

040.030.010 - Application of use tax. 
    The following provisions shall apply to the payment and collection of use tax as imposed by Subsection 040.010.030(b) on the storage, consumption and use of tangible personal property: 
(1)  Automotive vehicles and trailers . Any resident person who shall purchase any automotive vehicle, trailer, mobile home or semitrailer, whether new or used, outside the corporate limits of the City for use within the City shall immediately and prior to registering and obtaining a license therefor, make a return showing such transaction to the Director of Finance or the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder pursuant to the provisions of Subsection 040.040.010(d) and thereupon pay to the Director of Finance or to the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder the use tax applicable to said automotive vehicle, trailer, mobile home or semitrailer as provided in Subsection 040.010.030(b) herein; and failure to do so, when shown to be an attempt to evade the payment of such tax, shall constitute a violation of this Title. 
(2)  Construction materials . 
a.  Use tax levied. Any person who shall build, construct or improve any building, dwelling or other structure or make any improvement to realty whatsoever within the City shall file a return with the Director of Finance and pay a use tax upon all construction materials used in the improvements. 
b.  Duty to keep and produce records. Any person required to pay use tax by Paragraph 040.030.010(b)(1) shall keep and preserve all invoices and statements showing all purchases, made both inside and outside the corporate limits of the City, for necessary lumber, fixtures, materials or any other supplies. It shall be the duty of any such person and his/her contractors and subcontractors hired to construct such improvements to furnish the Director of Finance such information as the Director of Finance may require as to such purchases of lumber, fixtures, materials and supplies for such improvements. The Director of Finance may request the Building Inspector to assist the Director of Finance in determining the amount of use tax due. 
c.  Lien on real property. The full amount of use tax due pursuant to the provisions of this Subsection (2) shall be, until paid, a lien upon the real property benefited by such improvement; and the Director of Finance is hereby authorized to file, when appropriate, a notice of such lien with the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder and collect the same in the manner provided for the collection of taxes by the City. 
d.  Tax paid before certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building erected or altered until evidence of payment of all use taxes due and owing is supplied to the Building Inspector. Such evidence shall be supplied at or before application for a certificate of occupancy. For purposes of this paragraph, evidence of payment of use tax shall mean a receipt from the Director of Finance reflecting payment in full of all use taxes due and owing for the building or structure for which a certificate of occupancy is sought. 
e.  Reserved. 
(3)  Other personal property . Each entity that purchases or establishes a business inside the City shall file an initial use tax return. 
a.  Every entity subject to the business licensing requirements of Title 050 of this Code shall be subject to the payment of a use tax for the privilege of storing, using or consuming within the City any articles of tangible personal property purchased at retail, shall file a return with the Director of Finance on or before the twentieth day of January of the year in which the purchase was made, and shall pay therewith the full amount of the tax due. Any undue delay or effort to evade the payment of such tax shall be a violation of this Title. 
b.  Existing businesses. Use tax shall be due on tangible personal property, except inventory held for lease, rental or resale, which is acquired with the purchase of a business. The tax rate shall be multiplied times the value as evidenced by the bill of sale or agreement which is a part of the total transaction at the time of the sale or transfer; provided that the value is not less than the fair market value of such property. Where the transfer of ownership provides for a lump sum transaction, which does not allocate the price of tangible personal property, the use tax shall be due on the book value established by the purchaser for federal income tax depreciation purposes, or fair market value if no determination has been made. When a business is sold in exchange for the assumption of outstanding indebtedness, the tax shall be paid on the fair market value of all taxable tangible personal property acquired by the purchaser. Such tax shall be reported on an initial use tax return. The due date for such return shall be the twentieth of the month following the calendar month in which the sale of the business was finalized. 
c.  New businesses. Use tax shall be paid on the price of all tangible personal property, except inventory held for lease, rental or resale, which is purchased for use inside the City. Such tax shall be reported on the initial use tax return. The due date for such return shall be the twentieth of the month following the calendar month in which the business opens. 
(Code 1971 § 9-89; 1-83 § 1; 56-85 § 1[B]; 38-91 §§ 6, 7; 9-00 § 5; 29-01 § 3; 29-01 § 3) 
040.030.020 - Items, transactions exempt from use tax. 
    The use tax on the storage, consumption and use of tangible personal property is hereby declared to be supplementary to the City tax on retail sales as provided in this Tax Ordinance and shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property, the sale of which is subject to the City retail sales tax as provided in this Tax Ordinance. 
(2)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in this City, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of a business. 
(3)  To the storage, use or consumption of motor fuel upon which there has accrued or has been paid the motor fuel tax prescribed by the Colorado Motor Fuel Tax Law of 1933, and amendments thereto, and which is subject to refund. 
(4)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into the City by a nonresident thereof for his/her own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within the City, nor to the personal property of a resident, if such personal property was purchased prior to becoming a resident of the City. 
(5)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property of the United States or the State or its institutions or its political subdivisions, in their governmental capacities only, or by religious, charitable or eleemosynary corporations in the conduct of their regular religious, charitable or eleemosynary functions. 
(6)  To the storage, use or consumption of cigarettes. 
(7)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property for use in the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit or use any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the finished product and the container, label or the furnished shipping case thereof. 
(8)  To the storage, use or consumption of fuels for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, telecommunications, street and railroad transportation services, and all industrial uses. 
(9)  To the storage and use of tangible personal property purchased from a nonresident retailer by a common carrier, public utility company or construction company being a resident of the City or doing business in the City, which is stored in the City but not used or consumed in the City. 
(10)  To the storage of construction materials. 
(11)  On and after January 1, 1986, to the use or consumption of tangible personal property within the City which occurs more than three (3) years after the most recent sale of the property if, within the three (3) years following such sale, the property has been significantly used within the State for the principal purpose for which it was purchased. 
(12)  To prescription drugs for humans, medical supplies and equipment used in the diagnosis and treatment of patients, or prosthetic devices for humans. 
(Code 1971 § 9-88; 56-85 §§ 2, 5; 38-91 § 8; 9-00 § 6; Ord. No. 12-2018 , § 2, 6-7-2018) 
040.030.021 - Credit for sales or use taxes previously paid to another municipality. 
    For transactions consummated on or after May 6, 2000, the City's use tax shall not apply to the storage, use or consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has already been subject to a sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule municipality legally imposed on the purchaser or user and can be substantiated by the purchaser or user in writing. 
(56-85 § 4; 27-91 § 1; 9-00 § 7) 
ARTICLE 040.040 - COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TAX ORDINANCE 

040.040.010 - Administration of Tax Ordinance. 
(a)  Administration vested in director of finance. The administration of the provisions of the Tax Ordinance is hereby vested in and shall be exercised by the Director of Finance who shall prescribe reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with the Tax Ordinance for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of the taxes imposed under the Tax Ordinance and for the proper administration and enforcement hereof. 
(b)  Collection of sales tax. The City Council may contract with the Department of Revenue for the State and the Director of Revenue for the State for the collection of the sales taxes levied under the provisions of Article 040.020. Otherwise, such sales taxes shall be collected by the Director of Finance in accordance with the provisions of the Tax Ordinance. 
(c)  Collection of use tax. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Director of Finance shall collect the use tax as levied pursuant to the provisions of Article 040.030 in accordance with the provisions of the Tax Ordinance. 
(d)  Collection of automotive vehicle and trailer sales and use tax. The City Council may contract with the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder for the collection of sales and use tax for automotive vehicles and trailers at the time of registration. 
(e)  Map of municipal boundaries. The City Clerk shall make available to any requesting vendor a map showing the boundaries of the City. For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the requesting vendor may rely on such map and any update thereof available to such vendor in determining whether to collect a use tax. No penalty shall be imposed or action for deficiency maintained against such a vendor who in good faith complies with the most recent map available to it. 
(f)  Standard reporting form. The City shall use the standard municipal sales and use tax reporting form and any subsequent revisions thereto adopted by the Executive Director of the Colorado Department of Revenue by the first full month commencing one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the regulation adopted or revising such standard form. 
(Code 1971 §§ 9-122, 9-129; 1-83 § 1; 56-85 § 11; 47-89 §§ 1, 2; 38-91; § 9) 
040.040.020 - Procedure for determination of exemption disputes. 
(a)  Claim of exemption. It is the duty of the purchaser to claim an exemption from the taxes imposed by this Tax Ordinance at the time and place of the purchase. If the purchaser does not claim an exemption at the time and place of purchase, the exemption for that purchase shall be waived. 
(b)  Preservation of a disputed exemption. Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and seller as to whether or not any sale, commodity or service is exempt from taxation under this Tax Ordinance, nevertheless, the seller shall collect and the purchaser shall pay such tax. The seller shall also issue to the purchaser a receipt and certificate, on a form prescribed by the Director of Finance, showing the names of the seller and purchaser, the items purchased, the date, price and amount of tax paid, and a brief statement of the claim of exemption. 
(c)  Application for sales tax refund. Applications for refund of a tax paid pursuant to Subsection (b) above must be made within thirty (30) days after the purchase of the goods on which the exemption is claimed, must be supported by the affidavit of the purchaser, accompanied by the original paid invoice or sales receipt and a certificate issued by the seller, and must be made upon such forms as shall be prescribed and furnished by the Director of Finance, which forms shall contain such information as the Director of Finance shall determine is necessary to determine the dispute. 
(d)  Application for use tax refund. For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, an application for a refund of use tax paid under dispute by a purchaser or user who claims an exemption pursuant to this section shall be made within sixty (60) days after the storage, use or consumption of the goods or services whereon an exemption is claimed. An application for a refund of tax monies paid in error or by mistake shall be made within three (3) years after the date of storage, use or consumption of the goods for which the refund is claimed. 
(e)  Decision of director. Within ten (10) business days of the receipt of the application for refund, the Director of Finance shall issue a written decision in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 040.040.040(a). 
(f)  General provisions. 
(1)  Violation to fail to collect or pay disputed tax. It shall be a violation of this Title for any seller to fail to collect or any purchaser to fail to pay a tax levied by this Tax Ordinance on sales on which an exemption is disputed. 
(2)  Refunds not assignable. The right of any person to a refund under this section shall not be assignable, and application for refund must be made by the same person who purchased the goods and paid the tax thereon as shown in the invoice for the goods. 
(3)  False claims for refunds. Any applicant for refund under the provisions set forth in this section, or any person having made any false statements in connection with an application for a refund of any tax, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Title. 
(4)  Burden of proving right to refund. The burden of proof that sales, commodities or services on which tax refunds are claimed as exempt from taxation under the provisions of this Tax Ordinance shall be on the person making such claim, which burden shall be by clear and convincing evidence. 
(Code 1971 §§ 9-56, 9-90, 9-92-9-94; 56-85 § 8) 
040.040.021 - Intercity claims for recovery. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to streamline and standardize procedures related to situations where tax has been remitted to the incorrect municipality. It is not intended to reduce or eliminate the responsibilities of the taxpayer or vendor to correctly pay, collect and remit sales and use taxes to the City. 
(b)  As used herein, Claim for Recovery means a claim for reimbursement of sales and use taxes paid to the wrong taxing jurisdiction. 
(c)  When it is determined by the Director of Finance that sales and use tax owed to the City has been reported and paid to another municipality, the City shall promptly notify the vendor that taxes are being improperly collected and remitted, and that as of the date of the notice the vendor must cease improper tax collections and remittances. 
(d)  The City may make a written Claim for Recovery directly to the municipality that received tax and/or penalty interest owed to the City or, in the alternative, may institute procedures for collection of the tax from the taxpayer or vendor. The decision to make a Claim for Recovery lies in the sole discretion of the City. Any Claim for Recovery shall include a properly executed release of claim from the taxpayer and/or vendor releasing its claim to the taxes paid to the wrong municipality, evidence to substantiate the Claim, and a request that the municipality approve or deny, in whole or in part, the claim within ninety (90) days of its receipt. The municipality to which the City submits a Claim for Recovery may, for good cause, request an extension of time to investigate the Claim, and approval of such extension by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(e)  Within ninety (90) days after receipt of a Claim for Recovery, the City shall verify to its satisfaction whether or not all or a portion of the tax claimed was improperly received, and shall notify the municipality submitting the Claim in writing that the Claim is either approved or denied in whole or in part, including the reasons for the decision. If the Claim is approved in whole or in part, the City shall remit the undisputed amount to the municipality submitting the Claim within thirty (30) days of approval. If a Claim is submitted jointly by a municipality and a vendor or taxpayer, the check shall be made to the parties jointly. Denial of a Claim for Recovery may only be made for good cause. 
(f)  The City may deny a Claim on the grounds that it has previously paid a Claim for Recovery arising out of an audit of the same taxpayer. 
(g)  The period subject to a Claim for Recovery shall be limited to the thirty-six-month period prior to the date the municipality that was wrongly paid the tax receives the Claim for Recovery. 
(38-91 § 11) 
040.040.030 - Determination and assessment of tax. 
(a)  Purpose . The Director of Finance may determine the accuracy or make an assessment of the amount of sales and use tax paid or due to the City in accordance with the provisions of this section; however, nothing in this section shall prohibit the determination, assessment and collection of use tax as set forth in Article 040.030. 
(b)  Procedure when return filed and tax paid . 
(1)  Examination of return; amount paid . For returns filed in the City, the Director of Finance shall examine such return as soon as is possible. For returns filed with the State pursuant to Subsection 040.040.010(b), or for returns filed with the County Clerk and Recorder pursuant to Subsection 040.040.010(d), the Director of Finance shall review, as soon as practicable, the amount paid and such other information as the Director of Finance deems necessary. 
(2)  Redetermination of amount. If it appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted is greater or less than that shown in the return, the tax shall be recomputed. 
(3)  Refund of excess tax paid. If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the excess shall be refunded or, at the option of the City, credited against any subsequent remittance from the same taxpayer. Notice of any refund to be credited against subsequent remittances shall be given to the taxpayer. 
(4)  Payment of tax due. If the amount paid is less than the amount due, the difference, together with interest as provided in Subsection 040.040.050(a), shall be paid by the retailer within ten (10) days after service of written notice and demand. 
(c)  Procedure when no return made or tax paid. 
(1)  Estimate of taxes due. If any person neglects or refuses to make a return or pay the taxes as required by this Tax Ordinance, the Director of Finance shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of the taxes due for which the taxpayer is delinquent; and, upon the basis of such estimated amount, compute and assess in addition to such tax a penalty together with interest, both as provided in Section 040.040.050. 
(2)  Notice of estimated taxes and demand for payment. The Director of Finance shall give the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty and interest, and such estimate shall thereupon become an assessment which shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the Director of Finance ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice. 
(3)  Application for review. The delinquent taxpayer may, within such ten-day period, make an application to the Director of Finance for a revision or modification of such assessment of taxes, penalties or interest. Such application shall be in writing and be given under oath of the taxpayer and shall include such facts, figures and documentation as is necessary to show the correct amount of such taxes. Failure to make an application for review shall waive the taxpayer's right to contest the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest. 
(4)  Decision of director. Within ten (10) business days of the receipt of the application for review, the Director of Finance shall issue a written decision in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 040.040.040(a). 
(d)  Investigatory powers of Director . 
(1)  In general. For the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of a return or for the purpose of determining the amount of tax due from any person, the Director of Finance may hold investigations and hearings concerning any matters covered by the Tax Ordinance and may examine any relevant books, papers, letters or memoranda of any such person and may require the attendance of such person, or any officer or employee of such person, or any person having knowledge of such sales and may take testimony under oath and otherwise require proof. The Director of Finance shall have power to administer oaths to such persons. 
(2)  Compelling attendance and testimony. The Municipal Judge, upon application of the Director of Finance, may compel the attendance of papers, records or memoranda and the giving of testimony before the Director of Finance in the same manner as production of evidence and testimony may be compelled before the Municipal Court. 
(3)  Depositions. The Director of Finance or any party in an investigation or hearing before the Director of Finance may cause the deposition of witnesses to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for depositions in civil actions in courts of this State. 
(4)  Subpoenas and witness fees. All subpoenas issued under the terms of this section may be served in the same manner as provided in the Colorado Rules for Civil Procedure. The fees of witnesses for attendance and trial shall be as set forth in Section 030.030.070. Such fees shall be paid when the witness is subpoenaed at the instance of the Director of Finance and, when a witness is subpoenaed at the instance of any other party, the Director of Finance shall require that the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee of the witness be borne by the party at whose instance the witness is summoned. In such case, the Director of Finance, in his/her discretion, may require a deposit to cover the cost of such service and witness fees. 
(e)  Coordinated audit . 
(1)  Any vendor licensed in the City pursuant to this article, and holding a similar sales tax license in at least four (4) other Colorado municipalities that administer their own sales tax collection, may request a coordinated audit as provided herein. 
(2)  Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of notice of an intended audit by any municipality that administers its own sales tax collection, the vendor may provide to the Director of Finance of the City, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written request for a coordinated audit indicating the municipality from which the notice of intended audit was received and the name of the official who issued such notice. Such request shall include a list of those Colorado municipalities utilizing local collection of their sales tax in which the vendor holds a current sales tax license and a declaration that the vendor will sign a waiver of any passage-of-time-based limitation upon the City's right to recover tax owed by the vendor for the audit period. 
(3)  Except as provided in Paragraph (7), any vendor that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit may be audited by the City during the calendar year in which such request is submitted only through a coordinated audit involving all municipalities electing to participate in such an audit. 
(4)  If the City desires to participate in the audit of a vendor that submits a complete request for a coordinated audit pursuant to Paragraph (3), the Director of Finance shall so notify the finance director of the municipality whose notice of audit prompted the vendor's request within ten (10) days after receipt of the vendor's request for a coordinated audit. The Director of Finance shall then cooperate with other participating municipalities in the development of arrangements for the coordinated audit, including arrangement of the time during which the coordinated audit will be conducted, the period of time to be covered by the audit, and a coordinated notice to the vendor of those records most likely to be required for completion of the coordinated audit. 
(5)  If the vendor's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by the City, the City's Director of Finance shall facilitate arrangements between the City and other municipalities participating in the coordinated audit unless and until an official from some other participating municipality agrees to assume this responsibility. The Director of Finance shall cooperate with other participating municipalities to, whenever practicable, minimize the number of auditors that will be present on the vendor's premises to conduct the coordinated audit on behalf of the participating municipalities. 
(6)  If the vendor's request for a coordinated audit was in response to a notice of audit issued by the City, the City's Director of Finance shall, once arrangements for the coordinated audit between the City and other participating municipalities are completed, provide written notice to the vendor of which municipalities will be participating, the period to be audited and the records most likely to be required by participating municipalities for completion of the coordinated audit. The Director of Finance shall also propose a schedule for the coordinated audit. 
(7)  The coordinated audit procedure set forth in this section shall not apply: 
a.  When the proposed audit is a jeopardy audit; or 
b.  To audits for which a notice of audit was given prior to the effective date of this section. 
(Code 1971 §§ 9-99, 9-103, 9-105, 9-106, 9-111, 9-115; 38-91 § 10) 
040.040.040 - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  Decision of director. Every decision of the Director of Finance required by this article shall be in writing and shall contain the findings of the Director of Finance. A copy of such decision shall be mailed to the applicant. All such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of ten (10) days after the date of service of the decision, unless proceedings are begun within such time for review thereof as provided in Subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Appeal of decision of director. An appeal of a notice of assessment issued to a vendor or taxpayer for failure to file a return, for underpayment of tax owed or as a result of an audit, or an appeal of a denial of a refund, shall be submitted in writing to the City Council within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the decision of the Director of Finance. Any such appeal shall identify the amount of tax disputed or refund requested and the basis for the appeal. The time period set forth in this subsection may, in the absolute discretion of the City Council, be waived for good cause on written application of a vendor or taxpayer. 
(c)  Decision of city council. The City Council shall, within one (1) month at a regularly scheduled meeting, review the decision of the Director of Finance. At such hearing, the applicant shall present his/her case and the Director of Finance shall be given an opportunity to respond. After this presentation, the City Council shall decide to uphold or overrule the decision of the Director of Finance. Such decision shall be final from which an appeal may be brought in accordance with the laws of the State. 
(d)  Exhaustion of remedies. No appeal may be taken to Court unless the applicant has exhausted all his/her administrative remedies as provided in this article. The failure of the applicant to process such remedies in accordance with the provisions of this article shall forfeit all rights of the applicant. 
(e)  Appeals bonds. 
(1)  Within fifteen (15) days after filing a notice of appeal to the District Court as provided in Subsection (c) above, the taxpayer shall file with the District Court a surety bond in twice the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the City Council which are contested on appeal. The taxpayer, at his/her option, may satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account or deposit in, or a certificate of deposit issued by, a state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with the provisions of C.R.S. § 11-35-101(1), as amended, equal to twice the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the City Council. 
(2)  The taxpayer may, at his/her option, deposit the disputed amount with the Director of Finance in lieu of posting a surety bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the deficiency contested during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, after appeal to the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeals or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the Court, either retained by the Director of Finance and applied against the deficiency or returned in whole or in part to the taxpayer with interest at the rate imposed pursuant to Subsection 040.040.050(e). No claim for refund of amounts deposited with the Director of Finance need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in accordance with the direction of the Court. 
(f)  General provisions . 
(1)  Notices . All notices required to be given under the provisions of this article shall be in writing and, if mailed, shall be mailed postage prepaid, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address. Such notices shall be deemed served on the date delivered, if by hand delivery, or at the time received as shown on the return receipt or five (5) days from the date of mailing, whichever is earlier. 
(2)  Hearings to be held in City. Every hearing before the Director of Finance or City Council shall be held in the City. 
(g)  Alternative procedures for use tax disputes . For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the taxpayer may elect a state hearing on the Director of Finance's final decision on a use tax deficiency notice or claim for refund within one (1) month after the mailing of such final decision pursuant to the procedures set forth in C.R.S. § 29-2-106.1, as amended. 
(Code 1971 §§ 9-116, 9-118, 9-120, 9-121; 56-85 § 10; 56-85 §§ 10, 12; 38-91 § 12) 
040.040.050 - Interest and penalties. 
(a)  Interest on underpayment, nonpayment or extensions of time for payment of tax . 
(1)  If any amount of tax is not paid on or before the last date prescribed for payment, interest on such amount at the rate imposed under Subsection (e) below shall be paid for the period from such last date to the date paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without regard to any extension for time for payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. In the case of a tax in which the last date for payment is not otherwise prescribed, the last date for payment shall be deemed to be the date the liability for the tax arises, and in no event shall it be later than the date notice and demand for the tax is made by the Director of Finance. 
(2)  Interest prescribed under Subsections (a) through (d) of this section shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as the tax to which it is applicable. 
(3)  If any portion of a tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed under this section on the portion of the tax so satisfied for any period during which, if the credit had not been made, interest would have been allowed with respect to such overpayment. 
(4)  Interest prescribed under Subsections (a) through (d) of this section on any tax may be assessed and collected at any time during the period within which the tax to which such interest relates may be assessed and collected. 
(b)  Deficiency due to negligence or fraud. If any part of the deficiency in payment of the tax is due to negligence or intentional disregard of the ordinances or of authorized rules and regulations of the City with knowledge thereof, but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten (10) percent of the total amount of the deficiency, and interest in such case shall be collected at the rate imposed under Subsection (e) of this section, in addition to the interest provided for by Subsection (a) of this section, on the amount of such deficiency from the time the return was due, from the person required to file the return, which interest and addition shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand to him/her by the Director of Finance. If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added one hundred (100) percent of the total amount of the deficiency and, in such case, the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the Director of Finance. An additional three (3) percent per month on said amount shall be added from the date the return was due until paid. 
(c)  Neglect or refusal to make return or to pay. If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in payment of a tax or to pay any tax as required, the Director of Finance shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent and shall add thereto a penalty equal to ten (10) percent thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under Subsection (e) of this section, plus one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent per month from the date when due. 
(d)  Penalty interest on unpaid taxes. Any tax due and unpaid shall be debt to the City, and shall draw interest at the rate imposed under Subsection (e) of this section, in addition to the interest provided by Subsection (a) of this section, from the time when due until paid. 
(e)  Rate of interest. When interest is required or permitted to be charged under any provision of Subsections (a) through (d) of this section, the annual rate of interest shall be that established by the State Commissioner of Banking pursuant to C.R.S. § 39-21-110.5, as amended. 
(f)  Other remedies. Nothing in this section shall preclude the City from utilizing any other applicable penalties or remedies for the collection or enforcement of taxes. 
(g)  Waiver of penalty by director of finance. The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty assessed in this section, and any interest imposed in excess of eight (8) percent per annum shall be deemed a penalty. 
(Code 1971 §§ 9-100, 9-101, 9-114; 56-85 § 9) 
040.040.060 - Enforcement and collection of unpaid taxes. 
(a)  Seizure and sale of property for unpaid taxes, penalties or interest . 
(1)  Warrant . If any taxes, penalty or interest imposed by the Tax Ordinance are not paid when the same are due, the Director of Finance may issue a warrant under the City's official seal directed to the Chief of Police, commanding him/her to levy upon, seize and sell sufficient of the personal property of the taxpayer found within the City for the payment of the amount due, together with interest, penalties and costs, subject to valid pre-existing liens. 
(2)  Seizure and sale. The Chief of Police shall forthwith levy upon sufficient of the property of the taxpayer and sell the same in all respects and with like effect and in the same manner as is prescribed by state law in respect to execution against property upon judgment of a court of record. 
(b)  Recovery by action at law . 
(1)  Debt. The Director of Finance may also treat any such taxes, penalties and interest due and unpaid as a debt due the City from the retailer and recover the same in the county or district courts of the State which have jurisdiction of the amount sought to be collected and venue over the person from whom the amount is sought. 
(2)  City attorney to assist. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney, upon request of the Director of Finance, to commence an action pursuant to the provisions of this subsection. 
(3)  Return and assessment are prima facie proof. The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the Director of Finance, as provided in this article, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. 
(Code 1971 §§ 9-112, 9-113) 
ARTICLE 040.050 - MISCELLANEOUS TAXES 

040.050.010 - Telephone exchange occupation tax. 
    All public utility businesses and occupations which maintain a telephone exchange and lines connected therewith in the City which supply local exchange service to inhabitants of the City and which use the public streets, rights-of-way and other public places and areas in the City in connection with such service and for the installation of poles or lines in connection with such service shall pay an occupation tax in the sum of nine hundred dollars ($900.00) per month to the City for each month or part thereof during which such public utility conducts the operations described in this section. This fee shall be due and payable on or before December 31, ending each year during all or any part of which such public utility conducts the operations described in this section. 
(Code 1962 § 17.2; Code 1971 § 9-6) 
040.050.020 - Telephone pole charge. 
    There shall be charged to Mountain States Telephone and Telegraph Company, pursuant to an agreement dated January 1, 1970, between the City and Mountain States Telephone and Telegraph Company, a pole charge of ten dollars and thirty cents ($10.30) per pole for the deficit in pole ownership as determined in accordance with the terms of said agreement, which payment shall be made within sixty (60) days of December 31 of each year for the poles for the prior year. This pole rental may be amended in accordance with the terms of the agreement. 
040.050.030 - Rocky Mountain Gas occupancy and license tax. 
    Pursuant to a franchise agreement entered into by and between the City and Rocky Mountain Natural Gas Company (RMNG), there is hereby imposed in lieu of all occupancy and license taxes and all other special taxes, assessments or excises upon the pipes, mains, meters or other property of RMNG or any other levies that might be imposed, either as a franchise tax, occupancy tax, license tax, permit charge or for inspection of pipes, mains, meters or other property of the RMNG, or otherwise, a tax of two (2) percent of the annual gross revenue of RMNG derived from the sale of gas within the corporate limits of the City excluding the revenue received from the sale of industrial gas and excluding the amount received from the City itself from gas service furnished it and after adjustment for net write-off on uncollectible accounts and corrections of bills theretofore rendered; however, the City may, after construction of the initial distribution system, require a payment of a reasonable permit charge for the opening of streets, alleys or other public ways and places and a reasonable fee for the inspection of repairs thereto. Payments of this franchise tax should be made on or before the first day of March of each year for the previous calendar year. For the purpose of ascertaining or auditing the correct amount to be paid under the provisions of this section, the City Clerk and/or any committee appointed by the City Council shall have access to the books of said company for the purpose of checking the gross income received from operations within the City. 
(1-61 § 16) 
040.050.040 - CATV occupation tax. 
    Pursuant to an agreement entered into between the City and Western Colorado Television Company dated June 1, 1966, which agreement has been duly assigned to the Community Tele-Communications, Inc. (CTI), CTI shall pay to the City a sum equal to two and one-half (2.5) percent of its annual gross revenues derived from the monthly recurrent service charges to customers within the corporate limits of the City. Payment of this sum shall be made on or before the first day of March each year for the preceding calendar year. For the purpose of ascertaining or auditing the correct amount to be paid under the provisions of this section, CTI shall submit to the City on or before the fifteenth day of each month a report showing the number of and classification of its subscribers, and the City shall also have access to such portion of the books of CTI as accurately reflects such figures, together with the revenues derived from each subscriber. 
040.050.050 - CATV pole rental. 
    Pursuant to an agreement entered into between the City and Western Colorado Television Company dated June 1, 1966, which agreement has been duly assigned to the Community Tele-Communications, Inc. (CTI), CTI shall pay to the City a rental charge of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per pole per annum; however, the City may increase or the pole rental charge set forth in this section upon ninety (90) days' written notice to the company. The pole rental charge is payable semiannually in advance on the first day of January and the first day of July of each year during the term of the agreement. Semi-annual rental payments shall be based upon the number of poles to which attachments are being maintained on the first day of June and the first day of December respectively. 
TITLE 050 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 050.010 - GENERAL LICENSE REQUIREMENTS 

050.010.010 - Applicability and purpose. 
(a)  Applicability . Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, all licenses issued by the City shall be issued according to the provisions of this Title. Wherever the term license is used in this article, it shall also mean registration as required for plumbers and electricians elsewhere in this Title 050. 
(b)  Purpose . The purpose of this Title is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City by registering business activity in the City. 
(25-88 § 1) 
050.010.020 - Requirement. 
    Before engaging in any work activity for which a license is required by this Title, a person shall obtain the license. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to engage in a work activity for which a license is required by this Title without first having a current license for such activity and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
050.010.030 - Application and issuance. 
(a)  In general. Any person who wishes to obtain a license required by this Title shall make an application for such license to the City Manager on a form provided by the City and pay the application fee, license fee or both. Included in the application fee shall be the fees, if any, charged for an examination required of or for an investigation of the applicant. 
(b)  Examination or investigation. Whenever an examination or investigation of an applicant is a condition of the issuance of a license pursuant to the provisions of this Title, such examination and such investigation shall be favorable before the license may be issued. 
(c)  Conditional issuance. Whenever the City Manager determines that a person meets all the requirements for the issuance of a license for which an examination or investigation is required and that such person is likely to receive a favorable result on the examination or receive a favorable report from the investigation, the City Manager may, upon payment of a conditional license fee of five dollars ($5.00) and upon submittal of all other requirements for such license, issue a conditional license. Such conditional license shall be valid for no more than forty-five (45) days and shall expire upon issuance of a license. 
050.010.040 - Issuance and denial. 
(a)  Issuance. If the City Manager determines that an applicant for a license has met all the requirements and paid all the fees for such license, he/she shall issue the license to the applicant. 
(b)  Denial. If the City Manager determines that an applicant for a license has not met all the requirements or paid all the fees for a license, he/she shall deny the issuance of the license. Such denial shall be in writing and shall give the reasons for the denial. 
(c)  Appeal. If a license is denied, the applicant may appeal the denial to the City Council by filing a written appeal, stating the reasons the license should be issued, with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of denial. The City Council shall hear such appeal at its next regular meeting. The decision of the City Council shall be final from which an appeal may be taken to Court in accordance with the laws of the State. The appeal of a denial of a construction trade license shall be made to the Building Board of Appeals, which shall meet within thirty (30) days of the date of denial. For such appeals, the notice required by this section shall be filed with the Building Official. 
050.010.050 - Term. 
    Construction trade licenses issued pursuant to this Title shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date approved unless revoked pursuant to the provisions of this Title. All other licenses issued pursuant to this Title shall be valid for the year for which the license was issued and shall terminate on December 31 of that year unless a longer term has been provided for the license by the Finance Director, not to exceed two (2) years, or unless revoked pursuant to the provisions of this Title. There shall be no proration of the application and license fee for a license issued for a portion of a year. 
(25-88 § 2; 32-91 § 1) 
050.010.060 - Renewal. 
(a)  In general . It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to renew his/her license at the appropriate time. Applications for renewal of a license issued pursuant to this Title may be made thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the license. No person may engage in the business activity for which such license is issued for the next year until the renewal of the license is issued. 
(b)  Re-examination or investigation . Any license issued pursuant to this Title for which an examination or investigation of the applicant is required may be renewed without a renewal examination or investigation so long as the applicant for renewal has been licensed by the City within three (3) years from the date of the expiration of the license to such applicant. Any applicant for a construction trade license who has not been licensed by the City within three (3) years of the date of expiration of such license shall be reviewed by the Building and Contractor's Licensing Board and may be required to take a new examination. 
(25-88 § 2) 
050.010.070 - Nontransferability. 
    No license issued pursuant to this Title shall be transferable from one (1) person to another. The sale of part or all of the stock of a corporation shall be considered a transfer for purposes of this section. 
ARTICLE 050.011 - BUSINESS LICENSES 

050.011.010 - Definition. 
    Business includes all kinds of trades, vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments and all other kinds of activities and matters, for profit or nonprofit, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances on any premises in this City or anywhere else within its jurisdiction. Businesses that are comprised of several persons with the same or similar occupations, which may or may not be considered by that business as independent contractors or other independent entities for federal income tax purposes, such as, without limitation, real estate agents and cosmetologists, shall be considered one (1) business entity for purposes of this article. 
(8-00 § 1; 8-01 § 1) 
050.011.015 - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct business in the City without first obtaining a license to conduct such business pursuant to this article. A separate general business license shall be required for each location of a business operating within the City limits. Specialty licenses, as required elsewhere in this Title, shall be required in addition to this business license, when applicable. However, this business license shall replace the sales and use tax license previously required in Title 040 of this Code. 
(b)  In the event that business has a physical presence in an unincorporated area at the time of the annexation of such area to the City and the person carrying on or engaging in the business is doing so lawfully and in conformance with all laws applicable to the territory, the conduct of such business may be continued upon and subsequent to the annexation of the area to the City, provided that any applicable license fees are paid within thirty (30) days after annexation. In subsequent calendar years, the business must conform to all licensing requirements as they are stated in this Title. 
(c)  Any business existing on or having a physical presence in the City after May 6, 2000, and prior to January 1, 2001, shall be licensed no later than the City's close of business on January 1, 2001. Any business desiring to conduct business and having a physical presence within the City's boundaries after January 1, 2001, shall comply with all provisions of this article prior to commencing operation. 
(8-00 § 1) 
050.011.120 - License application and administration. 
(a)  The applicant for a business license shall submit an application to the Finance Department on a form provided by the Finance Department, and the application shall be accompanied with a nonrefundable fee, as established by City Council resolution, for the processing of such license. This fee shall be waived for nonprofit applicants upon providing proof of their nonprofit status. 
(b)  All original applications shall be reviewed by the City Manager, in order to determine whether grounds exist for denial. If approval of the application is recommended as a result of the investigation, the City Manager shall issue the license which will expire at the end of an odd-numbered year for a period not to exceed two (2) years for all businesses other than temporary vendors. Temporary vendor licenses shall be issued for a period not to exceed one (1) year and shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which it is issued. The application may be approved with reasonable conditions necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety. 
(c)  An application for renewal of the business license shall be filed with the Finance Department. In the event a suspension or revocation proceeding is pending when a license renewal is filed, the application for a renewal shall not be acted upon until the suspension or revocation proceeding has been completed. 
(d)  All licenses shall specify the name of the licensee, the business address, the nature of the business, the term of the license and the date upon which it expires. Every license granted under the provisions of this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the location of the business for the full term of the license. Licenses shall be removed upon expiration. 
(e)  Licenses are not transferable for any reason. After a sale of a business, the new owner shall apply for a new license. 
(f)  No license shall be required for any governmental agency. 
(8-00 § 1; 22-10, § 1) 
050.011.125 - License denial, cancellation or revocation. 
(a)  A license may be denied for any violation of the provisions of this article or for any reason listed below. The reason for the denial of the application shall be provided to the applicant in writing. Such reasons are: 
(1)  The required fees have not been paid. 
(2)  The application is incomplete or contains false, misleading or fraudulent statements. 
(3)  Nonconformance of the business, premises, building or land use with applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)  The City Manager may cancel any license: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a written notice that the business is no longer active in the City; or 
(2)  Upon the business's failure to renew its license as required herein, or failure to pay applicable taxes to the City. 
(c)  A license may be denied, canceled, denied renewal, suspended or revoked for any violation of any provision of this Title for any reason set forth hereinabove, or on the grounds that the health, safety or welfare of the community may be endangered by the continued operation of the business as substantiated by a report from the Police Department, Fire Department or Building and Zoning Official. 
(d)  A license may be denied, denied renewal, suspended or revoked after the licensee has been given notice of the specific reasons in writing. Within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice, the applicant may request a hearing before the City Council. If a hearing is not requested within the ten (10) days, the right to such hearing is forever waived. 
(e)  An application for a new license may be denied by the City Manager for the reasons stated in this section. The applicant may appeal a denial to the City Council, unless the reason for the denial is an incomplete application, nonconformance with the zoning or building codes or failure to pay required fees. The reason for the denial of the application shall be provided to the applicant in writing, and the appeal process shall be the same as outlined in Subsection (d) above. 
(f)  A license may be summarily suspended for no more than thirty (30) days by the City Manager when required for the immediate protection of the public health, safety and welfare, as substantiated by the Police Department, Fire Department or Building and Zoning Official. The hearing process outlined in Subsection (d) above shall also apply. 
(g)  A business may continue operation in the City after its license has been canceled or revoked pending the completion of the appropriate appeal process. 
(8-00 § 1) 
050.011.130 - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any business to violate a provision of this article. Violators shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 010.020.080 of this Code and may be subject to any civil remedies available. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such business is in violation of this article. 
(8-00 § 1) 
ARTICLE 050.020 - SALES TAX LICENSES 

050.020.010 - Retail sales tax license. 
(a)  When required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling at retail, as the same is defined in Title 040, without having first obtained a City retail sales tax license. 
(b)  When not required. A City retail sales tax license shall not be required of any person engaged exclusively in the business of selling commodities which are exempt from taxation under Title 040. 
(c)  Deposit required for peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants. In addition to any fee required pursuant to this Title, any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant selling at retail shall, prior to issuance of a new City retail sales tax license, submit a deposit in an amount established by City Council resolution. Upon verification by the Finance Director that the licensee has paid the sales taxes due the City, all or a portion of the deposit not applied to sale taxes due shall be returned to the licensee. If the licensee does not file a sales tax return and pay the sales tax due to the City, within ninety (90) days from the last day of doing business within the City limits or end of year whichever is earlier, the Finance Director may declare the deposit forfeited and notify the licensee thereof at the last address filed with the City. The foregoing deposit may be waived by the Finance Director where the peddler, solicitor or transient merchant has established a good credit history with the City as demonstrated by a history of timely tax payments on a prior City peddler, solicitor or transient merchant license. 
(Code 1971 §§ 9-63, 9-70; 43-83 § 2[a]; 9-00 § 8; 32-91 § 3; 21-10, § 1) 
050.020.020 - Special event sales tax license. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created a special events City sales tax license which may be issued to any organization which has been incorporated under the laws of the State for the purpose of a social, fraternal, patriotic, political or athletic nature, and not for pecuniary gain, or which is a regularly charter branch, lodge or chapter of a national organization or society organized for such and being nonprofit in nature, or which is a regularly established religion or philanthropic institution or which is a governmental body or agency. 
(b)  Term. A special events City sales tax license shall be valid for no more than one (1) year. 
(c)  Organization responsible for collection and remittance of sales tax. The organization issued the license shall be responsible for collecting the sales tax and paying the same to the City from the various persons engaged in the business of selling at retail at said special event and no further City sales tax license shall be required of such persons. In the event that such persons have a validly issued City sales tax license for the location, then the organization sponsoring the event shall receive a statement from such person as to the gross amount of sales subject to sales tax consummated at such special event and the tax to be paid to the City. Such statement shall be provided to the City by the organization. Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve any person engaged in the business of selling at retail at such special event from the obligation to pay sales, use or other taxes lawfully enacted by the City or the State nor to waive any other requirements for such persons for the type of business in which they are engaged. 
(Code 1971 § 9-71; 43-83 § 3; 18-92 § 1; 9-00 § 9) 
050.020.030 - Form, different locations and posting. 
(a)  Form. Each license issued pursuant to this article shall be numbered, shall show the name, street and mailing address, place and character of the business for which the license is issued and the term for which the license is issued. 
(b)  Separate locations. In case business is transacted at two (2) or more separate places by one (1) person, a separate license required by this article 050.020 for each place of business shall be required. No such license may be transferred to a new location. 
(c)  Posting. Each license issued pursuant to this Article 050.020 shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the location for which it is issued. 
(Code 1962 § 16.4; Code 1971 §§ 9-2, 9-4, 9-65, 9-66) 
050.020.040 - Record of licenses. 
    The Director of Finance shall keep a record of all sales tax licenses issued, setting forth the name of every licensee, the place of business licensed, the kind of license issued and its term. 
(Code 1962 § 16.5; Code 1971 § 9-3) 
050.020.050 - Revocation. 
(a)  Revocation . The Director of Finance may, upon written notice to a licensee stating the contemplated action and in general the grounds therefor and after a reasonable opportunity to be heard, revoke any sales tax license issued by the City if he/she finds that: 
(1)  The licensee has failed to pay the required license fee; 
(2)  The licensee has failed to file any report or finish any other information that may be required by the provisions relating to the specific license; 
(3)  The licensee has violated any state law or provision of this Code or ordinance of this City pertaining to his/her license or any regulation or order lawfully made relating to his/her license; or 
(4)  Any fact or condition exists which, if it had existed or had been known to exist at the time of the application for such license, would have warranted the refusal of the issuance of such license. 
(b)  Appeal from revocation . Any finding and order of the Director of Finance revoking the license, required by this article, of any person shall be subject to review by the District Court of Garfield County upon application of the aggrieved party. The procedure for review shall be as nearly as possible the same as now provided for review under Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Code 1962 § 16.7; Code 1971 §§ 9-5, 9-68, 9-69) 
ARTICLE 050.030 - TEMPORARY SALES AND STRUCTURES 

050.030.010 - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or establish any temporary sales use or structure within the City until a temporary use permit has been approved by the City Manager. 
(b)  Temporary use shall, for purposes of this article, mean any outdoor retail and/or wholesale sales use on a short-term basis, including, but not limited to: produce stands; peddlers; solicitors; hawkers; itinerant merchants; and transient merchants, and excluding temporary promotions or sidewalk sales by permanent businesses on their own property. Temporary sales structure shall mean a structure for the purpose of storing or displaying goods for retail sale or for the purpose of conducting business for a short term outside of a pre-existing building or structure, including, but not limited to, long-term or recurrent yard or garage sales, produce stands, tents, fences, tables, display racks, canopies, vending carts, trailers and other vehicles. 
(c)  The fee for a temporary use permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall be used to offset the expense of investigating and reviewing the permit application. 
(d)  Temporary use permits may be allowed in the C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 zone districts only and shall be prohibited at all times on the Wing Street Pedestrian Mall, defined as the east wing street of Grand Avenue between the Seventh Street Esplanade and the curb line of Eighth Street and the Seventh Street Esplanade, except during special community events and subject to a special community event permit. 
(17-96 § 2) 
050.030.011 - Special community events permits. 
(a)  Temporary sales structures associated with special community events, including Strawberry Days, the Fall Arts Festival and similar community-wide events or festivals shall be exempt from the permit application requirements and review criteria outlined hereinbelow. 
(b)  Such temporary sales uses associated with a community event shall be subject to all licensing requirements, including sales tax, and shall be required to obtain a special community event permit. 
(c)  The fee for a special permit hereunder shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) and shall be valid for a maximum of seventy-two (72) hours. 
(17-96 § 2) 
050.030.012 - Permit application requirements. 
    Temporary use permits shall be submitted on an application form approved by the City and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  If the applicant is an organization, association, corporation or other such entity, evidence as is necessary to substantiate the existence of such entity; 
(3)  A site plan indicating all proposed temporary sales structures, required off-street parking and existing structures, access and parking. If multiple vendors are participating in an association or similar organization, all vendors must operate on same parcel and have the same use and/or similar wares; 
(4)  A written description of the proposed business operation; 
(5)  A parking plan for the entire parcel of land with sufficient data to calculate parking requirements per Title 070 of the Code; 
(6)  Sales tax license, or licenses if an association or similar entity; 
(7)  Evidence of Department of Health approval or exemption; and 
(8)  A plan to address reasonably anticipated debris or litter problems. 
(17-96 § 2; 46-96 § 1; Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 4, 8-2-2018) 
050.030.015 - Permit review criteria. 
(a)  The temporary use permit application shall be submitted in writing and may be approved by the City Manager if the following criteria and specific regulations are met: 
(1)  The allowance of such use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare, and the use is compatible with the purpose and intent of the specific zoning district in which it will be located. 
(2)  The applicant has all licenses required by this Code, including a sales tax license, and by state law. 
(3)  For food sales, the applicant has evidence of Department of Health approval. 
(4)  Adequate off-street parking is provided to serve the use, and the use does not displace the required off-street parking spaces or loading areas of the principal permitted uses on the site or interfere with the flow of traffic. 
(5)  The use is compatible in intensity, characteristics and appearance with existing land uses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed location, and the use, value and qualities of the uses surrounding the proposed location will not be adversely affected by the use or activities with it. Factors such as location, access, traffic generation, noise, light, dust control and hours of operation will be considered. 
(6)  The use is not on publicly owned property, including rights-of-way, unless the applicant first obtains a revocable license to encroach from the City authorizing such use. 
(7)  The proposed use and structure has a neat and clean appearance. 
(8)  Proposed lighting shall not glare onto adjoining properties or onto public streets. 
(9)  No merchandise shall be displayed within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of the curb line of any two (2) streets; within the required setback area of the parcel on which the use is to be located; within ten (10) feet of any curb cut; or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any structure primarily used as a residence. 
(10)  Signage shall be limited to the signage described in Section 070.040.110 of this Code. 
(11)  Permanent retail businesses may display their merchandise in the area outside and immediately adjacent to their buildings. If the sidewalk or the pedestrian way in front of the building is used for display of merchandise, a minimum width of four (4) feet must remain available for use. 
(12)  Noise makers of any kind, including amplifiers, shall be prohibited. 
(b)  The temporary use permit application shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the City Manager within ten (10) working days after a complete submittal. 
(17-96 § 2; 46-96 § 2; Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 4, 8-2-2018) 
050.030.020 - Conditions of approval. 
    In the allowance of such temporary use, the City Manager shall have authority to require such reasonable conditions as necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizenry and to ensure that the use, value and quality of the surrounding uses will not be adversely affected. 
(17-96 § 2) 
050.030.025 - Time limits. 
(a)  A temporary use permit shall be valid for a maximum time period of fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days. The permit may be renewed up to three (3) times in any calendar year. 
(b)  The following uses may be granted permits for longer time periods in accordance with the schedule described below with a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the respective time period. 
(1)  Christmas tree sales: up to thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(2)  Produce sales: up to one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days. 
(3)  Retail (ready-to-eat) food sales: up to one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days. 
(4)  Agricultural sales: up to one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days. 
(c)  Such permit fee for longer time periods shall not be applicable to temporary uses on property owned and permanently occupied by the user. 
(17-96 § 2; 46-96 § 3; 17-99 § 1) 
050.030.030 - Maintenance standards. 
(a)  The use and any associated structures or vehicles shall be maintained at all times in a clean and neat condition. 
(b)  Parking shall be limited to areas indicated on the approved application. 
(c)  Trash and rubbish resulting from the use shall be completely contained on the approved site and shall be properly disposed of daily. 
(d)  The use site shall be operated during the times indicated on the approved application only and, during such time that the operation is to be closed, the site will be vacated, except for any approved structures and sale time associated herewith. 
(17-96 § 2) 
050.030.035 - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  In addition to any other available remedies, permits issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended by the City Manager for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the application for a permit; or 
(2)  Any violation of this article. 
(b)  Written notice of the suspension or revocation, along with supporting grounds therefor, shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his/her last known address or hand-delivered to the permittee at least three (3) days prior to the effective date of the suspension or revocation. 
(c)  The City Manager may, whenever he/she determines that it is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health, safety or welfare, immediately suspend a permit issued hereunder. Such suspension shall be for a period not to exceed seven (7) days, during which time notice shall be given within the provision of this section. 
(17-96 § 2) 
050.030.040 - Appeal procedure. 
    Appeal of any administrative decision, including denials, suspensions and revocations, hereunder may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 070.060.070 of this Code. 
(17-96 § 2; 13-06, § 2; Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 4, 8-2-2018) 
050.030.045 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-08, § 2, repealed § 050.030.045, which derived from Ord. 17-96, § 2. 
ARTICLE 050.040 - CONSTRUCTION TRADES LICENSES 

050.040.010 - General requirements. 
(a)  Requirement. Before a permit required by the provisions of Title 060 is issued to any person, such person must first obtain a license in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such license may only be issued to a person and not to a business entity. A permit for a construction project may be issued before all subcontractors are determined; however, no work may be commenced by the subcontractor until a license required by this article is obtained. As used in this article, the term license shall also include any registration as required for plumbers and electricians. 
(b)  Stop work order. If the Building Official discovers work being performed by a person without the license, as required in this article, he/she may, in addition to any other remedies or actions available to the City pursuant to this Code, issue a stop work order. Such stop work order shall remain in effect until the license required by this article is obtained. 
(c)  License to save and hold harmless. Every person issued a license pursuant to this article shall save and hold harmless the City from damages, cost and expenses including, but not limited to attorney's fees, that arise out of the negligence of the licensee or his/her servants, employees, agents or those acting on his/her behalf or out of his/her or their failure to comply with state and federal laws and regulations and this Code, City ordinances and regulations. 
(d)  Insurance. Every licensee granted a license under this article shall maintain at all times workers' compensation insurance as required by state law and combined single-limit insurance which includes both bodily injury and property damage insurance in the following minimum amount: 
Classification of Licensee Insurance Class A Building Contractor $500,000.00 Class B.1 Building Contractor $500,000.00 Class B.2 Building Contractor $500,000.00 Class C Building Contractor $300,000.00 Class D Building Contractor $300,000.00 Electrical Contractor $300,000.00 Plumbing Contractor $300,000.00  
(e)  License and testing fees . The license fee for licenses granted under this article shall be as follows: 
Classification of Licensee Testing Fee License Fee Class AA Unlimited General Contractor $125.00 $200.00/year Class A Limited Commercial Contractor $100.00 $175.00/year Class B Limited Light Commercial Contractor $75.00 $150.00/year Class C Home Builder Contractor $60.00 $125.00/year Class D Specialty Contractor $50.00 $ 75.00/year Electrical Contractor No Fee Plumbing Contractor $ 50.00/2 years Renewals: $50.00 for Class AA, A, B and C; $35.00 for Class D  
(1)  The plumbing contractor license fees shall be prorated for the period from date of license issuance to expiration date. 
(2)  In the event a licensee with a business entity leaves that business entity and a new person is licensed for that business entity, in accordance with the provisions of this article, no new license fee for that year of the license shall be required, unless the licensee transfers his/her license to a new business entity. Such new person shall pay all application or examination fees required by this article. 
(f)  License term . The terms of the licenses shall be as follows: Class AA, B, C and D, one (1) year from date of issuance of a conditional license or regular license, whichever is issued first, and yearly thereafter. Electrician and plumbing licenses shall expire at the expiration date of the state electrician and plumbing licenses. 
(g)  Proof of license . The City shall issue to each licensee under this article a license certificate and card, which license card must be available for inspection by the Building Official at all construction sites. 
(Code 1962 § 22.6-2; Code 1971 §§ 4-43-4-45, 4-90, 4-93, 4-108, 4-163, 4-164, 4-166, 4-167, 4-213-4-215; 44-83 §§ 2-10; 25-88 § 3; 1-97; 8-08 § 2) 
050.040.020 - Contractors. 
(a)  Definition of contractor . A contractor shall include any person who builds, constructs, alters, adds to, repairs, moves or wrecks any building or structure either on his/her own or other property for which improvement a charge is made, no matter how such charge is computed. Such definition shall include those persons normally designated in the building trade as subcontractors, but such definition shall not include: 
(1)  Special contractor registrations. Electricians or plumbers for which a registration is otherwise required under the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Owners. Owners or leaseholders doing ordinary maintenance, repair or minor improvements, which do not affect the structural integrity of the building, either by themselves or with the assistance of a building contractor as defined in this subsection; and 
(3)  Homeowners. Any person who constructs, alters, repairs or improves a home for his/her own residence if he/she does the work by himself/herself, obtains the assistance of a building contractor as defined in this subsection or obtains assistance for his/her work from not more than one (1) person at a given time who: 
a.  During the period of such employment for a homeowner or within the previous twelve (12) months, is not otherwise engaged in or receiving benefits from a person or company who is defined in this article as a contractor; 
b.  Works for hourly wages or receives no compensation, and 
c.  Is not now or has not been for the previous twelve (12) months licensed as a contractor as defined in this article. 
d.  Any person assisting more than two (2) homeowners during any consecutive twenty-four-month period shall be presumed to be a contractor and said person must be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
A homeowner may secure a building permit on only one (1) R-3 occupancy in any consecutive twelve-month period. The construction of more than one (1) residence in any consecutive three-year period shall be construed to establish the homeowner as a contractor, and the homeowner must be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Classification . For the purposes of this section, contractors shall be divided into the following classifications for reference and definition: 
(1)  General contractor class AA unlimited. A contractor in this classification shall be allowed to contract for the construction, alteration or repair of any type or size of structure permitted by the International Building Code as adopted in this Code. 
(2)  Commercial contractor class a limited. A contractor in this classification shall be allowed to contract for the construction, alteration or repair of any of occupancy classifications permitted by the International Building Code as adopted in this Code, except for any building of Type I-A or Type I-B construction. 
(3)  Light commercial contractor class b limited. A contractor in this classification shall be allowed to contract for the construction, alteration or repair of Type II, III, IV and V construction and A-2, A-3, B, F-1, F-2, M, R, S-1, S-2 and U occupancy classifications as regulated by the International building Code as adopted in this Code. 
(4)  Home builder contractor class c. A contractor in this classification shall be allowed to contract for the construction, alteration and repair of detached one and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height with a separate means of egress, and their accessory structures as regulated by the International Residential Code, as adopted in this Code. 
(5)  Specialty contractor class d. A contractor in this classification shall be allowed to engage in contracting as other than a general or home builder contractor as defined in Paragraphs (1), (2), (3) and (4) above, for labor or for labor and materials involving no more than two (2) trades. 
(6)  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the issuance of one (1) or more licenses for different contractor classifications to the same person. 
(7)  A person licensed as a building contractor Class D shall be limited to the trade for which such license is issued, which trade shall be noted on the license certificate. No more than two (2) trades shall be allowed on one (1) Class D license. 
(c)  Scope and administration . No person shall perform the work of a contractor within the City without first obtaining a contractor's license which shall be issued, suspended and revoked by the City at the direction of the Building Official. 
(d)  Examination and fee . 
(1)  Examination . Prior to the issuance of the license required by this section, it shall be the duty of the Building Official to examine the applicant for such license as to his/her qualifications and competency to engage in or conduct the building contractor work for which application is made. Written examinations shall be required as deemed necessary by the Building Official, with the tests administered by the Board of Examiners for Standardized Testing (BEST) as the preferred tests. The Building Official may also accept licensing from other governmental jurisdictions as substitution for testing when such licensing requires testing on current code editions of the International Code Council. Examinations shall be scheduled at a reasonable interval as determined by the Building Official. 
(2)  Fee . Each applicant shall pay a fee for such examination per the table in subsection 050.040.030(e). Fess may be adjusted administratively. 
(Code 1971 §§ 4-31-4-33, 4-40, 4-42, 4-49, 19-29; 44-83 § 1; 25-88 § 4; 1-97; 8-08 § 2) 
050.040.030 - Electrical Contractors. 
(a)  Scope and administration. 
(1)  Scope. No person shall perform the work of an electrical contractor within the City without first obtaining an electrical contractor's registration. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any homeowner to be registered before performing electrical work on his/her residence except where prohibited by state law; however, such work shall be subject to the same limitations as are placed on contractors by the provisions of Subsection 050.050.020(a). 
(2)  Exception for telephone, light and cable television companies. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to telephone, telegraph, electrical, light and cable television companies operating in the City, or their employees; to the installation, repair, alteration, extension, maintenance and operation of their systems; to their employees in connecting or disconnecting the services of their customers; or to such emergencies as are necessary to restore service; however, such companies and their employees are not authorized to go beyond the exceptions contained in this section. 
(3)  Administration. Any registration issued pursuant to this section shall be administered, suspended and revoked by the City at the direction of the Building Official. 
(b)  Issuance . A person who holds a current valid master electrician's license and electrical contractor license from the State, upon application to the City and the furnishing of Certificates of Insurance as specified in Section 050.040.010(d) above shall be issued an electrical contractor's registration, unless such person's registration is currently under suspension or revocation by the City. No fee shall be charged for this registration. 
(Code 1962 §§ 22.4-3, 22.4-7; Code 1971 §§ 4-86, 4-92; 25-88 § 5; 25-88 § 5; 1-97; 8-08 § 2) 
050.040.040 - Gas Piping Work. 
    Scope and administration . No person, including a homeowner performing gas piping on his/her residence, shall construct, install, extend, alter, repair or improve any gas piping as defined by the International Fuel Gas Code or International Residential Code as adopted in this Code, within the City without first obtaining a plumbing license unless supervised and inspected by a licensed plumber. The provisions of this section apply only to such work as is performed on the property or premises of consumers and not to work performed by a gas company on its distribution lines and on customer service lines to and including the gas meter. The issuance, suspension and revocation of this license shall be by the City at the direction of the Building Official. 
(Code 1962 § 22.6-2; Code 1971 §§ 4-42, 4-161; 25-88 § 4; 1-97; 28-98; 8-08 § 2) 
050.040.050 - Plumbing contractors. 
(a)  Scope and administration. No person shall perform plumbing work within the City without first obtaining a plumbing contractor's registration. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any homeowner to hold a registration before performing plumbing work on his/her residence except where prohibited by state law; however, such work shall be subject to the same limitations as are placed on homeowners by the provisions of Subsection 050.040.020(a)(3). Any registration issued pursuant to this section shall be administered, suspended and revoked by the City at the direction of the Plumbing and Gas Fitters Board. For the purposes of this section, plumbing work does not include that section of pipe extending from the City main to the structure it is servicing, provided that the final connection inside the building is done by the owner or a registered plumber and is inspected and approved by the City, nor does it include any gas piping. 
(b)  Issuance. A plumbing contractor registration shall be issued to a person who holds a current valid master plumber's license from the State, upon submittal of the application to the City, the furnishing of Certificates of Insurance as specified in Section 050.040.010(d) above and payment of the registration fee unless such person's registration is currently under suspension or revocation by the City. 
(Code 1971 §§ 4-209, 4-210.1, 4-210.2; 25-88 § 6; 25-88 § 6; 1-97) 
050.040.060 - Compliance with local and state law required. 
    All of the laws of the State and this Code and other ordinances of the City dealing with measures for the safety of workers and of the public shall be observed by any person licensed under provisions of this article. 
(Code 1971 § 4-34; 1-97) 
050.040.070 - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Complaint and notice. The Building Official may, upon his/her own motion, and shall, upon the verified complaint in writing of any person, require any person licensed pursuant to this article to appear before the Building Board of Appeals for hearing after five (5) days' notice in writing mailed to his/her last known post office address or personally delivered to such person. Such notice shall include a copy of the complaint and the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  Hearing . The Building Board of Appeals shall conduct a hearing allowing for procedural due process although strict rules of evidence need not be followed. At the conclusion of the hearing, if the board finds by clear and convincing evidence that the license holder has committed any one (1) or more of the following acts or omissions, it may suspend or revoke such license: 
(1)  Abandonment of any contract without legal cause; 
(2)  Diversion of funds or property received for performance or completion of a specific contract or for a specified purpose in the performance or completion of any contract and their application or use for any other contract, obligation or purpose, or the failure, neglect or refusal to use such funds or property for the performance or completion of said contract; 
(3)  Fraudulent departure from or disregard of plans or specifications in any material respect without consent of the owner or his/her duly authorized representative, and the Building Official; 
(4)  Willful and deliberate disregard and violation of the construction building codes of the City or failure to comply with any lawful order of the Building Official; 
(5)  Misrepresentation of material facts by the applicant in obtaining a license; 
(6)  Fraudulent use of a license to obtain building permits for another, 
(7)  Carelessness or negligence in providing reasonable safety measures for the protection of workers and the public; 
(8)  Failure to obtain a building permit for any work as required by Title 060; or 
(9)  Suspension or revocation of the person's license (master or otherwise) which is required by the State. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation. The suspension of the license shall be for a period not to exceed one (1) year, and the revocation shall be for a period of more than one (1) year or may be a permanent revocation of that person's license. The suspension or revocation of a license shall not entitle the licensee to a refund of his/her license or application fees. 
(d)  Appeal. Any order of suspension or revocation of a license may be appealed to the Building Board of Appeals by filing a written notice of appeal with the Building Official, stating the exact reasons for the order of suspension or revocation, within ten (10) days of the order. The Building Board of Appeals shall hear the appeal within one (1) month. The decision of the Building Board of Appeals shall be final from which an appeal may be taken to Court in accordance with the laws of the State. 
(e)  Re-examination. The administrating board may require a person whose license has been suspended or revoked to be reexamined before a license will be reinstated or reissued. 
(f)  Other remedies. These procedures for suspension or revocation of a license are cumulative and are in addition to the powers of the Building Official to issue stop work orders pursuant to Subsection 050.040.010(b) or pursuant to any other provisions of this Code and in addition to any other remedies which may be available to the City. 
(Code 1962 § 22.6-10; Code 1971 §§ 4-47, 4-168; 1-97; 8-08 § 2) 
050.040.080 - Violations. 
    In addition to any other remedial action allowed pursuant to this Title, any person violating any of the provisions of this article or any lawful rule or regulation of the Building Board of Appeals or any lawful order of the Building Official shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
(Code 1971 § 4-481; 1-97; 8-08 § 2) 
ARTICLE 050.050 - MISCELLANEOUS LICENSES 

050.050.010 - Commercial tree cutters. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the City and its citizens and to protect and preserve trees in the City by assuring a minimum level of knowledge and competency on the part of all persons engaged in the business of cutting trees within the City. 
(b)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of cutting, trimming, pruning or removing trees within the City without first procuring a license from the City. For purposes of this section, business is defined as any work for which a charge is made by a fixed sum, price, fee, wage, percentage, barter or any combination of these. 
(c)  Application procedure. Any person desiring a license pursuant to this section shall make application for the license at the office of the Director of Parks and Recreation ("Director") or his/her duly appointed representative on forms to be provided by the Director. Within ten (10) days after receipt of the application, the Director shall examine the applicant either orally or in writing, as he/she shall deem necessary, in order to determine the applicant's qualifications and competency to engage in the tree trimming and cutting business. At the discretion of the Director, the examination may also include an actual demonstration of the applicant's ability. No license shall be issued or renewed without the approval of the Director. 
(d)  Insurance. Every person granted a license under this section shall maintain at all times workers compensation insurance as required by state law, and public liability and property damage insurance in the following minimum amounts: seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) coverage per occurrence, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) coverage for bodily injury and death per person, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage. 
(e)  License fee and term. No license shall be issued hereunder until the applicant has paid an annual license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). The term of the license shall be from January 1 to December 31. 
(f)  Suspension or revocation of license. Upon the verified complaint in writing by any person or on his/her own motion, the Director may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder for violation of this Title or for violation of any rule or regulations promulgated pursuant to this Title. The complaint shall be submitted in writing to or made by the Director and shall state the date, time and place of the violation for which the suspension or revocation of said license is requested. Before suspending or revoking any license pursuant to this section, the Director shall first mail, by certified mail, or deliver to the license holder, a copy of the complaint and give notice to the license holder of a date, not less than five (5) days after the date of mailing or date of delivery of such notice, on which the Director will hold a hearing to determine whether or not such license should be suspended or revoked. 
(g)  Appeal of suspension or revocation. In the event of any suspension or revocation of a license by the Director, the licensee shall have the right to appeal such suspension or revocation to the City Manager and thence to the City Council. An appeal of the Director's decision must be submitted in writing to the Director within ten (10) days after the suspension or revocation of the license or, if an appeal from the decision of the City Manager, within ten (10) days of his/her decision. The City Manager or the City Council shall have the power to affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Director or City Manager, respectively. The decision of the City Council shall be final from which an appeal may be taken to court in accordance with the laws of the State. 
(33-83 § 6) 
050.050.020 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5-2018 , § 2, adopted March 1, 2018, repealed § 050.050.020, which pertained to bicycle licenses and derived from Code 1971 § 9-11. 
ARTICLE 050.060 - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 

050.060.010 - Lodging. 
    The keeper of every hotel, motel or rooming house shall keep a register, and every guest shall be required to register therein his/her name and address or place of residence. Such register shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable times and shall be subject to the inspection of any City police officer at any time on demand. 
(Code 1962 § 17.8-2; Code 1971 § 10-1) 
050.060.020 - Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers. 
(a)  Receipt or purchase of articles from minors restricted. No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall take or receive in pawn or pledge or shall purchase any article of property or thing of value from any minor unless such minor shall have the written consent of his/her parent or guardian to pawn or to sell such article, a copy of which consent shall be retained by the pawnbroker or dealer. 
(b)  Record keeping. Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall keep in his/her place of residence a well-bound book in which shall be clearly written, at the time of each loan, an accurate account and description of the goods, articles or things pawned, the amount of money loaned thereon, the time of pledging the same, the rate of interest to be paid on such loan and the name and residence of the person pawning or pledging the goods, articles or things. In addition, such book shall contain the following information: number of loan, name of pledgor, address of pledgor, articles pledged, amount of loan, rate per month, time loan is to run, when due, when redeemed, notice sent, when advertised, when sold, amount realized, excess over loan and interest, purchaser, address of purchaser and remarks. The entries therein shall be in the English language, and the book shall have an alphabetical index of the names of the pledgors. The book shall, at all reasonable hours of the day, be open to the inspection of the City police officers. 
(c)  Inspection generally. Any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall exhibit any goods or personal property which may have been left with them or purchased by them, to City police officers upon request. 
(Code 1962 § 16.8; Code 1971 §§ 16-3-16-5) 
050.060.030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-96, § 1, repealed § 050.060.030. 
050.060.040 - Distribution of commercial and noncommercial handbills. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have the following meanings ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates that City Council intended a different meaning: 
    Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature: 
a.  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or 
b.  Which directs attention to any business, mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales; 
c.  Which directs attention to or attempts to influence political or religious beliefs or attitudes for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting political or religious interests; or 
d.  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind. 
    Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by state law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States or in accordance with federal statutes or regulations, and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year and sold to the public. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept the same. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon: 
(1)  Any public place, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to individuals then present in or upon such public place; and 
(2)  Any private place without first having obtained the permission of the owner, lessee or person having control of such private place. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, hand out or circulate any handbill in any place, under any circumstances, which does not have printed on the cover, front or back the name and address of the following: 
(1)  The person who printed, wrote and compiled or manufactured the same; and 
(2)  The person who caused the same to be distributed; provided, however, that in the case of a fictitious person or club, in addition to such fictitious name, the true names and addresses of the owners, managers or agents of the person sponsoring said handbill shall also appear thereon. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution of mail by the United States or to newspapers. 
(f)  This section shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any ordinance either prohibiting, regulating or licensing canvassers, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants or any person using the public streets or places for any private business or enterprise or for commercial sales. 
(Code 1971 § 11-30) 
050.060.041 - Alcoholic beverage licenses, elimination of 500-foot rule. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of C.R.S. § 12-47-313, the City hereby eliminates the five-hundred-foot requirement from any public or parochial school or the principal campus of any college, university or seminary. 
(20-84 § 1; 8-98 § 1) 
050.060.050 - Violations. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
ARTICLE 050.070 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

050.070.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have the following meanings ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates that City Council intended a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore , Adult video store or adult novelty store means a business having as a substantial and significant portion of its stock and trade, revenues, space or advertising budget resulting from the sale, rental or viewing one (1) or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar business, whether alcoholic beverages are served or not, which regularly features: 
(1)  Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment or other similar business and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or other similar professional person licensed by the State engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar business that offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons live performances characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas, or with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and that advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television, or that offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a business where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown for any form of consideration and which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar business that, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
    Church means a church or place of religious worship and institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings and other activities. The term church shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any domination are held. 
    Employee means a person who works or performs in and/or for business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. 
    Good moral character , as used within the adult entertainment establishment licensing provisions of this Code, is defined as one who has not engaged in a specified criminal act within the times set forth in this article. 
    Licensing officer , when used in conjunction with licensee of adult entertainment establishments, means the City Manager whose function is to review adult entertainment establishment license applications and either issue a license or deny the license based upon the licensing provisions set forth in this article. 
    Manager is an operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by a business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the business. 
    Massage parlor means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar professional person licensed by the State. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered an as incidental or accessory service. 
    Material means any physical object, facsimile, recording, transcription, pictorial representation, motion picture or reproduction, whether mechanical, electrical or chemical, which is used as a means of communicating sensation or emotion to human beings to or through the visual, aural or tactile senses. 
    Nudity or state of nudity is the appearance of more than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the human bare buttocks, or the anus, male genitals, female genitals or the female breasts below the top of the nipple; or a state of dress that fails to opaquely cover more than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the human buttocks, or the anus, male genitals, female genitals, pubic region or aureole or the female breast below the top of the nipple. 
    Obscene material means material that: 
(1)  Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of the average person, applying a contemporary state-wide standard; 
(2)  Depicts or describes hard-core sexual conduct; and 
(3)  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
    Obscene performance means any performance that: 
(1)  Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of the average person, applying a contemporary state-wide standard; 
(2)  Presents or shows hard-core sexual conduct; and 
(3)  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
    Operator is and includes the owner, permit or license holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises. 
    Peep booth means a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space. 
    Performance means a presentation or exhibition, whether live or recorded, in a public place or place open to the public or to a segment thereof at which an admission fee is charged or attendance is conditioned upon the presentation of a membership card or other token. 
    Permittee and/or licensee is a person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as the applicant on the application for a permit and/or license. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
    Principal owner means any person owning, directly or beneficially, ten (10) percent or more of the ownership interest in any legal entity other than a corporation. No stockholder of a corporation shall be considered a principal owner. 
    Private room means a room in an adult motel that is not a peep booth, has a bed and bath in the room or adjacent room and is used primarily for lodging. 
    Promote means to produce, direct, manufacture, sell, provide, distribute, present or exhibit for consideration, to offer or agree to do any of these things for consideration, or to have a financial interest in any of these things. 
    Sadomasochistic material or sadomasochistic performance means that material or performance that: 
(1)  Taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of the average person, applying a contemporary state-wide standard; 
(2)  Depicts, presents, shows or describes flagellation, mutilation or torture, actual or simulated, in a sexual context; and 
(3)  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
    Sexual encounter establishment means a business or commercial establishment that, as one (1) of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of the exposure of specified anatomical areas, or when one (1) or more of the persons exposes any specified anatomical area. 
    Specified anatomical areas are defined as including: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks and female breast below a point above the top of the nipple. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if completely and/or opaquely covered. 
(3)  Areas included within the definition of nudity hereinabove. 
    Specified criminal acts include sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity, sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling prostitution, sexual performance by a child, possession of child pornography, public lewdness, indecent exposure, indecency with a child, engaging in organized criminal activity as defined by state statutes, sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault, as defined by state statutes, incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as defined by state statutes, kidnapping or aggravated kidnapping as defined in state statutes, bribery or retaliation as described in state statutes in violation of the Colorado Controlled Substances Act or Dangerous Drugs Act punishable as a felony, Class A Misdemeanor or Class B Misdemeanor, criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses, pandering, tax violations associated with sexually oriented businesses, crimes involving the use of or trafficking narcotic drugs, or violent acts against persons or property. 
    Specified sexual activities means acts, simulated acts, exhibitions, representations, depictions or descriptions of: 
(1)  Human male genitals in a discernable and evident state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
(3)  Intrusions, however slight, actual or simulated, by any object, any part of an animal's body or any part of a person's body into the genital or anal openings of any person's body. 
(4)  Cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, masturbation, bestiality, lewd exhibition of genitals or excretory function, actual or simulated, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism and zooerasty. 
(5)  Flagellation, mutilation or torture, actual or simulated, including sadomasochism in a sexual context. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means any business arrangement, gift or other similar legal devise that transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. 
(5-97) 
050.070.015 - License required. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment, as defined herein, shall be permitted to operate within the City except as herein provided, and any said operation without a license is unlawful. It shall further be unlawful and an offense if a person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business and/or adult entertainment establishment and said person knows or reasonably should know that: (1) the business does not have a sexually oriented business and/or adult entertainment establishment license; (2) the business has a license that is under suspension; (3) the business has a license that has been revoked; or (4) the business has a license that has been expired. Further, any applicant must first obtain zoning approval prior to the issuance of a license, which zoning approval is subject to relevant zoning regulations contained in Title 070 of this Code, and said decision of the applicant's zoning request shall be processed in the same manner and course as any other zoning request. 
(b)  Responsibilities . 
(1)  The licensing officer is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling sexually oriented business licenses for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. 
(2)  The Planning Director is responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a license application has been submitted complies with all locational requirements of Title 070 of this Code and for processing the zoning application request through the special review process. 
(3)  The Police Department is responsible for providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time periods set forth herein. 
(4)  The Building Inspector is responsible for inspecting a proposed sexually oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and ordinances. 
(c)  No later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of this ordinance, all adult entertainment establishments lawfully operating within the city on or before the effective date of this ordinance shall apply for an adult entertainment establishment license. If an application is not received within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this ordinance, such existing adult entertainment establishment must cease operations. Except where expressly provided otherwise, the applicant is permitted a six-month amortization period from the effective date of this ordinance. After the expiration of said amortization period, the licensing officer shall approve or deny the license subject to the provisions contained herein. 
(d)  The annual license fee for a new adult entertainment establishment shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) for a transfer of location or ownership; and four hundred dollars ($400.00) for a renewal of a license. 
(e)  A license may be issued only for one (1) adult entertainment establishment at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership or corporation that desires to operate more than one (1) adult entertainment establishment must obtain a license for each establishment. 
(5-97; Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 4, 8-2-2018) 
050.070.020 - Application and conditions of license. 
(a)  The completed applications shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his/her complete legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is eighteen (18) year of age. 
(2)  If the applicant is a legal entity, the person shall state its complete name, the date and place of its organization, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of the state in which it is organized and, if it is organized under the laws of a state other than Colorado, that it is registered to do business in Colorado, the names and capacity of all officers, directors, managers and principal owners, and the name of the registered agent and the address of the registered office for service of process, if any. 
(3)  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he/she must state the sexually oriented business's fictitious name. 
(4)  The applicant's driver's license number, social security number and his/her state or federally issued tax identification number. 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to Paragraph (1) or (2) above have been convicted of a specified criminal activity for which: 
a.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or 
c.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction and the date of release from confinement for the last convictions, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. 
(6)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to Paragraph (1) or (2) above has had a previous license under this or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another town or county denied, suspended or revoked and, if so, the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation. 
(7)  Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to Paragraph (1) or (2) above has been a principal owner of a legal entity which license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked and, if so, the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(8)  Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to Paragraph (1) or (2) above holds any other permits and/or licenses under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another municipality and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses. 
(9)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, address and telephone number, if any. 
(10)  The single adult entertainment establishment classification of license for which the applicant is filing. 
(11)  The mailing address and residential address of the applicant and any other individual listed pursuant to Paragraph (1) or (2) above. 
(12)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The licensing officer may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. If the sexually oriented business has or will have a peep booth or booths, the sketch shall show the locations of each manager's station and designate any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(13)  A current certificate and straight-line drawing within thirty (30) days prior to an initial application by a Colorado registered land surveyor depicting: (1) the property lines and the structures of the property to be certified; (2) the property lines of any residential zone district, church, public or private school, child care center, public community center, park, fairground, recreation center, publicly owned or maintained building opened for use by the general public, any alcoholic beverage establishment located in the City at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, any area designated as an urban renewal project area pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-25-107, within five hundred (500) feet of the property to be certified; (3) the property lines of any arterial or major or collector roadway within two hundred (200) feet of the property to be certified; and (4) the property lines and structures of any other sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. 
(14)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a license as the applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each principal owner of the applicant must sign the application for a license as the applicant. 
(b)  In the event that the licensing officer determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly or inaccurately completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he/she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten (10) days to properly or accurately complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. 
(c)  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. 
(5-97) 
050.070.025 - Duty to supplement application. 
    Applicants for a license under this article shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this article in the event that said information changes in any way from that which is stated in the original application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty (30) days from the date of such change shall be grounds for suspension of the respective license. 
050.070.030 - Investigation of application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business license properly filed with the licensing officer and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the licensing officer shall immediately stamp the application as received and send photocopies of the application to the Planning Department, the Police Department, the Building Inspector and any other department responsible under law for investigating compliance, such as the Fire Department. Each department shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law. Said investigations shall be completed by all departments within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the application by the licensing officer. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department shall indicate on the application its approval or disapproval of the application and the reasons therefor, the date and the signature of the department official investigating. The Police Department shall be required only to provide the information regarding the applicant as specified herein and shall not be required to approve or disapprove an application. 
(b)  The Building Inspector, Planning Department or other department shall disapprove an application if it finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the City. After its indication of approval or disapproval, said department shall immediately return the application to the licensing officer. 
(5-97; 26-99 § 2) 
050.070.035 - Granting or denial of license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall grant or deny an application for a license within sixty (60) days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the sixtieth day, unless the applicant requests in writing and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the application shall be deemed granted, unless the licensing officer notifies the applicant of a denial of the application in writing and states the reasons for that denial. 
(b)  Grant of application for license . 
(1)  The licensing officer shall grant the application unless one (1) or more of the criteria set forth below is present. 
(2)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall also indicate that sexually oriented businesses are subject to prohibitions against public indecency pursuant to C.R.S. §§ 18-7-208 and 18-7-301. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be easily read at any time. 
(c)  Denial of application for license . 
(1)  The licensing officer shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
a.  An applicant is under eighteen (18) year of age. 
b.  An applicant is overdue on his/her payment to the City of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him/her or imposed upon him/her in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
c.  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
d.  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have been disapproved by an inspecting department pursuant to provisions of this article. 
e.  The application or license fees have not been paid. 
f.  An applicant or the proposed business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this article or any pertinent provisions of this Code, including but not limited to, the zoning locational requirements for a sexually oriented business. 
g.  The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance or court order. 
h.  The applicant has a license under this Title which has been suspended or revoked within the previous twelve (12) months. 
i.  The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth herein. 
j.  The applicant knowingly has in his/her employ an employee who does not have a valid license, as required by this article. 
k.  The applicant is not of good moral character, as defined by this article. 
(2)  If the licensing officer denies the application, he/she shall notify the applicant in writing of the denial and state the reasons for the denial pursuant to the time periods set forth hereinabove. 
(3)  Whenever an application is denied, the City Clerk shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. The applicant has the right to appeal any adverse decision by the licensing officer and must notify the City Clerk of such appeal by requesting in writing a hearing before the City Council within ten (10) days after receipt of notification of the denial. A public hearing on said denial shall be held by the City Council within thirty (30) days thereafter unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of time on the public hearing. 
(4)  Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the application, his/her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application, or his/her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation required by this article, shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he/she or she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the licensing officer. 
(5-97) 
050.070.040 - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked, and may be renewed only by making application as provided in this article. Application for renewal of a license shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the license, and the original survey filed with the original application shall be sufficient for renewal purposes. If a renewal application is made fewer than thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the license, the expiration date of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  If, subsequent to denial of a renewal, the licensing officer finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the license has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial becomes final. 
(5-97) 
050.070.045 - Suspension of license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he/she determines that a licensee, or an employee of a licensee, has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as required by this article; 
(3)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulations, whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such a statute, code, ordinance or regulation violation, the licensing officer shall promptly notify the licensee of the violation and shall allow the licensee a seven-day period in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven-day period, the licensing officer shall forthwith suspend the license and shall notify the licensee of the suspension; 
(4)  Engaged in a license transfer contrary to this article. In the event that the licensing officer suspends a license on the grounds that a licensee engaged in a license transfer contrary to this article, the licensing officer shall forthwith notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable section of this article has been satisfied; 
(5)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation provisions in this article; 
(6)  Where the licensing officer has reason to believe that a violation of this Title has occurred in a deliberate or willful manner, or that the public health, safety and welfare require immediate action on the part of the licensing officer, the licensing officer may summarily suspend the license of an adult use establishment or an adult use employee, and said notice of suspension shall contain notice that the adult use establishment or adult use employee may request a hearing to contest the suspension. Should the adult use establishment or the adult use employee, within ten (10) days after service of the suspension notice, request a hearing on the suspension, the licensing officer shall set a hearing date within thirty (30) days. No suspension shall exceed thirty (30) days unless prior to expiration of the thirty-day suspension a revocation proceeding is commenced; or 
(7)  The licensing officer may impose a civil penalty against the licensee for any violations meriting a suspension or revocation, as provided herein. If the licensee fails to pay the civil penalty, the licensing officer may provide that, at the end of the period of suspension, if the civil penalty remains unpaid, the license shall be revoked. 
(b)  The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the statute, code, ordinance or regulation has been corrected. 
(5-97) 
050.070.050 - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business license upon determining that: 
(1)  A cause of suspension in Section 050.070.045 of this article and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months; 
(2)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that enhanced the applicant's opportunity to obtain a license; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances (as defined in C.R.S. Part 3 of article 22 of Title 12) on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(5)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(6)  A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time period set forth herein has not elapsed; 
(7)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person was an employee of the sexually oriented business at the time the offense was committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license; 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City or State for any taxes or fees; 
(9)  A licensee or an employee of a licensee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises or personally engaged in the same; or 
(10)  The licensee has operated more than one (1) sexually oriented business within the same building, structure or portion thereof. 
(b)  When the licensing officer revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date the revocation became effective. 
(5-97) 
050.070.055 - Transfer of license. 
(a)  A licensee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application for license. 
(b)  A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another person unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements: 
(1)  Obtains an amendment to the license from the licensing officer that provides that he/she is now the licensee, which amendment may be obtained only if he/she has completed and properly filed an application with the licensing officer, setting forth the information required in this article; and 
(2)  Pays a transfer fee of twenty (20) percent of the original annual license fee. 
(c)  No license may be transferred when the licensing officer has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee. 
(d)  A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another location. 
(e)  Any attempt to transfer a license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the license shall be deemed revoked. 
(5-97) 
050.070.057 - Display of specified anatomical areas or nonlive entertainment or performances; establishments serving and/or selling liquor. 
(a)  No retail licensee for on-premises consumption of liquor shall suffer or permit any person to appear on said licensed premises displaying specified anatomical areas or nonlive performances or entertainment exhibiting specified sexual activities, as defined in Article 050.070 of the Code. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of an offense against the City, punishable as provided in Section 010.020.080 of this Code. 
(c)  If the owner, operator, licensee, lessor, lessee, manager, employee or any other person participating in the operation of a commercial establishment located within the City at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises shall be convicted of any of the offenses herein, the Local Liquor Licensing Board may take appropriate action, including, but not limited to, suspension and revocation of the establishment's respective liquor license. 
(5-97) 
050.070.060 - Judicial review. 
    After denial of an application, denial of a renewal of an application, suspension or revocation of a license and a hearing before the City Council as set forth hereinabove, the applicant may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(5-97) 
050.070.065 - Sexually oriented business employees general requirements. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult use entertainment shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee shall be of good moral character, as defined herein. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he/she shall first obtain a sexually oriented business employee license, as set forth hereinbelow. 
(c)  Prohibitions. Notwithstanding any other applicable prohibitions in this Code, employees shall not be permitted to mingle with patrons in a nude state and are prohibited from kissing or touching patrons. Further, it shall be unlawful for any employee of a sexually oriented business to receive tips from patrons other than through the receipt of such tips from one (1) or more tip boxes or other containers designed to receive said tips. All tips for such employee shall be placed by the patron of the sexually oriented business into the tip box. The tip boxes for the sexually oriented business patrons, as provided in this section, shall be identified by the posting of one (1) or more signs that must be conspicuously visible to the patrons on the premises in letters at least one (1) inch high, to read as follows: "All tips are to be placed in the tip box and not handed directly to employees. Any physical contact between a patron and employees is strictly prohibited." 
(d)  Violation. Violation of the provisions of this article or the rules and regulations of the licensing officer shall subject an employee to suspension or revocations of the license. 
(5-97) 
050.070.070 - Employee license required. 
    It shall be unlawful, and a person commits a misdemeanor, if he/she works as an employee of a sexually oriented business without first obtaining an employee's license. 
(5-97) 
050.070.075 - Application for employee license. 
(a)  An employee shall submit an application for an employee's license on a form to be provided by the licensing officer. The application shall contain the applicant's name, address, date of birth, phone number, driver's license number and any other information required therein. 
(b)  The licensing officer shall refer the employee license application to the Police Department for investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be completed within ten (10) days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the licensing officer shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in any report required to be filed with the Police Department or other department; 
(2)  The applicant is under age eighteen (18); 
(3)  The applicant has failed to provide the information required by this section; 
(4)  The license fee has not been paid; 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in this article; 
(6)  The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this article; or 
(7)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the City within two (2) years of the date of the current application. 
(c)  A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual review by the licensing officer upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the licensing officer and the Police Department that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal act or committed any act during the existence of the previous license period that would be grounds to deny the initial license application. 
(d)  The employee license shall be subject to a fifty-dollar ($50.00) fee, and a renewal shall be subject to a twenty-five-dollar ($25.00) fee. 
(5-97) 
050.070.080 - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Building Inspection Department, Police Department and Fire Department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his/her agent commits a misdemeanor if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business. 
(5-97; 26-99 § 2) 
050.070.085 - Records and reports; authority to promulgate. 
(a)  Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the licensing officer and the Fire Marshal to implement this article and carry out its purpose. By applying for a license under this article, an individual, partnership or corporation shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the licensing officer of the powers given herein and in the manner herein specified. 
(b)  The licensing officer is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or this Code as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(5-97) 
050.070.090 - General requirements. 
    In addition to the special requirements contained in the Zoning Code, each licensed premises shall: 
(1)  Conform to the requirements of the International Building Code, as adopted in this Code, unless a requirement in the International Building Code conflicts with a special requirement contained in this article. 
(2)  Conform to the requirements of the International Fire Code, as adopted in this Code; except to the extent that a requirement in the International Fire Code, as adopted in this Code, conflicts with a special requirement contained in this article. 
(3)  In all cases wherein the occupant capacity, as determined by the Fire Inspector, is at least fifty (50) persons, exclusive of attendants and assistants, such structure shall have electric, battery-operated emergency lights using reliable type storage batteries provided with suitable maintenance in properly charged condition; provided that dry batteries shall not be used, and further provided that electric storage batteries shall be approved by the Fire Inspector for their intended use and shall comply with the building codes, as adopted by the City; and further provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to adult motion picture theaters that are open-air theaters designed to permit viewing by patrons seated in automobiles. 
(4)  Conform to the requirements of the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the City. 
(5)  Conform to all other ordinances of the City. 
For purposes of this section, the City shall render a decision regarding conformance to the general and special requirements noted in this article within forty-five (45) days of an application for a license. 
(5-97; 8-08 § 2) 
050.070.095 - Adult bookstore, adult novelty store and adult video store requirements. 
    In addition to the general requirements noted in Section 050.070.090, an adult bookstore shall observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  All materials and novelties shall be so displayed that they cannot be seen by anyone other than customers who have entered the licensed premises. 
(2)  If recordings are offered for sale and customers may listen to them while on the licensed premises, soundproof booths or rooms shall be available for use by customers who desire to listen and each such booth or room shall have: 
a.  One (1) clear window, facing the major portion of the licensed premises, covering not less than one-fourth (1/4) of the wall area into which the window is set, which window shall not be covered or obscured in any manner while the booth or room is in use, except when the booth or room is used for viewing motion pictures. 
b.  Sufficient seating to accommodate the expected number of persons who will occupy the booth or room at one (1) time. 
c.  The number of persons who may occupy the booth or room at one (1) time clearly stated on or near the door to the booth or room, and only that number shall be permitted inside the booth or room at one (1) time. 
d.  The door opening into the booth or room is incapable of being locked or otherwise fastened so that it will freely open from either side. 
(3)  It is unlawful for anyone to distribute for commercial purposes, sell or offer for sale any device, instrument or paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others. Such devices include but are not limited to phallic-shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains, bather restraints, racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing implements (excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry) or other tools of sadomasochistic abuse. 
(5-97) 
050.070.100 - Adult arcade, adult motel and peep booth requirements. 
    In addition to the general requirements noted above, a person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business that exhibits on the premises in a peep booth a film video cassette, or other video reproduction that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight (8) feet. The diagram shall also designate the place at which this license will be conspicuously posted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The licensing officer may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(2)  At least one (1) employee must be on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the City. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video display equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more managers' stations designated, the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the managers' stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. The view area shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times, and no patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this article. 
(6)  No door, screen or other covering shall be placed or allowed to remain on any peep booth, and no holes or openings shall be placed or allowed to remain in the wall between any two (2) adjacent peep booths. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in Paragraph (5) above remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or persons at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has not been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this article. 
(8)  No peep booth may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any time. No holes, commonly known as "glory holes," shall be allowed in the walls or partitions that separate each viewing room from an adjoining viewing room or restroom. 
(9)  A person having a duty under this section commits a misdemeanor if he/she fails to fulfill that duty. 
(10)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access and an illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles, as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(5-97) 
050.070.105 - Adult motion picture theater requirements. 
    In addition to the general requirements contained hereinabove, an adult motion pictures theater shall observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  Each adult motion picture booth shall have a rectangular-shaped entrance not less than two (2) feet wide nor less than six (6) feet high, and there shall be a door, curtain or other closure closing off the entrance while the booth is in use, which closure shall open outward from the inside of the booth or be capable of being pushed aside. 
(2)  Each adult motion picture booth shall have sufficient seats to accommodate the maximum number of persons expected to use the booth. The maximum number of persons who may occupy a booth shall be stated on or near the entrance, and only that number shall be permitted to be in a booth at any time. 
(3)  Adult motion picture booths, if there is more than one (1) in an adult motion picture theater, shall open onto a common corridor, passageway or area that has an exit way or doorway, as defined in the International Building Code, as adopted in this Code, separate from the other required exits of the licensed premises. This exit way or doorway need not be in use during the normal course of business; however, an exit doorway opening directly to the exterior, whether it is the only exit doorway or the last exit doorway in an exit way, shall be equipped with approved panic hardware, as provided in the International Building Code. 
(4)  Adult motion picture booths shall be lighted, whenever film material is not being shown, such that the light intensity at every point thirty (30) inches above the floor is not less than one-half (1/2) foot-candle, but may be in complete darkness when film material is being shown. Common corridors, passageways or areas shall be constantly lighted when in use such that the light intensity at every point thirty (30) inches from the floor is not less than five-hundredths (.05) of a foot candle. 
(5)  Partitions between adult motion picture booths shall be considered nonbearing partitions, but they shall be so constructed as to have a fire-resistance rating of not less than one (1) hour, or shall have approved sprinklers. 
(6)  An adult motion picture theater having only a hall or auditorium for the showing of film material shall be considered a "place of assembly" within the meaning of the Uniform Building Code and shall conform to the requirements thereof. 
(7)  An adult motion picture theater having both adult motion picture booths and a hall or auditorium shall conform to the special requirements for both facilities, provided that where the special requirements allow common elements to be utilized or constructed, this may be done with the express approval of the Building Inspector. 
(8)  There shall be provided within or adjacent to the common corridor, passageway or area in adult motion picture theaters having adult motion picture booths, adequate lavatories equipped with running water, hand-cleansing soap or detergent and sanitary towels or hand-drying devices; common towels are prohibited. 
(9)  An adult motion picture theater designed to permit viewing by patrons seated in automobiles shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the licensed premises so screened, that the projected film material may not be seen from any public right-of-way or residential property. 
(5-97; 8-08 § 2) 
050.070.110 - Adult cabaret, adult theater and adult motel requirements. 
    In addition to the general requirements contained hereinabove, an adult cabaret, adult theater and adult motel establishment shall observe the following special elements: 
(1)  Any person employed or working in the licensed premises as a dancer shall, while dancing, perform upon a stage or similar structure specially designed for such dancing. Stages shall conform to the requirements of the International Building Code, as adopted in this Code, including the requirements for appurtenant rooms if such appurtenant rooms are used by the establishment, provided that the dancers shall be provided with dressing rooms that are not part of or used by the public as restrooms. 
(2)  Where a dancer performs upon a platform or other small structure designed to hold a small number of persons that is not a stage nor equipped to be a stage for theatrical presentations, the platform shall be level and of sturdy construction, shall be securely fastened to the floor or wall during performances and shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet from patrons to be seated. Steps and handrails shall be provided so that the dancer may ascend to the top of the platform safely under the normal operating conditions of the establishment in all cases wherein the top of the platform is more than eight (8) inches from the surface upon which the platform rests. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of a sexually oriented business to receive tips from patrons except as set forth herein. A licensee that desires to provide for tips from its patrons shall establish one (1) or more boxes or other containers to receive tips. All tips for such employees shall be placed by the patron of the sexually oriented business into the tip box. A sexually oriented business that provides tip boxes for its patrons, as provided for in this section, shall post one (1) or more signs to be conspicuously visible to the patrons of the premises in letters at least one (1) inch high to read as follows: "All tips are to be placed in the tip box and not handed directly to employees. Any physical contact between a patron and employees is strictly prohibited." 
(5-97; 8-08 § 2) 
050.070.115 - Admission of minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee or operator to admit or to permit the admission of minors under the age of eighteen (18) years within a licensed premises. 
(5-97) 
050.070.120 - Sale to minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor, adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(5-97) 
050.070.125 - Cleaning of licensed premises requirements. 
    Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises, but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(5-97) 
050.070.130 - Self-inspection of licensee to premises. 
    The licensee of a licensed premises, or his/her designated representative, shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month, and shall record his/her findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(5-97) 
050.070.135 - Sealing of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
    A licensed premises, or any part thereof, may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his/her finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him/her or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within twenty-four (24) hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe," as may be appropriate. 
(5-97) 
050.070.140 - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
    A licensed premises, or any part thereof, which has been determined to be unsanitary or unsafe may be declared a nuisance and such abated by the City at the licensee's expense. 
(5-97) 
050.070.145 - Interference with inspection. 
    No person shall interfere with or obstruct inspectors in the performance of their official duties hereunder. 
(5-97) 
050.070.150 - Tampering with notices, etc. 
    No person shall mutilate, obstruct, tear down, remove or otherwise tamper with any official notice, seal or poster unless authorized to do so by the licensing officer under this article. 
(5-97) 
050.070.155 - False statements prohibited. 
    No person shall knowingly make, induce or cause to be made by another a false, untrue or misleading statement or a signature of another on a certificate, application, registration, report or other document required to be prepared pursuant to this article. No person shall knowingly make a false, untrue or misleading oral statement to the licensing officer as to any matter investigated by the licensing officer. 
(5-97) 
050.070.160 - Alterations prohibited. 
    No person shall reproduce, alter or cause to be reproduced or altered a license, report, certificate or other document issued by the licensing officer if the purpose of the reproduction or alteration is the evasion or violation of a provision of this article or any other law. 
(5-97) 
050.070.165 - Immunity from prosecution. 
    All officers and employees of the City who are acting within the scope of their authority and duties under this article shall be immune from prosecution, civil and criminal, for trespass upon real property. 
(5-97) 
050.070.170 - Violations. 
    Any person who knowingly and willingly: 
(1)  Operates, procures or acquiesces in the operation of an unlicensed premises contrary to the relevant requirements of this Code; 
(2)  Admits, procures or acquiesces in the admission of a minor within a licensed premises; 
(3)  Sells, barters or gives, or offers to sell, barter or give, or in an offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult arcade, adult motion picture theater, massage parlor, adult theater or peep booth; 
(4)  Maintains, procures or acquiesces in the maintaining of a licensed premises in an unsanitary or unsafe condition contrary to the provisions of this article; 
(5)  Having a duty to conduct the self-inspection required herein, fails or refuses, or procures or acquiesces in a failure or refusal to conduct said self-inspection; 
(6)  Interferes with or procures or acquiesces in an interference with an inspector contrary to relevant provisions of this Code; or 
(7)  Maintains, procures or acquiesces in the maintenance of a nuisance on a licensed premises; 
shall be guilty of a violation of this Code, as amended. For violations that are of a continuing nature, each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(5-97) 
050.070.175 - Civil penalties. 
(a)  In addition to or in lieu of the penalties that may be otherwise imposed, the licensing officer may assess the following civil penalties: 
(1)  A person who operates or attempts to operate an adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult arcade, massage parlor, adult motion picture theater, adult theater or peep booth without having first obtained a license under this article may be assessed a civil penalty of up to three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(2)  An applicant for a license under this article, and any officer, director, partner, agent or attorney of such applicant, who knowingly makes a false statement or provides false information on any document or paper accompanying and forming a part of such application, shall be assessed a civil penalty of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such false statement or false item of information. 
(3)  A licensee or employee who fails or refuses to renew his/her license within the period granted herein may be assessed a civil penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day beyond said period that said refusal or failure continues, but not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each refusal or failure. 
(4)  A licensee, and any agent, officer, servant or employee of a licensee, who maintains a nuisance on the licensed premises or permits the licensed premises to be unsanitary or unsafe may be assessed a civil penalty of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the nuisance or unsafe or unsanitary condition continues. 
(5)  A licensee who moves his/her licensed premises without approval by the licensing officer or who changes the name of his/her business without notifying the licensing officer may be assessed a civil penalty up to three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(6)  A licensee or employee who does not keep the records and make the reports required by any of the agencies herein may be assessed a civil penalty of up to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation. 
(7)  A licensee, any agent, officer, servant or employee of a licensee who fails to correct violations of the general and applicable special requirements for the licensed premises may be assessed a civil penalty of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation observed and not corrected within the period prescribed by the licensing officer, the Building Official or the Fire Department, as the case may be. 
(8)  Any person who aids or participates in a violation for which a civil penalty may be assessed under this article shall be considered a principal in the violation and may be assessed a civil penalty of up to the maximum amount prescribed for that violation. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the City from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include but shall not be limited to an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages. All remedies and penalties provided for herein shall be cumulative and independently available to the City, and the City shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full extent allowed by law. 
(5-97) 
050.070.180 - Assessment and recovery of civil penalty. 
    Civil penalties shall be assessed by the licensing official based upon findings certified by the Building Official or Fire Department. 
(5-97) 
050.070.185 - Criminal penalties. 
    If any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of the criminal provisions, such person upon conviction of such offense shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed one (1) year, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each violation of noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(5-97) 
ARTICLE 050.080 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA 

050.080.010 - Purpose. 
    The City Council intends to regulate the use, acquisition, production and distribution of medical marijuana in a manner consistent with Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, C.R.S. Article 43.3 of Title 12 and any other applicable laws and regulations of the state. Nothing within this article is intended to promote or condone the production, use, sale or distribution of medical marijuana other than in compliance with applicable state law. 
(5-97) 
050.080.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have the following meanings ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates that City Council intended a different meaning: 
    Amendment 64 shall mean Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Business manager means the individual designated by the owner of the medical marijuana business and registered with the City as the person responsible for all operations of the business during the owner's absence from the business premises. 
    City Code means the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code, as amended. 
    Colorado Medical Marijuana Code or CMMC shall mean C.R.S. Article 43.3 of Title 12, as amended. 
    Colorado Retail Marijuana Code shall mean C.R.S. Article 43.3 of Title 12, as amended. 
    Cultivation shall have the same meaning as set forth in Article 070.070 of the City Code. 
    Good cause shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
    Licensed premises means the premises specified in an application for a license under this article, owned or in the possession of the licensee, and within which the licensee is authorized to operate a medical marijuana business in accordance with the provisions of this article and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
    Licensee means a person as defined and licensed pursuant to this article and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
    Local licensing authority shall mean the Glenwood Springs City Clerk, and any hearing officers appointed to assist the City Clerk, to approve or disapprove the issuance of licenses pursuant to this article, and to administer other provisions set forth herein. 
    Medical marijuana means marijuana grown and sold, for Medical Use pursuant to the provisions of this article, the Medical Marijuana Amendment and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
    Medical Marijuana Amendment shall mean Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Medical marijuana business shall have the same meaning as set forth in Article 070.070 of the City Code. 
    Medical marijuana center shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. See C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104(8) and § 12-43.3-402, as amended. 
    Medical marijuana-infused product shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. See C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104(9), as amended. 
    Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. See C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104 (10) and § 12-43.3-404, as amended. 
    Medical use shall have the same meaning as is set forth in the Medical Marijuana Amendment, or as may be more fully defined in any applicable state law or regulation. 
    Optional premises shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. See C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104(11), as amended. 
    Optional premises cultivation operation shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. See C.R.S. § 12-43.3-104(12) and § 12-43.3-403, as amended. 
    Patient shall have the same meaning as is set forth in the Medical Marijuana Amendment, or as may be more fully defined in any applicable state law or regulation. 
    Person means a natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation, limited liability company, or organization, or a manager, agent, owner, director, servant, officer, or employee thereof. 
    Premises means a distinct and definite location, which may include a building, a part of a building, a room, or any other definite contiguous area. 
    Primary caregiver shall have the same meaning as is set forth in the Medical Marijuana Amendment, or as may be more fully defined in any applicable state law or regulation. 
    Retail marijuana means marijuana grown and sold pursuant to the provisions of the Retail Marijuana Amendment and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
    Retail marijuana establishment shall have the same meaning as set forth in Article 050.090 of the City Code. 
(15-11; 22-13; Ord. No. 17-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-20-2015; Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 4, 8-2-2018) 
050.080.030 - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a medical marijuana business without first having obtained a license to operate pursuant to the provisions of this article and having paid the fee therefor. The licensing requirement applies to all medical marijuana businesses that exist on the effective date of the ordinance adopting this provision and any medical marijuana businesses established after such effective date. An application for a business that exists on the effective date of the adopting ordinance shall be filed with the City on or before a date set by resolution of the City Council. 
(a)  A medical marijuana business holding a valid City business license that commenced operation prior to the effective date of the ordinance adopting this article, may continue to operate pending final action on an application for a license pursuant to this article, when the medical marijuana business: possesses a valid sales tax license from the City; and possesses a valid medical marijuana business license under the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code from the State of Colorado; and is located in a zone district where the business qualifies as a use permitted by right or is a preexisting non-conforming use. 
(b)  Any medical marijuana business commencing operation after the effective date of the ordinance adopting this article shall comply with the licensing requirements of this article, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, and any other applicable state or local laws and regulations. 
(c)  Pursuant to the provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, medical marijuana businesses shall be licensed by the City in at least one (1) of the following categories: 
(1)  Medical marijuana center. Such centers shall meet all criteria and requirements of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, as well as all other regulatory requirements applicable to medical marijuana centers set forth within this article and any other applicable state or local laws and regulations. 
(2)  Medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer. Such manufacturers shall meet all criteria and requirements of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, as well as all other regulatory requirements applicable to medical marijuana-infused products manufacturing set forth within this article and any other applicable state or local laws and regulations. 
(3)  Optional premises cultivation operation. Such operations shall meet all criteria and requirements of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, as well as all other regulatory requirements applicable to optional cultivation operations set forth within this article and any other applicable state or local laws and regulations. 
(d)  The licensing requirements set forth in this article shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by any other federal, state or local law, including, but not by way of limitation, a retail sales tax license, retail food establishment license, or development, zoning or building permit. 
(e)  No license for a medical marijuana center, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer or optional premises cultivation operation shall be issued by the City until a license for such use, at the location designated in the application, has been submitted or issued and the State license application fee has been received, by the Department of Revenue of the State of Colorado. 
(f)  The issuance of a license pursuant to this article does not create a defense, exception or provide immunity to any person in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have for the production, distribution or possession of marijuana. 
(g)  A separate license shall be required for each location from which a medical marijuana business is operated. 
(h)  All medical marijuana business licenses issued by the City shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date such license is issued. Renewal applications shall be filed at least forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of the existing license. 
(i)  Licensees shall report each transfer or change of ownership interest, change in business manager or change in financial interest on forms as required by the Local Licensing Authority. An application for such change shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to any such change, together with any required fees, to provide necessary time for the background check and processing of the application. 
(j)  If the State prohibits the sale, cultivation or other distribution of marijuana through medical marijuana businesses in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, any license issued by the City pursuant to this article shall be deemed to be immediately revoked by operation of law, with no ground for appeal or other redress on behalf of the licensees. 
(15-11; Ord. No. 17-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-20-2015) 
050.080.040 - Application. 
(a)  An application for a medical marijuana business license shall be made on the Colorado Business Medical Marijuana License Application, Colorado Associated Person and Associated Key Medical Marijuana License Application, Colorado Employee Key Medical Marijuana License Application and Colorado Support Employee Medical Marijuana License Application forms, as applicable, provided by the State of Colorado and any additional forms required by the Local Licensing Authority for such purposes. The application shall be used to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this article, the City Code, Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Medical Marijuana Amendment and any other applicable law, rule or regulation. In addition to general information required, the application shall include the following information: 
(1)  An operating plan for the proposed medical marijuana business which includes a description of the products and services to be provided by the business, including whether the business proposes to engage in the production of retail sale of food or other products for human ingestion, and whether any products or services will be provided at a location different than the address on the license application. 
(2)  A dimensioned floor plan of the licensed premises, clearly labeled, and indicating the principal uses of the floor area, including but not limited to: areas open to non-patients; areas open to employees only; private consulting areas; storage areas; retail sales areas and areas where medical marijuana will be distributed; production areas; and areas where caregiver services, other than the distribution or sale of marijuana, will occur. 
(3)  A security and lighting plan indicating how the applicant will comply with the requirements of the laws and regulations of the state and the City Code. 
(4)  An area map, drawn to scale, indicating, within a radius of five hundred (500) feet from the boundaries of the property upon which the medical marijuana business is located, the proximity of the property to any kindergarten through 12th grade public or private school and within a radius of nine hundred (900) feet of the proximity of the property to any other medical marijuana business ore retail marijuana establishment. 
(5)  Fingerprints, personal histories, and a statement certifying Colorado residency for all owners, officers, business managers, parties having a financial interest or those otherwise associated with the proposed medical marijuana business. All such individuals shall be subject to a criminal background check in conjunction with the license application. 
(6)  Any other information necessary to determine compliance with any provision of the City Code, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code or any other applicable law or regulation. 
(b)  An inspection of the proposed medical marijuana business by the City, including building and fire inspectors and law enforcement officers, shall be required prior to the issuance of a license. Such inspection shall occur after the licensed premises are ready for operation, but prior to the opening of the business to any patients or to the public. The inspection shall verify that the premises are constructed and operated in accordance with the submitted application, and that such premises are in compliance with applicable City Codes. 
(c)  An application for a medical marijuana business license shall be accompanied by the application fee, criminal background check fee, and license fee, together with any other applicable fees. Such fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(d)  The Local Licensing Authority shall conduct an initial review of the medical marijuana business license application materials to determine the following: 
(1)  the proposed licensed premises location is allowed pursuant to the zoning, land use laws, and distance requirements in the City Code; 
(2)  the application is full and complete; and 
(3)  the application for a license concerns a particular location that is the same as or greater than five hundred (500) feet of a location for which, within the two (2) years next preceding the date of the application, the State or a Local Licensing Authority denied an application for the same class of license for the reason that the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood and the desires of the adult inhabitants were satisfied by the existing establishments; and 
(4)  the applicant is, or will be, entitled to possession of the premises for which application is made under a lease, rental agreement, or other arrangement for possession of the premises, or by virtue of ownership thereof. 
    Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the medical marijuana establishment license approval application material, if the approval application does not meet one or more of the review items in subsection (d) above, the Local Licensing Authority shall notify the Colorado Department of Revenue Marijuana Enforcement Division and the applicant that the application is denied without further review. If the application is not denied upon completion of this initial review, the Local Licensing Authority shall forward the application to city departments for review of compliance with the provisions of this article, the City Code, the CMMC, and any other applicable law, rule or regulation. Nothing shall prevent the Local Licensing Authority from later denying the application based upon the criteria detailed in subsection (d) above, the application containing any false or misleading information, or the failure to meet any applicable laws, rules or regulations. 
(e)  All applications for a medical marijuana business license shall require a public hearing before the Local Licensing Authority, inclusive of publication and posting requirements as set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and below. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application, transfer of ownership or renewal application if there has been a violation of any of the provisions of this article, the Local Licensing Authority shall schedule a public hearing upon the application not less than thirty (30) days from the date of the application and shall post and publish the public notice thereof not less than ten (10) days prior to such hearing. Public notice shall be given by the posting of a sign in a conspicuous place on the premises for which application has been made and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. A public hearing for a renewal application shall not be required if there are no violations of this article. 
(2)  Notice given by posting shall include a sign of suitable material, not less than twenty-two (22) inches wide and twenty-six (26) inches high, composed of letters not less than one (1) inch in height and stating the type of license applied for, the date of the application, the date of the hearing, the name and address of the applicant, and such other information as may be required to fully apprise the public of the nature of the application. If the applicant is a partnership, the sign shall contain the names and addresses of all partners, and if the applicant is a corporation, association, or other organization, the sign shall contain the names and addresses of the president, vice-president, secretary, and manager or other managing officers. 
(3)  Notice given by publication shall contain the same information as subsection (e)(2) above. 
(4)  If the building in which the medical marijuana establishment is to be located is in existence at the time of the application, any sign posted as required in subsections (1) and (2) of this subsection (e) shall be placed so as to be conspicuous and plainly visible to the general public. If the building is not constructed at the time of the application, the applicant shall post notice on the premises upon which the building is to be constructed in such a manner that the notice shall be conspicuous and plainly visible to the general public. 
(5)  a.  At the public hearing held pursuant to this section, any party in interest shall be allowed to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. 
b.  As used in this subsection (5), "party in interest" means any of the following: 
1.  The applicant; 
2.  An adult resident within the Glenwood Springs city limits; 
3.  The owner or manager of a business located within the Glenwood Springs city limits. 
c.  The Local Licensing Authority, in its discretion, may limit the presentation of evidence and cross-examination so as to prevent repetitive and cumulative evidence or examination. 
(6)  Before entering any decision approving or denying the application, the Local Licensing Authority shall consider whether the application meets the requirements of the CMMC and City Code, the facts and evidence adduced as a result of its investigation, as well as any other facts, the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood for the class of license for which application has been made, the desires of the adult inhabitants and any other pertinent matters affecting the qualifications of the applicant for the conduct of the type of establishment proposed. 
(7)  Any decision of a Local Licensing Authority approving or denying an application shall be in writing stating the reasons therefor, within thirty (30) days after the date of the public hearing, and a copy of such decision shall be hand delivered, sent by electronic transmission or sent by first-class mail to the applicant at the address shown in the application. 
(15-11; 22-13; Ord. No. 17-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-20-2015) 
050.080.050 - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
    The criteria for determination of those persons who are not eligible to receive a medical marijuana business license shall be as provided in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
(15-11) 
050.080.060 - Location of licensed business. 
    Medical marijuana businesses shall be located in areas of the City only as allowed in the City Code. No medical marijuana business shall be located: 
(1)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any existing public or private school facility where classes are held for children aged kindergarten through the 12th grade. The distance shall be computed by a straight line measurement from the nearest property line of the school property to the nearest property line of the site housing the medical marijuana business; or 
(2)  Within nine hundred (900) feet of another medical marijuana business or any retail marijuana establishment. A medical marijuana business may locate on the same licensed premises as a retail marijuana establishment of the same class and same ownership, only if the licensed premises is located to meet the distance requirements from other medical marijuana businesses and retail marijuana establishments. This distance shall be computed by a straight line measurement between property lines of the sites housing the two (2) facilities. 
(3)  In any zone district not specifically allowed by the City Code. 
(15-11; 22-13) 
( Ord. No. 17-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-20-2015) 
050.080.070 - Persons allowed on premises. 
    A licensee shall only allow persons authorized under the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and City Code on the licensed premises, including the following: 
(1)  a person who is actively engaged in the maintenance, repair or improvement of the licensed premises, or 
(2)  law enforcement officers, inspectors and other officials or employees of any federal, state or local government or agency engaged in the lawful performance of their official duties. 
(3)  if operated on the same licensed premises with a retail marijuana establishment as authorized in this article and Article 050.090, no person under twenty-one(21) years of age is allowed on the licensed premises. 
(15-11; 22-13) 
050.080.080 - Requirements related to operation of medical marijuana business. 
(a)  Medical marijuana businesses shall meet all operational criteria for the procurement, dispensing, labeling, sanitation, security, and any other criteria as required by the state pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code. 
(b)  In addition, all medical marijuana businesses shall comply with the following local restrictions: 
(1)  All medical marijuana businesses shall be required to obtain a City business license and shall collect and remit all applicable state, county, city, and special district sales taxes in a timely manner. 
(2)  Medical marijuana businesses shall limit their hours of operation to between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday or as otherwise limited by state law. 
(3)  Medical marijuana businesses shall apply for a sign permit through the Community Development Department. All exterior signage associated with a medical marijuana business will meet the standards established in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and in the City Code. In addition, no sign associated with a medical marijuana business shall use the word "marijuana," "cannabis," or any other word or phrase commonly understood to refer to marijuana or a graphic/image of any portion of a marijuana plant, or paraphernalia associated with medicinal marijuana use unless immediately preceded by the word "medical" or the message of such sign includes the words "for medical use" or "for medicinal purposes" in letters that are no smaller than the largest letter on the sign. 
(4)  A lighting plan shall comply with the requirements of the City Code. 
(5)  The smoking of marijuana in public is prohibited by state law. 
(6)  Marijuana plants, products, accessories, and associated paraphernalia contained in a medical marijuana facility shall not be visible from a public sidewalk, public street or right-of-way, or any other public place. 
(7)  No licensed premises shall be managed by any person other than the licensee or the business manager listed on the application for the license, renewal application, or change of manager application. Such licensee or business manager shall be responsible for all activities that occur within the licensed premises. 
(8)  There shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each medical marijuana business legible signs containing the following: 
a.  A warning that the diversion of marijuana for non-medical purposes is a violation of state law; 
b.  A warning that the use of medical marijuana may impair a person's ability to drive a motor vehicle or operate machinery, and that it is illegal under state law to drive a motor vehicle or operate machinery when under the influence of or impaired by marijuana; 
c.  A warning that loitering in or around the medical marijuana dispensary is prohibited by state law; 
d.  A warning that possession and distribution of marijuana is a violation of federal law; 
e.  A warning that smoking of marijuana within a medical marijuana business or within fifteen (15) feet of such a business is unlawful; 
f.  A warning that the smoking or consumption of marijuana in public is prohibited by state law; 
g.  The name and contact information for the owner or owners and any business manager of the medical marijuana business; 
h.  The medical marijuana business license; and 
i.  All sales tax licenses. 
j.  If operated on the same licensed premises with a retail marijuana establishment as authorized in this article and Article 050.090; No person under twenty-one (21) years of age is allowed on the licensed premises. 
(15-11, 22-13) 
050.080.090 - Inspection of Books, Records, Premises and Inventory. 
(a)  Any medical marijuana business licensed by the City pursuant to this article may be required to demonstrate, upon demand by the City Manager or his duly authorized representative(s), or by law enforcement officers, that the source and quantity of any marijuana found upon the licensed premises is in full compliance with any applicable state law or regulation. Each licensee of a medical marijuana business shall keep and maintain a complete set of books and records necessary to show fully the business transactions of such licensee, in full compliance with the laws and regulations of the state. All such records shall be open at all times during business hours for inspection and examination by the City Manager or his duly authorized representative(s), or by law enforcement officers. The City may require the licensee to furnish such information as it considers necessary for the proper administration of this article. 
(b)  By accepting the medical marijuana business license, the licensee is providing consent to disclose the information required by this article, including information about the number of patients and caregivers. Any records that the licensee considers eligible for submission as confidential information may be submitted in a manner consistent with the Colorado Open Records Act, C.R.S. § 24-72-201 et seq. or other applicable law. 
(c)  The City may require an audit to be made of such books of account and records as it may deem necessary pursuant to Title 040 of the City Code. 
(d)  Acceptance of a medical marijuana business license from the City constitutes consent by the licensee, owners, managers, and employees of such business to permit the City Manager, or his authorized representative, or law enforcement officers to conduct routine inspections during business hours and other times of apparent activity, of any licensed medical marijuana business premises to assure compliance with this article, the City Code, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code or any other applicable law, rule or regulation. 
(15-11) 
050.080.100 - Disciplinary Actions. 
    The grounds for suspension, revocation or other disciplinary actions of a medical marijuana business license and the procedures for such suspension or revocation or other disciplinary action shall be as provided in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and any and all applicable rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. In addition, a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for suspension, revocation or other disciplinary action of a medical marijuana business license. In addition to suspension, revocation or other disciplinary actions, the Local Licensing Authority is hereby authorized to impose civil penalties or license violations to the same extent and according to the same standards as is utilized by the Colorado Department of Revenue Marijuana Enforcement Division in imposing fines for State license violations under the CMMC and any and all applicable rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(15-11; Ord. No. 17-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-20-2015) 
050.080.110 - Appeal of Local Licensing Authority Decision. 
(a)  Any initial decision of the Local Licensing Authority may be appealed by a party in interest to the City Council by filing written exceptions within ten (10) calendar days of the initial decision. The written exceptions shall include a statement giving the basis and grounds for the exceptions. Any party in interest who fails to properly file written exceptions within the time provided shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal. 
(b)  At the next regularly scheduled meeting, the City Council shall have the authority to sustain, modify or overturn the initial decision of the Local Licensing Authority. In any event, the City Council shall direct the Local Licensing Authority to take a particular action. The Local Licensing Authority shall conform a final decision to the written direction of the City Council within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the written directive. 
(c)  The City Council may modify deadlines and procedures related to the filing of exceptions to the initial decision upon motion by a party in interest for good cause shown. 
(15-11; Ord. No. 17-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-20-2015) 
050.080.120 - Judicial Review. 
    A party in interest applying to the District Court for review of a final decision of the Local Licensing Authority shall apply for review within thirty (30) days of the initial decision of the Local Licensing Authority. The thirty-day period shall be inclusive of the appeal process to City Council outlined in Section 050.080.110. 
(15-11; Ord. No. 17-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-20-2015) 
ARTICLE 050.090 - RETAIL MARIJUANA 

050.090.010 - Purpose. 
    The City Council intends to allow state-licensed retail marijuana establishments to exist in Glenwood Springs in accordance with Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution, C.R.S. Article 43.4 of Title 12, and any other applicable state laws and regulations as well as the additional local licensing requirements and other restrictions set forth in the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code. Nothing within this article is intended to promote or condone the production, use, sale, testing or distribution of marijuana other than in compliance with applicable state law. 
050.090.020 - Definitions. 
    Except as may be amended below, all definitions set forth in Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution, C.R.S. Article 43.4 of Title 12, and any adopted State of Colorado rules related to C.R.S. Article 43.4 of Title 12 are incorporated into this article. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have the following meanings ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates that City Council intended a different meaning: 
    Amendment 64 shall mean Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution. 
    City Code means the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code, as amended. 
    Colorado Retail Marijuana Code or CRMC shall mean C.R.S. Article 43.4 of Title 12, as amended, including the Colorado Department of Revenue Permanent Rules Related to the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, dated September 9, 2013, as amended. 
    Cultivation shall have the same meaning as set forth in Title 070 of the City Code. 
    Establishment manager means the individual designated by the owner of the retail marijuana establishment and registered with the City as the person responsible for all operations of the establishment during the owner's absence from the licensed premises. 
    Licensed premises means the premises specified in a state application for a license supplied for approval pursuant to this article, owned or in the possession of the licensee, and within which the licensee is authorized to operate a retail marijuana establishment in accordance with the provisions of this article and the CRMC. 
    Licensee means a person licensed pursuant to the CRMC and approved pursuant to this article. 
    Local Licensing Authority shall mean the Glenwood Springs City Clerk, and any hearing officers appointed to assist the City Clerk, to approve or disapprove the state-issued conditional license pursuant to this article, and to administer other provisions set forth herein. 
    Medical marijuana business shall have the same meaning as set forth in Title 070 of the City Code. 
    Medical marijuana business license is that issued pursuant to Article 050.080 of the City Code. 
    Premises means a distinct and definite location, which may include a building, a part of a building, a room, or any other definite contiguous area. 
    Retail marijuana means marijuana grown and sold pursuant to the provisions of this article, the Amendment 64, and the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code. 
    Retail marijuana establishment shall have the same meaning as set forth in Title 070 of the City Code. 
050.090.030 - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a retail marijuana establishment without first having obtained local approval for a state-issued conditional license pursuant to the provisions of this article, and having paid all fees therefor. 
(1)  Any retail marijuana establishment shall comply with the approval requirements of this article, the CRMC, and any other applicable state or local laws and regulations. 
(2)  The approval requirements set forth in this article shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by any other federal, state or local law, including, but not by way of limitation, a retail sales tax license, retail food establishment license, or development, change of use, zoning or building permit. 
(3)  Approval of a separate state-issued conditional license shall be required for each location from which a retail marijuana establishment is operated. 
(4)  Retail marijuana establishments shall prove compliance with the CRMC and City Code criteria and requirements before approval of a license by the City in the following classes: 
a.  Retail marijuana store. 
b.  Marijuana product manufacturing facility. 
c.  Marijuana cultivation facility. 
d.  Marijuana testing facility. 
(e)  Prior to July 1, 2014, no retail marijuana store or marijuana product manufacturing facility shall be licensed in the city unless: 
(1)  As of October 1, 2013, the applicant for licensing of a retail marijuana store or marijuana product manufacturing facility was operating a State of Colorado and City licensed medical marijuana business of the same class, under the same ownership, in good standing, and in a location that complies with the location requirements of Section 050.090.070; and the applicant proposes to surrender the existing medical marijuana license upon receipt of a retail marijuana license of equal class, thereby entirely converting an existing medical marijuana licensed business into a retail marijuana licensed establishment; or 
(2)  As of October 1, 2013, the applicant for licensing of a retail marijuana store or marijuana product manufacturing facility was operating a State of Colorado and City licensed medical marijuana business of the same class, under the same ownership, in good standing, and in the location that complies with the location requirements of Section 050.090.070; and the applicant proposes to retain the existing medical marijuana license while locating the same class of retail marijuana licensed operation at the same location, to the extent allowed by the CRMC and this City Code. 
(f)  A medical marijuana business operating in good standing as of October 1, 2013 under a State of Colorado and City license which obtains a change of location for that medical marijuana business within the City may qualify for licensing as a retail marijuana establishment, of equal class as allowed in subsection (e), in the new location. To qualify for a retail marijuana establishment license, the change of location must be in compliance with the requirements of the City Code. 
(g)  A licensed medical marijuana business that changes ownership after October 1, 2013 shall not be authorized for retail marijuana establishment licensing until July 1, 2014 or thereafter. 
(h)  On or after July 1, 2014, any person who otherwise qualifies for licensing under applicable state and city law may apply for approval of a state-issued retail marijuana establishment license within the City, regardless of whether the applicant holds a medical marijuana business license within the City. 
(i)  On or after January 2, 2014, an applicant may apply for approval of a state-issued retail marijuana cultivation facility or retail marijuana testing facility license regardless of whether the applicant holds a medical marijuana business license within the City. 
(j)  All retail marijuana establishment licenses approved by the City shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date such license is issued. 
(k)  Renewal applications shall be subject to review as detailed in the CRMC and any local rules, policies and procedures. 
(l)  Licensees shall report and submit to review each transfer or change of ownership interest, change in establishment manager, change in location or change in financial interest as detailed in the CRMC and any local rules, policies and procedures. 
050.090.040 - Limitations of license. 
(a)  Under no circumstances shall the Local Licensing Authority act upon any application for local approval before the issuance of a state-issued conditional license and the state's full regulatory oversight as specified in CRMC. The Local Licensing Authority shall not act upon any applications filed independent from the state licensing process such as: the state fails to process applications by October 1, 2013, the state fails to act within ninety (90) days of application filing, or the state fails to issue licenses by January 1, 2014. 
(b)  Approval of a state-issued conditional retail marijuana establishment license pursuant to this article does not create a defense, exception or provide immunity to any person in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have for the production, distribution or possession of marijuana. 
(c)  If the state prohibits the sale, cultivation or other distribution of marijuana through retail marijuana establishments authorized in the CRMC, any state-issued conditional license approved by the City pursuant to this article shall be deemed to be immediately revoked by operation of law, with no grounds for appeal or other redress on behalf of the Licensees. 
050.090.050 - Application. 
(a)  An application for a retail marijuana establishment license shall be made as required by the CRMC. The application shall be used to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this article, the City Code, CRMC, Amendment 64 and any other applicable law, rule or regulation. In addition to general information required, the application for approval of the state-issued conditional license shall include the following information: 
(1)  An operating plan for the proposed retail marijuana establishment which includes a description of the products and services to be provided by the establishment, including whether the establishment proposes to engage in the production of retail sale of food or other products containing retail marijuana, and whether any retail marijuana products or services will be provided at a location different than the premises on the license application. 
(2)  A dimensional floor plan of the licensed premises, clearly labeled, and indicating the principal uses of the floor area, including but not limited to: areas open to employees only; storage areas; retail sales areas and areas where retail marijuana will be distributed; and production areas. 
(3)  Sign, security and lighting plans indicating how the applicant will comply with the requirements of the CRMC and the City Code. 
(4)  An area map, drawn to scale, indicating, within a radius of five hundred (500) feet from the boundaries of the property upon which the retail marijuana establishment is located, the proximity of the property to any kindergarten through 12th grade public or private school and indicating, within a radius of nine hundred (900) feet, any other retail marijuana establishment or medical marijuana business. 
(5)  Any other information necessary to determine compliance with any provision of the City Code, the CRMC or any other applicable law or regulation. 
(b)  An application for approval of a state-issued conditional retail marijuana establishment license shall be accompanied by the operating fee. Such fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(c)  The Local Licensing Authority shall conduct an initial review of the retail marijuana establishment license application materials to determine the following: 
(1)  the proposed licensed premises location is allowed pursuant to the zoning, land use laws and distance requirements in the City Code; 
(2)  the application is full and complete and has been fully reviewed by the Colorado Department of Revenue Marijuana Enforcement Division; 
(3)  the application for a license concerns a particular location that is the same as or greater than five hundred (500) feet of a location for which, within the two (2) years next preceding the date of the application, the State or a Local Licensing Authority denied an application for the same class of license for the reason that the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood and the desires of the adult inhabitants were satisfied by the existing establishments; and 
(4)  the applicant is, or will be, entitled to possession of the premises for which application is made under a lease, rental agreement, or other arrangement for possession of the premises, or by virtue of ownership thereof. 
(d)  Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the retail marijuana establishment license approval application material, if the approval application does not meet one (1) or more of the review items in subsection (c) above, the Local Licensing Authority shall notify the Colorado Department of Revenue Marijuana Enforcement Division and the applicant that the application is denied without further review. If the application is not denied upon completion of this initial review, the Local Licensing Authority shall forward the application to city departments for review of compliance with the provisions of this article, the City Code, the CRMC, and any other applicable law, rule or regulation. Nothing shall prevent the Local Licensing Authority from later denying the application based upon the criteria detailed in subsection (c) above, the application containing any false or misleading information, or the failure to meet any applicable laws, rules or regulations. 
(e)  All applications for local approval of a state-issued conditional retail marijuana establishment license shall require a public hearing before the Local Licensing Authority, inclusive of publication and posting requirements as set forth in the CRMC and below. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application, transfer of ownership, or renewal application if there has been a violation of any of the provisions of this article, the Local Licensing Authority shall schedule a public hearing upon the application not less than thirty (30) days from the date of the application and shall post and publish the public notice thereof not less than ten (10) days prior to such hearing. Public notice shall be given by the posting of a sign in a conspicuous place on the premises for which application has been made and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. A public hearing for a renewal application shall not be required if there are no violations of this article. 
(2)  Notice given by posting shall include a sign of suitable material, not less than twenty-two (22) inches wide and twenty-six (26) inches high, composed of letters not less than one (1) inch in height and stating the type of license applied for, the date of the application, the date of the hearing, the name and address of the applicant, and such other information as may be required to fully apprise the public of the nature of the application. If the applicant is a partnership, the sign shall contain the names and addresses of all partners, and if the applicant is a corporation, association, or other organization, the sign shall contain the names and addresses of the president, vice-president, secretary, and manager or other managing officers. 
(3)  Notice given by publication shall contain the same information as subsection (e)(2) above. 
(4)  If the building in which the retail marijuana establishment is to be located is in existence at the time of the application, any sign posted as required in subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall be placed so as to be conspicuous and plainly visible to the general public. If the building is not constructed at the time of the application, the applicant shall post notice on the premises upon which the building is to be constructed in such a manner that the notice shall be conspicuous and plainly visible to the general public. 
(5)  a.  At the public hearing held pursuant to this section, any party in interest shall be allowed to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. 
b.  As used in this subsection (5), "party in interest" means any of the following: 
1.  The applicant; 
2.  An adult resident within the Glenwood Springs city limits; 
3.  The owner or manager of a business located within the Glenwood Springs city limits. 
c.  The Local Licensing Authority, in its discretion, may limit the presentation of evidence and cross-examination so as to prevent repetitive and cumulative evidence or examination 
(6)  Before entering any decision approving or denying the application, the Local Licensing Authority shall consider whether the application meets the requirements of the CRMC and City Code, the facts and evidence adduced as a result of its investigation, as well as any other facts, the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood for the class of license for which application has been made, the desires of the adult inhabitants and any other pertinent matters affecting the qualifications of the applicant for the conduct of the type of establishment proposed. 
(7)  Any decision of a Local Licensing Authority approving or denying an application shall be in writing stating the reasons therefor, within thirty (30) days after the date of the public hearing, and a copy of such decision shall be hand delivered, sent by electronic transmission, or sent by first-class mail to the applicant at the address shown in the application. 
(8)  An inspection of the proposed retail marijuana establishment by the City, including, but not limited to, building and fire inspectors and law enforcement officers, shall be required prior to local approval of a state-issued conditional license. Such inspection shall occur after the licensed premises are ready for operation but prior to the opening of the establishment to the public. The inspection shall verify that the premises are constructed and operated in accordance with the submitted application, and that such premises are in compliance with applicable City Codes, the CRMC, and laws and regulations of the State of Colorado. 
(9)  The Local Licensing Authority shall notify the state licensing authority of such decision. 
( Ord. No. 17-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-20-2015) 
050.090.060 - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
    The criteria for determination of those persons who are not eligible to receive a retail marijuana establishment license shall be as provided in the CRMC. 
050.090.070 - Location of licensed establishment. 
    Retail marijuana establishments shall be located only in areas of the City as allowed in the City Code. No retail marijuana establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any existing public or private school facility where classes are held for children aged kindergarten through the 12th grade. The distance shall be computed by a straight line measurement from the nearest property line of the school property to the nearest property line of the site housing the retail marijuana establishment; 
(2)  Within nine hundred (900) feet of another retail marijuana establishment or a medical marijuana business. A retail marijuana establishment may locate on the same licensed premises as a medical marijuana business of the same class and same ownership, only if the licensed premises is located to meet the distance requirements from other retail marijuana establishments and medical marijuana businesses. This distance shall be computed by a straight line measurement between property lines of the sites housing the two (2) facilities; and 
(3)  In any zone district not specifically permitted by the City Code. 
( Ord. No. 17-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-20-2015) 
050.090.080 - Persons allowed on licensed premises. 
(a)  A licensee shall only allow persons authorized under the CRMC and City Code on the licensed premises including, but not limited to, law enforcement officers, inspectors and other officials or employees of any federal, state or local government or agency engaged in the lawful performance of their official duties. 
(b)  Any retail marijuana establishment shall not allow anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) to be present on the licensed premises. 
(c)  A retail marijuana establishment allowed to locate on the same licensed premises as a medical marijuana business in accordance with this article shall not allow anyone under the age of twenty-one (21), including medical marijuana patients, on the Licensed Premises. 
050.090.090 - Requirements related to operation of a Retail Marijuana Establishment. 
(a)  Retail marijuana establishments shall meet all operational criteria for the procurement, display, dispensing, labeling, sanitation, security, and any other criteria as required by the state pursuant to the CRMC. 
(b)  In addition, all retail marijuana establishments shall comply with the following local restrictions: 
(1)  Any applicable City business/sales tax license shall be obtained and all applicable state, county, city, and special district sales taxes shall be collected and remitted in a timely manner. 
(2)  Hours of operation shall be limited to between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday. 
(3)  A sign permit shall be obtained through the Community Development Department. All exterior signage associated with a retail marijuana establishment will meet the standards established in the CRMC and in the City Code. 
(4)  A lighting plan shall be submitted to the Community Development Department and comply with the requirements of the City Code and CRMC. 
(5)  No licensee shall allow the smoking of marijuana in public or consumption of any marijuana products on the licensed premises as prohibited by the CRMC, other state law and City Code. 
(6)  All sales and distribution of retail marijuana shall occur only upon the licensed premises. The licensee is strictly prohibited from delivering retail marijuana to any person at any location other than the licensed premises. 
(7)  No licensed premises shall be managed by any person other than the licensee or the establishment manager listed on the application for the license, renewal application, or change of manager application. Such licensee or establishment manager shall be responsible for all activities that occur within the licensed premises. 
(8)  There shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each retail marijuana establishment legible signs as required by the CRMC, including but not limited to: 
a.  A warning that the use of marijuana may impair a person's ability to drive a motor vehicle or operate machinery, and that it is illegal under state law to drive a motor vehicle or operate machinery when under the influence of or impaired by marijuana; 
b.  A warning that loitering in or around the marijuana store is prohibited by state law; 
c.  A warning that possession and distribution of marijuana is a violation of federal law; 
d.  A warning that consumption of marijuana within a retail marijuana establishment is prohibited; 
e.  A warning that the smoking or consumption of marijuana in public is prohibited by state law; 
f.  A notice that no-one under the age of twenty-one (21) is allowed on the licensed premises; 
g.  The name and contact information for the owner or owners and any business manager of the retail marijuana establishment; 
h.  The retail marijuana establishment license; and 
i.  All sales tax/business licenses. 
050.090.100 - Inspection of Books, Records, Licensed Premises, and Inventory. 
(a)  Any retail marijuana establishment approved by the City pursuant to this article may be required to demonstrate, upon demand by the City Manager or his duly authorized representative(s), or by law enforcement officers, that the source and quantity of any marijuana found upon the licensed premises is in full compliance with any applicable state law or regulation. Each licensee of a retail marijuana establishment shall keep and maintain a complete set of books and records as required by the CRMC. All such records shall be open at all times required by the CRMC. The City may require the licensee to furnish such information as it considers necessary for the proper administration of this article. 
(b)  The City may require an audit to be made of such books of account and records as it may deem necessary pursuant to Title 040 of the City Code. 
(c)  Acceptance of a retail marijuana establishment license approved by the City constitutes consent by the licensee, owners, managers, and employees of such establishment to permit the City Manager, or his authorized representative, or law enforcement officers to conduct routine inspections during establishment hours and other times of apparent activity, of any licensed retail marijuana establishment premises to ensure compliance with this article, the City Code, the CRMC or any other applicable law, rule or regulation. 
050.090.110 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 20, 2015, repealed § 050.090.110, which pertained to rules, policies and procedures and derived from original codification. 
050.090.120 - Disciplinary Actions. 
    A violation of any provisions of the CRMC or the City Code shall be grounds for suspension, revocation or other disciplinary actions of a retail marijuana establishment license. The procedures for such suspension or revocation or other disciplinary action shall be as provided in the CRMC, the City Code and any and all applicable rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. In addition to suspension, revocation, or other disciplinary actions, the Local Licensing Authority is hereby authorized to impose civil penalties for license violations to the same extent and according to the same standards as is utilized by the Colorado Department of Revenue Marijuana Enforcement Division in imposing fines for state license violations under the CRMC and any and all applicable rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
050.090.130 - Appeal of Local Licensing Authority Decision. 
(a)  Any initial decision of the Local Licensing Authority may be appealed, by a party in interest, to the City Council by filing written exceptions within ten (10) calendar days of the initial decision. The written exceptions shall include a statement giving the basis and grounds for the exceptions. Any party in interest who fails to properly file written exceptions within the time provided shall be deemed to have waived the right to appeal. 
(b)  At the next regularly scheduled meeting, the City Council shall have the authority to sustain, modify or overturn the initial decision of the Local Licensing Authority. In any event, the City Council shall direct the Local Licensing Authority to take a particular action. The Local Licensing Authority shall conform a final decision to the written direction of the City Council within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the written directive. 
(c)  The City Council may modify deadlines and procedures related to the filing of exceptions to the initial decision upon motion by a party in interest for good cause shown. 
050.090.140 - Judicial Review. 
    A party in interest applying to the District Court for review of a final decision of the Local Licensing Authority shall apply for review within thirty (30) days of the initial decision of the Local Licensing Authority. The thirty-day period shall be inclusive of the appeal process to City Council as outlined in Section 050.090.130. 
(21-13) 
ARTICLE 050.100 - ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICTS 

050.100.010 - Purpose. 
    The City Council intends to authorize the creation of Entertainment Districts and establish procedures and guidelines for the Local Liquor Licensing Authority to certify/decertify promotional associations, and regulate the establishment of common consumption areas as provided for in C.R.S. § 12-47-301 (11), as amended. 
( Ord. No. 2018-16, § 2, 7-19-2018 ) 
050.100.020 - Application. 
    The provisions herein shall apply to all Entertainment Districts established under this Article. The City Council shall review each application for an Entertainment District and authorize its creation by Resolution, which shall be subject to annual review, and revocable at the will of the City Council. 
( Ord. No. 2018-16, § 2, 7-19-2018 ) 
050.100.030 - Authority. 
    The City Council shall expressly delegate to the Local Liquor Licensing Authority all decisions relating to: certifying and decertifying Promotional Associations; designating the location, size, security and hours of operation of Common Consumption Areas; and the regulation of licensed premises attached to Common Consumption Areas, retaining for the City Council's sole and absolute discretion the authority to revoke an Entertainment District by Resolution. 
( Ord. No. 2018-16, § 2, 7-19-2018 ) 
050.100.040 - Definitions. 
    Common Consumption Area shall mean an area designed as a common area located within a designated Entertainment District and approved by the Local Liquor Licensing Authority that uses physical barriers to close the areas to motor vehicle traffic and limit pedestrian access. 
    Entertainment District shall mean an area within the City of Glenwood Springs that is designated as an Entertainment District of a size no more than one hundred (100) acres and containing at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of premises licensed as a tavern, hotel and restaurant, brew pub, distillery pub, retail gaming tavern, vintner's restaurant, beer and wine licensee, manufacturer or beer wholesaler that operates a salesroom, limited winery or lodging and entertainment facility licensee. 
    Promotional Association shall mean an association that is incorporated within Colorado that organizes and promotes entertainment activities within a Common Consumption Area and is organized or authorized by two (2) or more people who own or lease property within an Entertainment District. 
( Ord. No. 2018-16, § 2, 7-19-2018 ) 
050.100.050 - General Provisions. 
(a)  Entertainment Districts may be established by City Council Resolution, from time to time, as determined to be in the best interest of the public and the specific geographic area to be served, subject to demonstration that the proposed district is consistent with the definition and purpose of an Entertainment District as set forth in this Article. 
(b)  The City Council may repeal and revoke an established Entertainment District, in its sole and absolute discretion, if the City Council concludes the continued operation of the Entertainment District is no longer in the best interest of the public. 
(c)  The Local Licensing Authority is authorized to certify and decertify Promotional Associations; designate the location, size, security and hours of operation of Common Consumption Areas; and allow attachment of licensed premises to Common Consumption Areas consistent with this Article and the provisions of C.R.S. § 12-47-301(11), as amended. 
( Ord. No. 2018-16, § 2, 7-19-2018 ) 
050.100.060 - Promotional Associations. 
(a)  Promotional Associations may be certified so long as the related Entertainment District is valid. Should an Entertainment District become revoked during a certification period pursuant to 050.100.050(b), the Promotional Association's certification will no longer be valid. 
(b)  Applications for certification of a Promotional Association shall be consistent with C.R.S. § 12-47-301(11) and applicable provisions of the Colorado Liquor Code and the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code. Applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall include the following minimum information: 
(1)  A copy of the Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws and a list of all directors and officers of the Promotional Association. The Board of Directors shall include one (1) person from each licensed premises attached to the proposed Common Consumption Area to serve as director. 
(2)  A detailed map of the proposed Common Consumption Area including: 
a.  Location of physical barriers, entrances and exits; 
b.  Location of attached licensed premises, including documentation showing possession of the Common Consumption Area; and 
c.  Identification of licensed premises that are adjacent but not to be attached to the Common Consumption Area; 
(3)  A detailed description of security arrangements within the Common Consumption Area; 
(4)  A list of the attached licensees including the following information: liquor license number, a list of any past liquor violations, and a copy of any operational agreements; 
(5)  Documentation of how the application addresses the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood, the desires of the adult inhabitants as evidenced by petitions, written testimony, or otherwise; 
(6)  A list of the dates and beginning and ending hours of operation of the Common Consumption Area; 
(7)  Payment of the application fee; 
(8)  An insurance certificate of general liability and liquor liability insurance that is reasonably acceptable to the Local Liquor Licensing Authority naming the City as an additional insured in a minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); and 
(9)  Any further information requested by the Local Licensing Authority. 
(c)  Upon Approval of a Certification by the Local Liquor Licensing Authority, the terms and conditions of the approval shall remain effective until and unless an amended application is submitted to the Local Liquor Licensing Authority and approved using the same procedures applied to the original application. 
(d)  After certification, each Promotional Association shall abide by the following operational requirements in addition to any specific requirements imposed by the City upon creation of the Entertainment District, or by the Local Liquor Licensing Authority upon certification of the Promotional Association: 
(1)  The size of the Common Consumption Area shall not exceed the area approved by the Local Liquor Licensing Authority for the particular Entertainment District and is wholly contained within the Entertainment District, and clearly delineated using physical barriers to close the area to motor vehicle traffic and limit pedestrian access; 
(2)  The Promotional Association may make such area smaller at any time, provided the new area is clearly delineated using physical barriers to close the area to motor vehicle traffic and limit pedestrian access. 
(3)  The Promotional Association shall provide an appropriate amount of security to ensure compliance with the liquor code and prevent a safety risk to the neighborhood and the general public patronizing the Entertainment District. All security within the Common Consumption Area or its attached licensed premises shall complete the server and seller training program established by the Director of the Liquor Enforcement Division of the Department of Revenue and be approved by the Chief of Police. 
(e)  The Local Licensing Authority has the power to refuse to certify, or to decertify a Promotional Association. After consideration of the merits of the application by the Local Licensing Authority, A Promotional Association may be decertified, or not certified if it: 
(1)  Fails to submit an annual report by January 31 of each year; 
(2)  Fails to establish that the licensed premises and Common Consumption Area can be operated without violating this Article, any provision of the Colorado Liquor Code or Regulations, or without creating a safety risk to the neighborhood; 
(3)  Fails to have at least two (2) licensed premises attached to the Common Consumption Area; 
(4)  Fails to obtain or maintain a properly endorsed general liability and liquor liability insurance policy that is reasonably acceptable to the Local Licensing Authority and names the City as an additional insured; 
(5)  Fails to demonstrate that the use is compatible with the reasonable requirements of the neighborhood or the desires of the adult inhabitants; or 
(6)  Is in violation of either C.R.S. §§ 12-47-301(11) or 12-47-909, as may be amended from time to time, related to Common Consumption Area operations; 
(7)  The Local Liquor Licensing Authority may authorize the City Clerk to decertify a Promotional Association pursuant to the provisions of this Article and applicable provisions of the Colorado Liquor Code, as amended. 
(f)  The Local Liquor Licensing Authority may authorize the City Clerk to administratively certify or recertify a Promotional Association pursuant to the provisions of this Article and applicable provisions of the Colorado Liquor Code, as amended. 
(g)  Applications for recertification of a Promotional Association must be made by January 31 of each year in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Section, upon applications furnished by the City Clerk. Review of applications for certification, recertification or attachment shall be considered within sixty (60) days of receipt by the City Clerk of the complete application and payment of application fees. The Local Liquor Licensing Authority shall review the application for compliance with this Article, Colorado liquor laws and any additional requirements imposed, and may either approve the application with or without conditions or deny the application. 
( Ord. No. 2018-16, § 2, 7-19-2018 ) 
050.100.070 - Application Fee. 
    The application fee for certification of a Promotional Association shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the initial application, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for recertification applications, as amended from time to time by City Council by Resolution. 
( Ord. No. 2018-16, § 2, 7-19-2018 ) 
TITLE 060 - CONSTRUCTION BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, adopted Nov. 2, 2017, repealed Title 060, and Exh. A thereto enacted a new title 060 as set out herein. Former Title 060 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from ordinances 17-04; 24-10 § 2; and 10-12 § 2; and consisted of the same articles and sections, with the exception of reserved §§ 060.040.040-060.040.060 and § 060.090.030 (pertaining to International Fire Code Commentary), which have been omitted from reenactment. 

ARTICLE 060.010 - IN GENERAL 

060.010.010 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this Title shall regulate all construction, reconstruction, repair, remodeling, or other construction activity within the City. Such provisions are necessary to protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.010.020 - Copies of Codes. 
    Copies of all codes adopted by reference in this Title are available for inspection in the office of the City Clerk at 101 W. 8 th Street, Glenwood Springs, Colorado. Copies of said codes are usually available for sale at the office of the City Clerk or the Building Official for the City at a cost to be established by the City Manager. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.010.030 - Liability to City. 
    Nothing in this Title, including, but not limited to, the adoption of the various construction building codes and the authorization of inspections by the City, shall be construed as imposing on the City or any city official or employee any liability or responsibility for injury or damage to a person caused by anything required or not required by such construction building codes or caused by reason of inspections or the lack thereof authorized by this Title or caused by the issuance or lack thereof of a certificate of occupancy or other similar document. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.010.040 - Compliance with Laws. 
    All work performed pursuant to this Title shall be in conformity with all applicable provisions of the Municipal Code, ordinances of the City and state and federal statutes, codes, rules, and regulations unless such state and federal statutes, codes, rules, and regulations have been superseded by the provisions of this Title. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.010.050 - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this Title or any lawful rule, regulation, or order of the City or its Building Official shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.010.060 - Conflicts. 
    If the provisions of the construction building codes, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
ARTICLE 060.020 - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE 

060.020.010 - International Building Code and Standards Adopted; Penalty for Violation. 
(a)  For purposes of regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Glenwood Springs, the International Building Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, is hereby adopted except as it is amended in this article. 
(b)  Appendices adopted. 
Appendix Title Appendix C Group U-Agricultural Buildings Appendix E Supplementary Accessibility Requirements Appendix G Flood Resistant Construction Appendix I Patio Covers Appendix J Grading  
Only the appendices contained within these chapters, as specifically listed herein, are adopted. 
(c)  All International Building Code Standards, which are referred to in the various parts of the International Building Code, as adopted in this section, are hereby adopted. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted in this section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
(e)  Unless indicated otherwise, all references in the Municipal Code to the International Building Code shall be deemed to include the International Building Code, the International Building Code Appendices and the International Building Code Standards as referred to in this Title and as adopted in this section. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.020.020 - Amendments to the International Building Code: 
CHAPTER 1-ADMINISTRATION 
§101.1.1 Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of Glenwood Springs, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
§104.1 General. 
    The Building official or any authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this code; however, a guarantee that all buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all the provisions of this code is neither intended or implied. The Building Official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this code. 
§104.8 Liability. 
    The adoption of this code, and any previous codes adopted by the City of Glenwood Springs, shall not be deemed to give rise to a duty of care on the part of any public entity, public employee, or agent, nor shall this code or any previous codes be deemed to create any civil remedy against a public entity, public employee, or agent. The Building Official, member of the Board of Appeals, or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. 
§104.8.1 Legal defense. 
    Any suit instituted against an officer, employee, or authorized representative because of an act performed by that officer, employee, or authorized representative in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The Building Official or any subordinate, acting in good faith, shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code. 
§105.2 Work exempt from permit. 
    THIS SECTION TO REMAIN AS IS, EXCEPT THE AMENDMENTS TO THE EXCEPTIONS NOTED BELOW: 
Building: 
Exception 2. Fences not over 6 feet high. 
Electrical: 
All electrical permits, inspections, and requirements are as per State of Colorado requirements. 
§105.5 Expiration. 
    Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Permits must pass a required inspection during every 180-day period after each inspection in order not to be considered suspended or abandoned. On expired permits, before such work can be recommenced, a re-issued or new permit shall be obtained. The Building Official is authorized to grant no more than two extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extensions shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. No permit shall be extended more than twice nor beyond 41/2 years from the date of issuance of such permit. 
§107.1 General (Submittal Documents). 
    The Building Official shall not issue any permit unless the plans and specifications for such proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or remodeling conform to the regulations and restrictions in the International Building Code. All plans and specifications for such proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or remodeling shall bear the seal of an architect or engineer licensed by the State of Colorado, unless the preparation of plans and specifications is exempted by C.R.S. § 12-25-303. Such plans and specifications prepared by architectural or engineering sub disciplines shall be so designated and shall bear the seal and signature of the architect or engineer for that sub discipline. 
§107.2.5.2 Additional site plan requirements. 
    A survey of the building lot may be required by the Building Official to verify that the structure is located in accordance with the approved site plans. A site development plan shall be submitted with any building permit application which involves the construction of a new building or the expansion of an existing building. The site development plan shall be submitted in duplicate, shall be drawn to scale, and shall show the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, the location of the building on the lot with reference to legally established property lines, building envelope, setbacks, easements, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the Municipal Code. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the Building Official may require monumentation of property boundaries and corners, or a foundation location certificate within 7 days of completion of the foundation, in accordance with the standards set forth in C.R.S. 38-51-101 et seq., as amended, in order to fulfill the purposes of this section. A record of all site development plans and other survey information shall be kept in the office of the Building Official. 
§107.6 Proof of water and sewer. 
    The applicant shall provide documentation and proof that water and sewer taps have been obtained from appropriate utility district when the property will be served by the district. 
§109.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. 
    A fee for each building permit shall be paid to the Building Official as set forth in Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020. 
§109.3 Building permit valuations. 
    The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit building construction value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued such as gas, mechanical, plumbing, equipment and permanent systems. Electrical valuation shall be provided as a separate value. A determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code shall be made by the Building Official based on the Valuation Schedule published in the "Building Safety Journal" magazine by the International Code Council. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued. The Building Official shall use the higher of these valuations. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the Building Official. 
    The Building Official may waive the building permit fee for any public entity when such entity is applying for a building permit for a governmental use or a proprietary purpose. 
§109.4 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. 
    Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum fee set forth in Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
§109.6 Plan Review Fee. 
    When submittal documents are required by Section 107, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee. 
    The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 109.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. 
    When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 107, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate shown in Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020. 
§109.6.1 Expiration of Plan Review. 
    Applications for which no permit is issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans submitted for checking may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and plan review fee. Said plan review fee shall be 65% of the building permit fee as shown in Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020. 
§109.7 Fee Refunds. 
    The Building Official may authorize the refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
§109.7.1 Processing Fee. 
    There will be a minimum $30.00 fee for processing refunds. 
§109.7.2 Permit Fee. 
    The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
§109.7.3 Plan Review Fee Refunds. 
    The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled before any plan reviewing is done. 
§109.7.4 Fee Refund Application. 
    The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of the fee payment. 
§109.7.5 Energy Conservation Rebates. 
    To encourage energy conservation in construction, construction that qualifies for State of Colorado or City of Glenwood Springs approved energy conservation programs may receive a rebate up to Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) of building permit and plan review fees. 
§109.8 Re-inspections. 
    Permit fees provide for customary inspections only. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. 
    This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection. 
    Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for failure to post a readily visible address as required in Section 501.2. 
    To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant shall pay the re-inspection fee in accordance with Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020. 
    In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
Table 1-A-Building Permit Fees 
TOTAL
VALUATIONFEE $1.00 to $500.00 $23.50 $501.00 to $2000.00 $23.50 for the first $500.00 plus $3.05 for each additional $100.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00 $2001.00 to $25,000.00 $69.25 for the first $2,000.00 plus $14.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00 $25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $391.25 for the first $25,000.00 plus $10.10 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00 $50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $643.75 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00 $100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $993.75 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.60 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00 $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $3,233.75 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.75 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00 $1,000,001.00 and up $5,608.75 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $3.15 for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof Other Inspections and Fees: 1. Inspections outside of normal business hours ..... 50.00 per hour 1 
(minimum charge - two hours) 2. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated ..... $50.00 per hour 1 3. Re-inspection fee assessed under provisions of Section 109.8 ..... $50.00 per hour 1 
(minimum charge - one hour) 4. Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to approved plans ..... $50.00 per hour 1 
(minimum charge - one hour) 5. For use of outside consultants for plan checking and inspections, or both ..... $50.00 per hour 2  
1 Or the hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is greater. This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved. 
2 Actual cost include administrative and overhead costs. 
Manufactured and/or Mobile Home (non-permanent foundation) ..... $200.00 
Re-roofing of one building or structure ..... $60.00/$80.00 if two inspections 
Demolition/Moved Buildings ..... $60.00 
Lawn sprinkler system ..... $60.00 
Excavation on private property ..... $60.00 
Window replacement (like for like) ..... $60.00 
Window replacement (2 inspections) ..... $100.00 
Excavation in the public right-of-way (refer to Article 060.140 of the GSMC) 
    The fee for modular units and manufactured homes on a permanent foundation and inspected by an approved agency shall be 50% of the fee set forth in Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code; however, a full plan review fee shall be assessed as set forth in Section 109.6 of the International Building Code. The building valuation for all permit fees shall be based on the building valuation data table of the most current issue of "Building Safety Journal" published by the International Code Council, using a regional modifier of 1.00, or other evidence of value, whichever is greater, as determined by the Building Official. The City of Glenwood Springs is a participating jurisdiction for the State of Colorado Manufactured Housing Inspection Program. 
§110.1.1 Sanitation at construction sites. 
    Toilet facilities shall be provided for construction workers and such facilities shall be conveniently located and maintained in a sanitary condition. The facilities shall be available from the time the first work is started until the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
§110.3.5 Lath and gypsum board inspection. 
    Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or before gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
§110.5 Inspection requests. 
    It shall be the duty of the person doing the work, the owner, contractor or subcontractor to know that the building or structure has a valid permit and to notify the building department when work is ready for inspection. A fine will be assessed to the person doing the work, the owner, contractor or, subcontractor if work is being done without a permit and the inspection is not requested per Section 110. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work, the owner, contractor or subcontractor requesting any inspections required by this code to provide legal and adequate access and means for inspection of such work. Such request for inspection may be in writing or by calling the 24-hour automated telephone answering system. 
§111.1 Use and occupancy. 
    No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
    A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until all monies owed to the City related to the construction of the project, including utility bills, have been paid in full. In addition, any damage to City property resulting from work done on the site shall be repaired by the owner of the site in compliance with City standards prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
    A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the owner establishes or re-establishes, as necessary, any lot boundary monumentation, or, provides an improvement location certificate as required pursuant to Section 107.2.5.2 as amended in this article or C.R.S. § 38-51-101 et seq., as amended. In addition no certificate of occupancy will be issued unless complete compliance with the development permit is obtained. 
§111.3 Temporary occupancy. 
    If the Building Official finds that no substantial hazard will result from occupancy of any building or portion thereof before the same is completed, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or structure upon receipt of a $1,000.00 certificate of occupancy deposit for all commercial and multi-family buildings and a $250.00 certificate of occupancy deposit on all residential buildings. Upon expiration of a temporary certificate of occupancy the certificate of occupancy deposit shall be refunded less a $100.00 processing fee as long as the conditions of the temporary certificate of occupancy have been met and a final certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
    A temporary certificate of occupancy shall expire at a date deemed appropriate by the building official; however, such expiration date shall not exceed 180 days from the date of issuance. Any applicant holding a non-expired temporary certificate of occupancy may apply for an extension of the time to complete required work and such extension may be granted by the building official in his or her sole discretion provided a written request is submitted by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented actions from being taken. A fee of $100.00 shall be paid for each extension granted for commercial or multi-family buildings and a fee of $50.00 shall be paid for each extension granted for residential buildings. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be extended more than once; however, the deposit shall be forfeited to the City after one year from the initial date of issuance. 
§113.1 General (Board of Appeals). 
    The Building Board of Appeals as established by Article 020.020 GSMC shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code. 
§113.4 Appeal Procedures. 
§113.4.1 Filing Appeal. 
    Any person with material or definitive interest in an order, decision or determination by the Building Official may appeal the order, decision or determination to the Building Board of Appeals. The appeal must be presented to the Building Official in writing within 20 days of the decision, stating the decision in question and the appellant's interpretation of the relevant code section. 
§113.4.2 Notice of Meeting. 
    The Building Official shall notify the Building Board of Appeals members and set a meeting date within two (2) weeks of receiving the written appeal. 
§113.4.3 Open Hearing. 
    All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Building Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. (Ad 24-10 §2) 
§113.4.4 Board Decision. 
    The Board may modify or reverse the decision of the Building Official by a concurring vote of the majority of the voting members present. The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board. 
CHAPTER 2-DEFINITIONS 
§202.1 Additional Definitions. 
    CERTIFIED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY TESTER. A person who has been certified by the State of Colorado to test and maintain backflow assemblies. 
    TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two or more attached units in which each unit extends from the foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides. 
CHAPTER 3-USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION 
§310.2.1 Additional Definitions. 
§312.1 General (Utility and Miscellaneous Group U). 
    Free standing signs over 10 feet of height is added. 
    SHORT TERM RENTAL. An R/2 or R/3 residential unit that has been approved pursuant to Title 070 Glenwood Springs Municipal Code requirements for use as a rental dwelling for rental periods of less than thirty (30) days. The short term residential unit will be considered to maintain the code requirements of its previous R/2 or R/3 occupancy. 
CHAPTER 4-SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON USE AND OCCUPANCY 
§419.1.1 Limitations. 
4.  A maximum of five non-residential workers or employees and a total maximum occupant load of 49 are allowed to occupy the nonresidential area at any one time. 
5.  The residential and nonresidential areas of the live/work unit shall be separated by a Smoke Partition per Section 711. 
§419.9 Plumbing Facilities. 
    The residential and non-residential areas shall be provided with separate plumbing fixtures in accordance with the occupancy requirements. 
CHAPTER 5-GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS 
§508.3.3 Separation. 
    Exception: 
3.  Non-separated occupancies and tenant spaces shall be separated by a Smoke Partition per section 711. 
CHAPTER 7-FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES 
§710.1 General (Smoke Partitions). 
    Smoke partitions installed as required elsewhere in the code, including live/work units and non-separated uses, shall comply with this section. 
CHAPTER 14-EXTERIOR WALLS 
§1403.2.1 Moisture Control During Construction. 
    Under-floor spaces and building construction materials shall be protected from moisture during construction as follows: 
1.  Under-floor spaces shall be protected from moisture during construction such that no standing water, snow or ice is present prior to the under-floor space being enclosed. 
2.  Construction material shall be protected for damaging moisture in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. 
CHAPTER 15-ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES 
§1503.7 Snow Shed Barriers. 
    Roofs shall be designed to prevent accumulations of snow from shedding above or in front of gas utility or electric utility meters and egress doors or patios/decks. 
§1503.7.1 
    Mechanical barriers are required for metal roof shingles, metal roof panels or for other roofing materials with 12:12 pitch or greater to protect walkways from snow slides. Mechanical barriers for metal roof shingles and metal roof panels. Mechanical barriers installed to prevent snow shedding from the roof shall be secured to roof framing members or to solid blocking secured to framing members in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Individual devices installed in a group of devices to create a barrier to prevent snow shedding shall be installed in at least two rows with the first row no more than 24 inches from the edge of the roof or eave. The rows shall be parallel with the exterior wall line and the devices in each row shall be staggered for a spacing of no more than 24 inches on center measured parallel with the exterior wall line. Continuous snow barriers shall be secured to roof framing at no more than 48 inches on center and/or to manufacturers specifications. Continuous barriers shall be installed parallel with the exterior wall line and no more than 24 inches from the edge of the roof or eave. 
§1507.6.2 Deck Slope. 
    Mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall not be applied on roof slopes below two (2) units vertical in twelve (12) units horizontal (16% slope) except for patios and carports open on three (3) sides are allowed one (1) unit vertical in twelve (12) units horizontal. 
CHAPTER 16-STRUCTURAL DESIGN 
§1608.1.1 Alternate Design Method. 
    In lieu of Ground Snow Load Design methods of ASCE 7, buildings and other structures and all portions thereof that are subject to snow loading may be designed to resist a basic horizontal snow load of forty (40) pounds per square foot (psf), in accordance with the load combinations set forth in Section 1605.2 or 1605.3. The duration of snow loading shall be considered as two months. 
    Potential unbalanced accumulation of snow due to drifting and sliding at valleys, parapets, roof structures and offsets in roofs of uneven configuration shall be considered. 
    Snow load on roofs that are not impaired by obstacles such as dormers, chimneys, valleys, or roofs of lesser pitch may be reduced for each degree of pitch over 20 degrees by 0.50 psf. 
§1608.2 Ground Snow Loads. 
    The minimum ground snow load for buildings or structures within the City of Glenwood Springs shall be 50 pounds per square foot (psf). Potential accumulation of snow at valleys, parapets, roof structures and offsets in roofs of uneven configuration shall be considered. See table R301.2(1) for climatic and geographic design criteria. 
TABLE R301.2(1) 
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA 
Ground Snow Load Wind Design Seismic Design Category Subject to Damage From Winter Design Temp Ice Barrier Underlayment Required Flood Hazards Air Freezing Index Mean Annual Temp Speed (MPH) Topo- 
graphic Effects Special Wind Weathering Frost Line Depth Termite 50 115 No No B/C Severe 36" slight/mod -2F Yes Yes/10-15-85 1500 48F  
§1613.1 Scope (Earth Quake Loads). 
    Every structure, and portion thereof, including non-structural components that are permanently attached to structures and their support and attachments, shall be designed and constructed to resist the effects of earthquake motions in accordance with ASCE 7, excluding Chapter 14 and Appendix 11A. The seismic design category for a structure is permitted to be determined in accordance with Section 1613 or ASCE7. Structures in Occupancy Categories I and II may be designed for Seismic Design Category B and structures in Occupancy Categories III and IV may be designed to Seismic Design Category C. 
CHAPTER 18-SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS 
§1801.3 Permits Required. 
    Due to the non-isolated nature of properties lying within the City boundaries, no grading shall be permitted anywhere within the City without first obtaining a grading permit. It shall be the obligation of the owner or person in charge of the property and the person(s) who will actually perform the grading to jointly obtain a grading permit. Engineered grading plans shall be submitted unless waived by the Building Official. 
§1807.2 Retaining Walls. 
    Retaining walls shall be designed in accordance with Sections 1807.2.1 through 1807.2.3. Retaining walls over 4 feet in height measure from bottom of footing to the top of wall shall be engineered by a Colorado licensed professional engineer or architect. 
§1807.3 Embedded post and poles. 
    Designs to resist both axial and lateral loads employing post or poles as columns embedded in earth or in concrete footings in earth shall be in accordance with Sections 1807.3.1 through 1807.3.3 and designed and sealed by a Colorado licensed engineer or architect 
§1808.1 General (Foundations). 
    Foundations shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 1808.2 through 1808.9. Shallow foundations shall also satisfy the requirements of Section 1809. Deep foundations shall also satisfy the requirements of Section 1810. All foundations shall be designed and sealed by a Colorado licensed engineer or architect except for foundations supporting a Group S-1 or U occupancy or addition to an R-3 not over 600 square foot of footprint. 
§1809.5 Frost Protection. 
    Except where otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be protected from frost by one of the following methods: 
1.  Extending below the frost line of the locality which is 36 inches (914.4 mm) for the City of Glenwood Springs; 
2.  Constructing in accordance with ASCE-32; or 
3.  Erecting on solid rock. 
    Exception: Free-standing buildings meeting all of the following conditions shall not be required to be protected: 
1.  Classified in Importance Category I (see Table 1604.5); 
2.  Area of 400 square feet (37m2) or less; and 
3.  Eave height of 10 feet (3048 mm) or less. 
    Footings shall not bear on frozen soil unless such frozen condition is of a permanent character. 
§1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction. 
    Minimum width of all footings is 16 inches; minimum thickness of all footings is 10 inches unless designed and sealed by a Colorado engineer or architect 
§1810.1 General (Deep Foundations). 
    Deep foundations shall be analyzed, designed, detailed and installed in accordance with Sections 1810.1 through 1810.4 and designed by a Colorado licensed architect or engineer. The City of Glenwood Springs will not inspect the drilling, reinforcement and placement of piers, piles or shafts. The engineer of record shall perform all inspections of the installation and provide the City with a sealed letter approving the work prior to the final inspection of the building or structure 
    Exceptions: 
1.  In single family dwellings of log construction, wall logs need not be graded. 
2.  In log construction, all structural log designs and connections shall be designed by a licensed Colorado architect or engineer and inspected by that architect or engineer after the completion of the framing with the architect or engineer certifying to the building department that the logs are of the size, quality and species of the design and that they were installed to that design. Wall logs need not be part of the structural design. 
CHAPTER 29-PLUMBING SYSTEMS 
§2901.1 Scope. 
    Exception: The Building Official can require that private sewage disposal systems shall comply with the requirement of the OWTS regulations as adopted by Garfield County. 
§2902.2 Separate Facilities. 
    Exceptions: 
2.  Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of twenty-five (25) or less. 
4.  Two (2) single-use unisex restrooms (one accessible/one non-accessible) are allowed when the occupant load is less than fifty (50). 
CHAPTER 30-ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS 
§3001.5 Permitting and Fees. 
    Elevators and conveying systems shall comply with the requirements of the Elevator Inspection Program of Northwest Colorado Council of Governments for permits, fees, and inspections. 
CHAPTER 31-SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION 
§3105.5 Canopy Special Provisions. 
1.  A canopy may be entirely supported by the building to which attached. 
2.  Separation between different types of construction shall not be required. 
3.  Minimum height of eight feet (8') or per Fire Department requirements. 
4.  Canopies in R.O.W. shall comply with Section 3202. 
5.  For the purposes of the Code, a porte-cochere may be considered a canopy. 
CHAPTER 33-STORM DRAINAGE 
§3311.2 Buildings being demolished. 
    Where a building is being demolished and a standpipe is existing within such a building, such standpipe shall be maintained in an operable condition so as to be available for use by the Fire Department. Such stand pipe shall be demolished with the building but shall not be demolished more than one floor below the floor being demolished or as approved by the Fire Department. 
§3311.3 Water supply. 
    Water supply for fire protection, either temporary or permanent shall be made available as soon as combustible material accumulates or as approved by the Fire Department Official. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017; Ord. No. 8-2018 , § 2, 4-5-2018) 
060.020.030 - The International Building Code and Commentary Vols. 1 and 2. 
    The International Building Code and Commentary Vols. 1 and 2, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, are hereby adopted as enforcement guides. The Building Official, or any authorized representative, shall have the discretion to apply the contents of the documents referenced in this article in a given circumstance, but the Building Official is not required to strictly apply such contents in every conceivably relevant circumstance. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
ARTICLE 060.030 - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE 

060.030.010 - International Residential Code Adopted; Penalty for Violation. 
(a)  For purposes of regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of detached one- and two- family dwellings, and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height in the City of Glenwood Springs, the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, is hereby adopted except as it is amended in this article. 
(b)  Appendices adopted. 
Appendix E Manufactured Housing Used As Dwellings Appendix F Passive Radon Gas Adopted for Tested Structures With Radon Issues Appendix G Pipe Standards for Various Applications Appendix H Patio Covers Appendix J Existing Building and Structures Appendix M Home Day Care R-3 (where there is a conflict with state regulations, state regulations shall apply)  
Only the appendices contained within these chapters, as specifically listed herein, are adopted. 
(c)  All International Residential Code Standards, which are referred to in the various parts of the International Residential Code, as adopted in this section, are hereby adopted. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted in this section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
(e)  Unless indicated otherwise, all references in the Municipal Code to the International Residential Code shall be deemed to include the International Residential Code, the International Residential Code Appendices and the International Residential Code Standards as referred to in this Title and as adopted in this section. 
(f)  If the provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.030.020 - Amendments to the International Residential Code. 
CHAPTER 1-SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 
§R101.1 Title. 
    These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code." 
§R104.1 General (Duties and Powers of the Building Official). 
    The Building official or any authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this code; however, a guarantee that all buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all the provisions of this code is neither intended or implied. The Building Official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this code. 
§R104.8 Liability. 
    The adoption of this code, and any previous codes adopted by the City of Glenwood Springs, shall not be deemed to give rise to a duty of care on the part of any public entity, public employee or agent, nor shall this code or any previous codes be deemed to create any civil remedy against a public entity, public employee or agent. The Building Official, member of the Board of Appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer, employee or authorized representative because of an act performed by that officer, employee, or authorized representative in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The Building Official or any subordinate, acting in good faith, shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code. 
§R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit. 
    This section shall remain the same, except the following alterations. 
Electrical: 
All electrical permits, inspections, and requirements are as per State of Colorado requirements. 
Building: 
1.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11.15 m 2 ). 
2.  Fences not over 6 feet high. 
3.  Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of footing to the top of wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, or IIIA liquids. 
§R105.5 Expiration. 
    Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, no more than two (2) extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extensions shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. No permit shall be extended more than twice nor beyond 41/2 years from the date of issuance of such permit. 
§R106.1 Submittal Documents. 
    The Building Official shall not issue any permit unless the plans and specifications for such proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or remodeling conform to the regulations and restrictions in the International Residential Code. All such plans and specifications for such proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or remodeling shall bear the seal of an architect or engineer licensed by the State of Colorado, unless the preparation of plans and specifications is exempted by C.R.S. § 12-4-112. Such plans and specifications prepared by architectural or engineering sub disciplines shall be so designated and shall bear the seal and signature of the architect or engineer for that sub discipline. 
§R106.2.1 Additional site plan requirements. 
    A survey of the building lot may be required by the Building Official to verify that the structure is located in accordance with the approved site plans. A site development plan shall be submitted with any building permit application which involves the construction of a new building or the expansion of an existing building. The site development plan shall be submitted in duplicate, shall be drawn to scale, and shall show the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected, the location of the building on the lot with reference to legally established property lines, building envelope, setbacks, easements, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the Municipal Code. Prior to issuance of a building permit, the Building Official may require monumentation of property boundaries and corners, or a foundation location certificate within 7 days of completion of the foundation, in accordance with the standards set forth in C.R.S. 38-51-101 et seq., as amended, in order to fulfill the purposes of this section. A record of all site development plans and other survey information shall be kept in the office of the Building Official. 
§R106.6 Proof of water and sewer. 
    The applicant shall provide documentation and proof that water and sewer taps have been obtained from appropriate utility district when the property will be served by the district. 
§R108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. 
    A fee for each building permit shall be paid to the Building Official as set forth in Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code shall be made by the Building Official based on the Valuation Schedule published in the "Building Safety Journal" magazine by the International Code Council. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued. The Building Official may waive the building permit fee for any public entity when such entity is applying for a building permit for a governmental use or a proprietary purpose. 
§R108.3 Building permit valuations. 
    The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit building construction value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued such as gas, mechanical, plumbing, equipment and permanent systems. Electrical valuation shall be provided as a separate value. A determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code shall be made by the Building Official based on the Valuation Schedule published in the "Building Safety Journal" magazine by the International Code Council. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued. The Building Official shall use the higher of these valuations. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the Building Official. 
    The Building Official may waive the building permit fee for any public entity when such entity is applying for a building permit for a governmental use or a proprietary purpose. 
§R108.5 Plan Review Fee. 
    When submittal documents are required by Section 106.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee as shown in Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020. 
    The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 108.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. 
    When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 106.3.4.2, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate shown in Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020. 
§R108.5.1 Expiration of Plan Review. 
    Applications for which no permit is issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application shall expire by limitation and plans submitted for checking may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and plan review fee. Said plan review fee shall be 65% of the building permit fee as shown in Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020 
§R108.6 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. 
    Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum fee set forth in Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
§R108.7 Fee Refunds. 
    The Building Official may authorize the refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
§R108.7.1 Processing Fee. 
    There will be a minimum $30.00 fee for processing refunds. 
§R108.7.2 Permit Fee. 
    The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
§R108.7.3 Plan Review Fee Refunds. 
    The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or cancelled before any plan reviewing is done. 
§R108.7.4 Fee Refund Application. 
    The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original applicant not later than 180 days after the date of the fee payment. 
§R108.8 Re-inspections. 
    Permit fees provide for customary inspections only. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. 
    This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection. 
    Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for failure to post a readily visible address as required in Section R502.1. 
    To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant shall pay the re-inspection fee in accordance with Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020. 
    In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
§R108.9 Investigation fees. 
§R108.9.1 Investigation. 
    Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
§R108.9.2 Fee. 
    An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum fee set forth in Table 1-A of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code Section 060.020.020. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
§R109.1.5.2 Energy Efficiency Inspections. 
    Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with the International Energy Conservation Code. 
§R109.3 Inspection requests. 
    It shall be the duty of the person doing the work, the owner, contractor or subcontractor to know that the building or structure has a valid permit and to notify the building department when work is ready for inspection. Upon conviction, a fine will be assessed to the person doing the work, the owner, contractor or subcontractor if work is being done without a permit and the inspection is not requested per section R109. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work, the owner, contractor or subcontractor requesting any inspections required by this code to provide legal and adequate access and means for inspection of such work. Such request for inspection may be in writing or by calling the 24-hour automated telephone answering system. 
    Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with the International Energy Conservation Code. 
§R112.1 General (Board of Appeals). 
    Orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official may be appealed per Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
CHAPTER 2-DEFINITIONS 
§R202.1 Additional Definitions. 
    ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. Accessory dwelling unit means a separate, complete, dwelling unit containing separate facilities for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation that is contained within or attached to a detached single-family dwelling, or detached from it on the same property. 
    CERTIFIED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY TESTER. A person who has been certified by the State of Colorado to test and maintain backflow assemblies. 
    SHORT TERM RENTAL UNIT. An R/2 or R/3 residential unit that has been approved pursuant to Title 070 of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code requirements for use as a rental dwelling for rental periods of less than thirty (30) days. The short term residential unit will be considered to maintain the code requirements of its previous R/2 or R/3 occupancy. 
    TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two or more attached units in which each unit extends from the foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides. 
CHAPTER 3-BUILDING PLANNING 
§R301.2 Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria. 
    See Table R301.2(1) for design criteria. 
    Buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this code as limited by the provisions of this section. Additional criteria shall be established by the local jurisdiction and set forth in Table R301.2(1). See Table R301.2(1) for design criteria. 
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA 
Ground Snow Load Wind Design Seismic Design Category Subject to Damage From Winter Design Temp Ice Barrier Underlayment Required Flood Hazards Air Freezing Index Mean Annual Temp Speed (MPH) Topo- 
graphic Effects Special Wind Weathering Frost Line Depth Termite 50 115 No No B/C Severe 36" slight/mod -2F Yes Yes/10-15-85 1500 48F  
TABLE R301.5 
    TABLE R301.5 shall remain as part of the code in full except for the 2 items below which are amended as follows: 
Habitable attics and attics served with fixed stairs 40 psf. Sleeping rooms 40 psf.  
§R302.2 Townhouses. 
    Common walls between town houses shall be constructed as 2 - 1 hour wood frame approved listed fire rated assemblies. The walls shall not contain through penetration plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall. 
    Exception: 
    A common 2-hour fire resistance-rated concrete or masonry approved listed fire rated assembly is permitted for townhouses if such walls do not contain through penetration plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall. 
§R302.2.1.1 
    Gypsum board separation shall be continuous around and behind all surface membrane penetrations in separation walls or ceilings. 
§302.2.4 Structural Independence. 
    Exceptions: 
5.  Townhouses separated by a common 2-hour fire-resistance-rated wall as provided in Section R302.2. 
§R302.5.1 Opening Protection. 
    Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 1-3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 1-3/4 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors. Such doors shall be tight-fitting and self-closing. 
TABLE R302.6 
    Table R302.6 shall remain in the code in full, with all the materials in the in the Table being changed to 5/8" Type X gypsum board. 
§R302.6.1 Heating Equipment Room Occupancy Separation. 
    In R-3 occupancies rooms containing a boiler, central heating plant or hot water supply boiler in excess of 400,000 btu per hour input shall be separated from the rest of the building by not less than: one-hour construction on the room side of the heating equipment, with a 20-minute rated door, smoke sealed and self-closing. 
§R302.7 Under stair protection. 
    Enclosed accessible space under stairs shall have walls, under-stair surface and soffits protected on the enclosed side with fire taped ?" gypsum board. 
§R306.5 Sanitation at Construction Sites. 
    Toilet facilities shall be provided for construction workers and such facilities shall be conveniently located and maintained in a sanitary condition. The facilities shall be available from the time the first work is started until the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
§R313.2 One- and Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Systems. 
    This subsection is deleted in its entirety. 
CHAPTER 4-FOUNDATIONS 
§R403.1 General (Footings). 
    When soils tests by an approved agency per R401.4 and foundations designed and sealed by an engineer or architect are not required by the Building Official, all exterior walls shall be supported on continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footings, wood foundations in accordance with AF&PA PWF, or other approved structural systems which shall be of sufficient design to accommodate all loads according to Section R301 and to transmit the resulting loads to the soil within the limitations as determined from the character of the soil. Footings shall be supported on undisturbed natural soils or engineered fill. Except where erected on solid rock or otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall extend to at least 36 inches below finished grade, and spread footings of 10 inches T thick by 16 inches W wide minimum size shall be provided to properly distribute the load within the allowable load-bearing value of the soil. Alternatively, such structures shall be supported on piles where solid earth or rock is not available. The City of Glenwood Springs will not inspect the drilling, reinforcement and placement of caissons. A qualified engineer must perform this inspection. Findings must be detailed in a typed, stamped report to the building department. Footings shall not bear on frozen soils. Concrete footings shall include a minimum of two #5 reinforcement bars to be tied continuously and spaced a minimum of three inches from the ground and equally within the footing. Dowels shall be 1 - #5 4 ft. long with an 8 in. hook placed 18 in. on center. Footings shall be so designed that the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is not exceeded, and that differential settlement is minimized. 
    Exception: 
1.  Unless designed and sealed by an engineer or architect. 
2.  Monolithic, thickened slabs with detached garages. 
3.  Wood foundations are limited to have no more than two floors and a roof; and interior basement and foundation walls at intervals not exceeding 50 ft. 
§R403.1.1 Minimum size. 
    See above. Footing projections, P, shall be at least 3 inches. Footings for wood foundations shall be in accordance with the details set forth in Section R403.2, and FiguresR403.1(2) and R403.1(3). 
§R403.3 Frost protected shallow foundations. 
    For buildings where the monthly mean temperature of the building is maintained at a minimum of 64-degree F, footings are not required to extend below the frost line when protected from frost by insulation in accordance with FigureR403.3(1) and Table R403.3(1). Foundations protected from frost in accordance with Figure R403.3(1) and Table R403.3(1) shall not be used for unheated spaces such as porches, utility rooms, garages and carports, and shall not be attached to basements or crawl spaces that are not maintained at a minimum mean temperature of 64-degree F. Minimum Air Freeze index for Glenwood Springs for frost protected shallow foundation design is 1,500 F-days. Materials used below grade for footings against frost shall be labeled as complying with ASTM C578. 
§R404.1.3.2 Reinforcement for foundation walls. 
    When soils tests by an approved agency per R401.4 and foundations designed and sealed by an engineer or architect are not required by the Building Official, foundations with stem walls shall be provided with a minimum of 2- #5 top and bottom of wall and 1 - #5 18 in. O.C. vertical and horizontal for wall up to 8 ft. in height. Walls over 8 ft. shall be a designed and sealed by a Colorado registered engineer or architect. Section R404.1.3.2.1 and R404.1.3.2.2 are deleted. 
CHAPTER 6-WALL CONSTRUCTION 
§R601.3 Moisture During Construction. 
    Under-floor spaces and building construction materials shall be protected from moisture during construction as follows: 
1.  Under-floor spaces shall be protected from moisture during construction such that no standing water, snow or ice is present prior to the under-floor space being enclosed. 
2.  Construction material shall be protected from damaging moisture in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. 
§R602.1.4 Structural Log Members. 
    Exceptions: 
1.  In single family dwellings of log construction, wall logs need not be graded. 
2.  In single family dwellings of log construction, all structural logs shall be designed by a licensed Colorado architect or engineer and inspected by that architect or engineer after the completion of the framing with the architect or engineer certifying to the building department that the logs are of the size, quality and species of the design and that they were installed to that design. Wall logs need not be part of the structural design. 
CHAPTER 8-ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION 
§R802.2 Design and Construction. 
    The framing details required in Section R802 apply to roofs having a minimum slope of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or greater. Roof-ceilings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Figures R606.11(1), R606.11(2), and R606.11(3) or in accordance with AWC NDS. Components of roof-ceilings shall be fastened in accordance with Table R602.3(1). The use of load duration factors for snow load shall be prohibited. 
§R802.10.2 Design. 
    Wood trusses shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice. The design and manufacture of metal-plate-connected wood trusses shall comply with ANSI/TPI 1. The truss design drawings shall be prepared by a registered professional where required by the statute of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed in accordance with Section R106.1. The use of load duration factors for snow load shall be prohibited. 
CHAPTER 9-ROOF ASSEMBLIES 
§R903.4.2 Gutters and Downspouts. 
    Any Group R or U occupancy with roof edges less than three (3) feet to any property line shall be provided with gutters and downspouts to direct water away from adjacent property. For zero-lot-line developments where roof projects are allowed by deed convent or ingress/egress easements, gutters and downspouts shall be provided to direct water away from adjacent property. Roof projections shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches. 
§R903.5 Snow-Shed Barriers. 
    Roofs shall be designed to prevent accumulations of snow from shedding above or in front of gas utility or electric utility meters and egress doors and patios/decks. 
§R903.5.1 Mechanical barriers are required for metal roof shingles, metal roof panels or for other roofing materials with 12:12 pitch or greater to protect walkways from snow slides. Mechanical barriers for metal roof shingles and metal roof panels. Mechanical barriers installed to prevent snow shedding from the roof shall be secured to roof framing members or to solid blocking secured to framing members in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Individual devices installed in a group of devices to create a barrier to prevents now shedding shall be installed in at least two rows with the first row no more than 24 inches from the edge of the roof or eave. The rows shall be parallel with the exterior wall line and the devices in each row shall be staggered for a spacing of no more than 24 inches on center measured parallel with the exterior wall line Continuous snow barriers shall be secured to roof framing at no more than 48 inches on center and/or manufacturers specifications. Continuous barriers shall be installed parallel with the exterior wall line and no more than 24 inches from the edge of the roof or eave. 
§R905.5.2 Deck Slope. 
    Mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall not be applied on roof slopes below two (2) units vertical in twelve (12) units horizontal (16% slope) except for patios and carports open on three (3) sides or detached garages. 
§R908.1 General (Reroofing). 
    Materials and methods of application used for re-covering or replacing an existing roof covering shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 9. A separate permit is required for re-roofing. Exceptions remain. 
CHAPTER 10-CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES 
§R1004.4 Un-vented Gas Log Heaters. 
    Installation of un-vented gas log heaters is prohibited. 
§R1005.8 
    Factory-built chimney chases shall be effectively fire blocked within the chase enclosure at each floor-ceiling level and at the roof. The vertical distance between adjacent fire blocking shall not exceed 10 feet. 
CHAPTER 11-[RE] ENERGY CONSERVATION 
§N1101.1 Scope. 
    Energy efficiency to comply with International Energy Conservation Code, GSMC 060.080.010. 
CHAPTER 24-FUEL GAS 
§G2417.4.1 Test Pressure. 
    The test pressure to be used shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure, but not less than 10 psig, irrespective of design pressure. Where the test pressure exceeds 125 psig, the test pressure shall not exceed a value that produces a hoop stress in the piping greater than 50 percent of the specified minimum yield strength of the pipe. 
§G2433.1 General (Log Lighters). 
    Log lighters are prohibited. 
§G2445 Un-Vented Room Heaters. 
    Unvented room heaters are prohibited. 
CHAPTER 25-PLUMBING ADMINISTRATION 
§P2503.8.2 Testing. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers, double check valve assemblies, double-detector check valve assemblies and pressure vacuum breaker assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation, immediately after repairs or relocation and at least annually. Testing to be done by a certified backflow assembly tester. 
CHAPTER 26-GENERAL PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS 
§P2601.1 Scope (General Plumbing Requirements). 
    The provisions of this chapter shall establish the general administrative requirements applicable to plumbing systems and inspection requirements of this code. The intent of this code is to meet or exceed the requirements of the State of Colorado Plumbing Code. When technical requirements, specifications or standards in the Colorado Plumbing Code conflict with this code the more restrictive shall apply. 
§P2603.5.1 Sewer Depth. 
    Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a not less than 20 inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be not less than 12 inches below grade. 
CHAPTER 29-WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 
§P2910.1 Scope (Nonpotable Water Systems). 
    The provisions of this section shall govern the materials, design, construction, and installation of systems for the collection, storage, treatment, and distribution of nonpotable water. The use and application of nonpotable water shall comply with laws, rules, and ordinances applicable in the jurisdiction. Nonpotable water systems must be in compliance with all state requirements. 
§P2911.1 General (On-Site Nonpotable Water Reuse Systems). 
    The provisions of this section shall govern the construction, installation, alteration, and repair of on-site nonpotable water reuse systems for the collection, storage, treatment, and distribution of on-site source of nonpotable water as permitted in the jurisdiction. On-site nonpotable water reuse systems must be in compliance with all state requirements. 
CHAPTER 31-VENTS 
§P3103.1 Roof Extension. 
    All open vent pipes which extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 12 inches above the roof except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet above the roof. 
§P3104.4 Vertical Rise of Vent. 
    Every dry vent shall rise vertically to a minimum of six (6) inches above the flood level rim of the highest trap or trapped fixture being vented. Horizontal dry vents below flood rim level shall be permitted for floor drains and floor sinks when installed per P3104.2 and P3104.3 when provided with a wall clean out in a vertical vent in the shortest distance possible. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.030.030 - The International Residential Code and Commentary Vols. 1 and 2. 
    The International Residential Code and Commentary Vols. 1 and 2, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5771, are hereby adopted as enforcement guides. The Building Official, or any authorized representative, shall have the discretion to apply the contents of the documents referenced in this article in a given circumstance, but the Building Official is not required to strictly apply such contents in every conceivably relevant circumstance. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
ARTICLE 060.040 - INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE 

060.040.010 - International Plumbing Code Adopted; Violation; Conflict. 
(a)  All plumbing within the City shall conform to the provisions of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, which is incorporated herein as if set forth verbatim and which is hereby adopted and made a part of the Municipal Code by reference. 
(b)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of the International Plumbing Code adopted in this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
(c)  If the provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.040.020 - Amendments to the International Plumbing Code. 
CHAPTER 1-ADMINISTRATION 
§101.1 Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the International Plumbing Code of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, herein after referred to as this code or the Plumbing Code of Glenwood Springs. 
§101.3 Intent. 
    The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safe guard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of plumbing equipment and systems. The intent of this code is to meet or exceed the requirements of the state of Colorado plumbing code. When technical requirements, specifications or standards in the Colorado plumbing code conflict with this code, the more restrictive shall apply. 
§103.2 Appointment (Building Official). 
    The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this code; however, a guarantee that all buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all of the provisions of this code is neither intended nor implied. 
§103.4 Liability. 
    The adoption of this code, and any previous codes adopted by the City of Glenwood Springs, shall not be deemed to give rise to a duty of care on the part of any public entity, public employee or agent, nor shall this code or any previous codes be deemed to create any civil remedy against a public entity, public employee or agent. The code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damages accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an actor omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suitor proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer of the department of plumbing inspection, acting in good faith, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any actor omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. 
§106.6.1 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. 
    Work commencing before permit issuance may be subject to Section 109.4 International Building Code. 
§106.6.2 Fee Schedule. 
    The fees for all plumbing work shall be as follows: 
1.  Water heater installation ..... $ 60.00 
2.  Plumbing systems; addition, alteration or remodel (includes 2 inspections) ..... $100.00 
§106.6.3 Fee Refunds. 
    The Building Official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected. 
2.  Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
3.  Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is expanded. The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment. 
4.  There will be a minimum $30.00 fee for processing refunds. 
§106.6.4 Re-inspection Fee. 
    A re-inspection fee may be assessed per Section 109.8 International Building Code. 
§109 Means of Appeal. 
    Orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official may be appealed per Section 113 International Building Code. 
CHAPTER 2-DEFINITIONS 
§202 Definitions. 
    CERTIFIED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY TESTER. A person who has been certified by the State of Colorado to test and maintain backflow assemblies. 
CHAPTER 3-GENERAL REGULATIONS 
§305.4.1 Sewer Depth. 
    Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 20 inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches below grade. 
CHAPTER 4-FIXTURES, FAUCETS, AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 
§403.2 Separate Facilities. 
    Exceptions: 
2.  Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of twenty-five (25) or less. 
4.  Two (2) single-use unisex restrooms (one accessible/one non-accessible) are allowed when the occupant load is less than fifty (50). 
§412.4 Public Laundries and Central Washing Facilities. 
    Exception: 
A two-inch (2") drain is allowed in facilities with two or less washing machines. 
CHAPTER 6-WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 
§608.1. General (Protection of Potable Water Supply). 
    A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner so as to prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids or gases being introduced into the potable supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system. Backflow preventer applications shall conform to Table 608.1, except as specifically stated in Sections 608.2 through 608.16.9. 
    No person shall install any water operated equipment or mechanism or use any water treating chemical or substance if it is found that such equipment, mechanism, chemical or substance may cause pollution of the domestic water supply. Such equipment or mechanism may be permitted only when equipped with a Colorado Department of Health approved backflow prevention device. Whenever the use of an antifreeze compound becomes necessary, propylene glycol is recommended. Other antifreeze compounds may be used after written approval by the City Water Department. The use of ethylene glycol is not permitted. In areas where the use of an approved antifreeze is necessary, a readily visible, durable sign shall be posted stating "ETHYLENE GLYCOL PROHIBITED." The sign shall be in letters not less than one (1) inch high on a contrasting background. 
CHAPTER 9-VENTS 
§903.1 Roof Extension. 
    All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 12 inches above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet above the roof. 
CHAPTER 11-STORM DRAINAGE 
§1104.3 Combining Storm with Sanitary Drainage. 
    Combining storm with sanitary drain is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.040.030 - International Plumbing Code Commentary. 
    The International Plumbing Code Commentary, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, is hereby adopted as an enforcement guide. The Building Official, or any authorized representative, shall have the discretion to apply the contents of the commentary referenced in this Title in a given circumstance, but the Building Official is not required to strictly apply such contents in every conceivably relevant circumstance. 
    Amendment to the International Plumbing Code Commentary 
    Alternate installations of backflow devices may be allowed, subject to the installation meeting all applicable CDPHE regulations and with the written approval of the City Public Works Director. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
ARTICLE 060.050 - INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE 

060.050.010 - International Mechanical Code Adopted; Penalties; Conflicts. 
(a)  The International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operating and maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration, incinerators and other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances. 
(b)  Appendix A of the International Mechanical Code as promulgated by the International Code Council are hereby adopted. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, alter, repair, relocate, add to, replace, use or maintain heating, ventilating, cooling or refrigeration equipment in the City, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of the International Mechanical Code and Standards as adopted in this article. Maintenance of equipment which was unlawful at the time it was installed and which would be unlawful under the International Mechanical Code and Standards adopted in this article, if installed after the effective date thereof, shall constitute a continuing violation of said code and standards. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the International Mechanical Code or Standards, as adopted in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
(e)  If the provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.050.020 - Amendments to the International Mechanical Code. 
CHAPTER 1-SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 
§101.1 Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the International Mechanical Code of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado herein after referred to as this code or the Mechanical Code of Glenwood Springs. 
§103.2 Appointment (Building Official). 
    Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this code; however, a guarantee that all buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all of the provisions of this code is neither intended nor implied. 
§103.4 Liability. 
    The adoption of this code, and any previous codes adopted by the City of Glenwood Springs, shall not be deemed to give rise to a duty of care on the part of any public entity, public employee or agent, nor shall this code or any previous codes be deemed to create any civil remedy against a public entity, public employee or agent. The code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damages accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an actor omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suitor proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer of the department of plumbing inspection, acting in good faith, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any actor omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith. 
§106.5.1 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. 
    Work commencing before permit issuance may be subject to Section 109.4 International Building Code. 
§106.5.2 Fee Schedule. 
    The fees for mechanical work shall be as follows: 
1.  Installation of mechanical appliances ..... $ 60.00 
2.  Mechanical systems; addition, alteration or remodel (includes 2 inspections) ..... $100.00 
§106.5.3 Fee Refunds. 
    The code official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows: 
1.  The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected. 
2.  Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
3.  Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is expanded. 
4.  There will be a minimum $30.00 fee for processing refunds. 
§106.5.4 Re-inspection Fee. 
    A re-inspection fee may be assessed per Section 109.8 of the International Building Code. 
§109 Means of Appeal. 
    Orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official may be appealed per Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
CHAPTER 8-CHIMNEYS AND VENTS 
§805.7.1 
    Factory-built chimneys shall be effectively fire-blocked within any chase at each floor-ceiling level and at the roof. The vertical distance between adjacent fire-blocking shall not exceed 10 feet. See IBC for additional requirements. 
CHAPTER 9-SPECIFIC APPLIANCES, FIREPLACES, AND SOLID FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT 
§903.3 Unvented Gas Log Heaters. 
    Unvented gas log heaters are prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.050.030 - International Mechanical Code Commentary. 
    The Commentary to the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Road, Illinois 60478-5795, is hereby adopted as an enforcement guide. The Building Official, or any authorized representative, shall have the discretion to apply the contents of the handbook referenced in this article in a given circumstance, but the Building Official is not required to strictly apply such contents in every conceivably relevant circumstance. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
ARTICLE 060.060 - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

060.060.010 - International Property Maintenance Code Adopted; Penalties. 
(a)  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards for existing residential and nonresidential structures, equipment, and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
(c)  If the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(d)  The Building Official, or any authorized representative, shall have the discretion to apply the contents of the code referenced in this article in a given circumstance, but the Building Official is not required to strictly apply such contents in every conceivably relevant circumstance. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.060.020 - Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code. 
CHAPTER 1-SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 
§101.1 Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, hereinafter referred to as the Glenwood Springs Property Maintenance Code or as "this code." 
§103.4 Liability. 
    The adoption of this code, and any previous codes adopted by the City of Glenwood Springs, shall not be deemed to give rise to a duty of care on the part of any public entity, public employee, or agent, nor shall this code or any previous codes be deemed to create any civil remedy against a public entity, public employee, or agent. The Building Official, member of the Board of Appeals, or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. 
§111.1 Means of Appeal. 
    Orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official may be appealed per Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
§112.4 Failure to Comply. 
    Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
CHAPTER 4-LIGHT, VENTILATION, AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS 
§404.4.1 Room Area. 
    Every living room shall contain at least one hundred twenty (120) square feet and every bedroom occupied by one (1) person shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet, and every bedroom occupied by more than one (1) person shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
§404.5 Overcrowding. 
    Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table 404.5. 
TABLE 404.5 
MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS 
Space Minimum Area In Square Feet 1-2 Occupants 3-5 Occupants 6 or more occupants Living Room a, b No Requirements 120 150 Dining Room a, b No Requirements 80 100 Bedrooms Shall comply with Section 404.4  
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m2. 
a.  See Section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces. 
b.  See Section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. 
§404.5.1 Sleeping Area. 
    The minimum occupancy area required by Table 404.5 shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with Section 404.4. 
§404.5.2 Combined Spaces. 
    Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of Table 404.5 if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
ARTICLE 060.070 - INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

060.070.010 - International Existing Building Code Adopted. 
(a)  The International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, is hereby adopted for the purpose of providing minimum standards for existing residential and nonresidential structures, equipment, and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as adopted in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
(c)  If the provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
CHAPTER 1-SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 
§101.1 Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building Code of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, hereinafter referred to as the Glenwood Springs Existing Building Code or as "the code." 
§103.2 Appointment (Building Official). 
    Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this code; however, a guarantee that all buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all of the provisions of this code is neither intended nor implied. 
§104.8 Liability. 
    The adoption of this code, and any previous codes adopted by the City of Glenwood Springs, shall not be deemed to give rise to a duty of care on the part of any public entity, public employee, or agent, nor shall this code or any previous codes be deemed to create any civil remedy against a public entity, public employee, or agent. The Building Official, member of the Board of Appeals, or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. 
CHAPTER 6-REPAIRS 
§607 
    The provisions of this section are subject to permits and approval by the Colorado State Electrical Inspector. 
CHAPTER 8-ALTERATIONS-LEVEL 2 
§808 
    The provisions of this section are subject to permits and approval by the Colorado State Electrical Inspector. 
CHAPTER 10-CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY 
§1008 
    The provisions of this section are subject to permits and approval by the Colorado State Electrical Inspector. 
ARTICLE 060.080 - INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 

060.080.010 - International Energy Conservation Code Adopted; Conflicts. 
(a)  For purposes of regulating and governing efficiency standards for the construction and renovation of residential and commercial buildings, the International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted except as it is amended in this article. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
(c)  If the provisions of the International Energy Efficiency Code, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code, then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.080.020 - Amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code. 
CHAPTER 1-ADMINISTRATION 
§101.1 Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, hereinafter referred to as the Glenwood Springs Energy Conservation Code or as "the code." 
§103.1.1 Appointment (Building Official). 
    Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this code; however, a guarantee that all buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all of the provisions of this code is neither intended nor implied. 
§104.9 Liability. 
    The adoption of this code, and any previous codes adopted by the City of Glenwood Springs, shall not be deemed to give rise to a duty of care on the part of any public entity, public employee, or agent, nor shall this code or any previous codes be deemed to create any civil remedy against a public entity, public employee, or agent. The Building Official, member of the Board of Appeals, or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. 
§107.3 Referenced Codes. 
CHAPTER 4-RESIDENTIAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
§401.3 Certificate. 
    A permanent certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the heating/cooling or service water heating equipment. The certificate shall be completed by the builder or registered design professional. The certificate shall list the predominate R-values of insulation installed in or on ceiling/roof, walls, foundation (slab, basement wall, crawlspace wall and/or floor) and ducts outside conditioned spaced; U-factors for fenestration; and the solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) of fenestration. Where there is more than one value for each component, the certificate shall list the value covering the largest area. The certificate shall list the type and efficiency of heating, cooling and service water heating equipment. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
ARTICLE 060.090 - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 

060.090.010 - Adoption of the International Fire Code. 
(a)  Pursuant to the power and authority conferred by the laws of the State of Colorado and the Charter of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, it is hereby adopted as the fire code of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, including the Commentary, appendix, except Sections A, E, G and J of said appendix of such code published by the International Code Council Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, all to have the same force and effect as though set forth herein in every particular. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
(c)  If the provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.090.020 - Amendments to the International Fire Code. 
CHAPTER 1-SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 
§101.1 Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, hereinafter referred to as the Glenwood Springs Fire Code or as "this code." 
§103.4 Liability. 
    The adoption of this code, and any previous codes adopted by the City of Glenwood Springs, shall not be deemed to give rise to a duty of care on the part of any public entity, public employee, or agent, nor shall this code or any previous codes be deemed to create any civil remedy against a public entity, public employee, or agent. The Building Official, member of the Board of Appeals, or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. 
§105.4.1 Submittals (Construction documents). The following shall be added: 
    All plans for automatic fire suppression systems submitted for approval shall have affixed the signature of a NICET Level III or higher in fire sprinkler system design or a Colorado Certified Professional Engineer with certified documented training in fire sprinkler system design. All plans for fire alarm systems submitted for approval shall have affixed the stamp and signature of a Colorado Certified Professional Engineer with certifications documenting training in fire alarm systems design or a NICET Level III or higher in fire alarm design. 
§105.6.28 LP-Gas. 
    An operational permit is required for: 
1.  Storage and use of LP-gas 
    Exception: A permit is not required for individual containers with a 1,000 gallon (3786L) water capacity or less serving occupancies in Group R-3. 
§108.4 Building Board of Appeals. 
    The Building Board of Appeals shall also serve as the board of appeals under this Code. The applicants requesting to appeal a decision shall make their request to the Building Board of Appeals within 10 days of the decision they are appealing. 
§109.3.2 Compliance with Orders and Notices. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following: 
(A)  If the building or other premises is owned by one person and occupied by another, under lease or otherwise, and the notice of violation requires additions to or changes in the building or premises such as would be considered real estate and become the property of the owner, said notice and order shall be directed to such owner of the building or premises. 
(B)  Every notice of violation pursuant to this chapter shall set forth a time by which compliance with the notice violation is required. The time specified shall be reasonable according to the circumstances of the particular hazards or condition to which the notice and order pertains. Immediate compliance may be required in any case which represents extreme or imminent danger to persons or property. 
(D)  Except for cases where immediate compliance is required, violations pursuant to this chapter may be appealed as set forth in Section 108.1. In cases where immediate compliance is required, the notice of violation so stating shall be final and conclusive. 
§109.4 Violations; Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
§111.4 Failure to Comply. 
    Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
CHAPTER 3-GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
§308.3 Group A Occupancies. 
    Open-flame or the use of indoor pyrotechnic displays shall not be used in A occupancies. 
    Exceptions: 
1.  Open-flame devices are allowed to be used where necessary for ceremonial or religious purposes in accordance with Section 308.1.7, provided approved precautions are taken to prevent ignition of a combustible material or injury to occupants. 
2.  Heat-producing equipment complying with Chapter 6 and the International mechanical Code. 
3.  Gas lights are allowed to be used provided adequate precautions satisfactory to the fire code official are taken to prevent ignition of combustible materials. 
§308.3.2 Theatrical Performances. 
    The use of indoor pyrotechnic and open flame displays shall be prohibited. 
CHAPTER 5-FIRE SERVICE FEATURES 
§507.2 Type of Water Supply. 
    A water supply shall consist of reservoirs, pressurized tanks, elevated tanks, water mains, tanker shuttles or other approved systems capable of providing the required fire flow. 
§507.5.4.1 Snow Removal. 
    Snow removal operations/snow storage shall not prevent fire hydrants from being immediately discernible or hinder gaining immediate access. 
CHAPTER 9-FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 
§903.2 Where Required (Automatic Sprinkler Systems). 
    Approved automatic sprinkler systems in all buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in this section and Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12: 
1.  In every story of all buildings three (3) stories or more in height except when it is required in the 2015 IBC or IFC, the more restrictive shall apply. 
2.  In every story, basement and mezzanine of any building when the total floor area (including basements and mezzanines) exceeds the limits shown in Table A below: 
TABLE A 
ALLOWABLE FLOOR AREA FOR BUILDINGS 
Building Type Maximum Floor Area III-B, V-B 7,500 V-A, II-B 9,000 II-A, III-A, IV-HT, I-A, I-B 12,000  
A-Protected / B-Unprotected (per Table 601 IBC)  H.T. - Heavy timber 
3.  Whenever any addition to an existing building, except R-3 occupancies, causes the total floor area of the building to exceed the limits set forth in the preceding item number 2 or the floor areas in the 2015 IFC/IBC for that occupancy, the entire building shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system or a firewall conforming to Section 705, 706, 2015 IBC must be installed. When such wall also separates different occupancy classifications, which require a greater fire-resistive rating as set forth in Table 706.4, 2015 IBC, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. Openings in these walls shall conform to the International Building Code and be controlled by actuation of a smoke detector. When the automatic-closing fire assembly is installed in a building with an approved fire detection system, the fire assembly actuating smoke detectors shall be made part of the fire detection. 
4.  Existing structures and facilities (except R-3 occupancies). When in any 24 month period the floor area of a alteration, remodel or modification to any existing building exceeds forty percent (40%) of the floor area of the building being improved, the entire building shall be made to comply with the requirements of chapter 9 in the 2015 International Building Code, 2015 International Fire Code as amended and adopted by the City. When the regulations set forth in the 2015 International Existing Building Code apply to the renovation, remodel or modification of an existing building the more restrictive shall apply to the building. 
5.  All occupancies to be built in a location that is difficult to access, or has limited fire flow water supply as determined by the fire code official or fire chief, will be reviewed by the fire code official and or fire chief for the need to be equipped with an approved automatic fire suppression system. 
§903.2.7 Group M. 
    An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  A Group M fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m 2 ). 
2.  A Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
3.  The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2230 m 2 ). 
4.  A Group M occupancy used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m 2 ). 
§907.1.4 Installation. 
    All fire alarm systems installations shall be supervised by a NICET Level II or higher in fire alarm installation. All fire sprinkler system installers shall hold a current State of Colorado sprinklers fitter license. 
§907.2.1 Group A. 
    Exception is hereby deleted. 
§907.2.2 Group B. 
    Exception is hereby deleted. 
§907.2.7 Group M. 
    Exceptions are hereby deleted. 
§907.2.8.1 Manual Fire Alarm Systems. 
    Exceptions are hereby deleted. 
§907.2.9.1 Manual Fire Alarm Systems. 
    Exceptions are hereby deleted. 
§903.1 Duct Smoke Detectors. 
    Exceptions are hereby deleted. 
§907.6.3 Initiating Device Identification. 
    Exceptions 1 and 4 are hereby deleted. 
    Addition: 
The exterior visual signals shall meet the following requirements: 
(A)  The light used shall be of the strobe light producing at least 110-185 candela. 
(B)  In systems with fire department connections the light is to be located at least 12 ft. above and as directly vertical to the fire department connection as possible. In systems without fire department connections the light is to be located so as to be visible from the nearest street. 
(C)  The light shall not replace the audible alarms but is to be used in junction with it. 
§913.4 Valve Supervision. 
    No. 3 is hereby deleted. 
CHAPTER 56-EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS 
§5601.1.3 Fireworks. 
    Exception: 
5.  The storage, sale, use and handling of toy caps, sparklers and smoke snakes shall be permitted. 
§5608.1 General (Fireworks Display). 
    The use of indoor pyrotechnic displays shall be prohibited 
§5608.3 Approved Fireworks Displays. 
    The handling and firing of explosives shall only be performed by the person possessing a valid explosives certificate issued by the State of Colorado. 
CHAPTER 57-FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS 
§5706.2.4 Permanent and Temporary Tanks. 
    The capacity of permanent above ground tanks containing Class I or II liquids shall not exceed 1,100 gallons (4164 L). The capacity of temporary above-tanks containing Class I or II liquids shall not exceed 2,000 gallons (7,580L). Tanks shall be of the single-compartment design. A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Code Official for the storage or keeping of volatile inflammable fluids in excess of ten (10) gallons in any building. The Fire Code Official is further authorized to issue temporary permits for the above ground storage of such fluids in tanks, which shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) gallon (7580L) capacity for the purpose of providing fuel for heavy equipment used in building construction, earth moving, earth grading or similar operations and such permits may be issued only for sites where there are not close hazards. Such temporary permits shall be issued with the time limits set that shall conform to the reasonably necessary time for completion of the individual job for which the permit is issued. 
APPENDICES 
Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads. 
    Section D106.3 Remoteness. Where two fire apparatus access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses as determined by the code official. 
    Section D107.2 Remoteness: where two fire apparatus access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses as determined by the code official. 
Appendix H Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) Instructions. 
    Appendix H shall be amended to utilize a hazardous Materials Declaration Form designated by the fire authority having jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017; Ord. No. 21-2018 , 4, 9-20-2018) 
ARTICLE 060.100 - NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE 

060.100.010 - Adoption of National Electrical Code; Penalty for Violations; Conflict. 
(a)  All electrical wiring, fixtures and appliances installed, altered or repaired within the City, or in connection with any building therein, shall, so far as materials, design, workmanship and manner of installation, conform with the National Electrical Code promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02269-9101, as adopted and amended by the State of Colorado, which code is incorporated herein and adopted by this reference. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in this section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
(c)  If the provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.100.020 - Work Permit. 
(a)  Required. No alterations or additions shall be made in the wiring of any building, nor shall any building be wired for electric lights, motors or heating or cooling devices, nor shall any electrical apparatus be installed, without first securing a permit therefore from the State Electrical Inspector. 
(b)  Application. Applications for permits required by this section shall be in writing, filed before the work is started, upon forms describing the work contemplated and providing such information as may be required by the State Electrical Inspector. 
(c)  Permit fees; administrative and appeal procedures. The permit fees and the administrative and appeal procedures for electrical work performed pursuant to this article shall be as set forth in C.R.S. § 12-23-101 et seq., as amended. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.100.030 - Inspectors. 
    The State Electrical Inspector shall serve as electrical inspector for the City. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.100.040 - Inspections. 
(a)  Inspection generally. Electric current shall not be turned on until the electrical installation shall have been inspected, approved and marked in a conspicuous place by the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall carefully inspect all electrical installations prior to and after completion, and he is hereby authorized and empowered to remove any and all obstructions such as lath, plastering, boarding, partitions or any other obstruction which interferes with a thorough and complete inspection. Inspections may be made at any time during the installation that the inspector deems is expedient or necessary. 
(b)  Issuance of certificate of inspection. Upon final inspection of an electrical installation, the electrical inspector shall issue his certificate of compliance or prescribe changes necessary for such compliance. Upon such changes being made to the satisfaction of the inspector, he shall issue the certificate of inspection, which shall authorize the commencement of the electrical service. After issuance of any such certificate, no change shall be made either by way of addition, alteration or taking from the same without the written consent of the inspector. 
(c)  Notice and discontinuance of service when defect discovered through inspection. 
(1)  Whenever the electrical inspector, during an electrical installation, shall find any wire or wires or equipment in a dangerous condition or so placed as to interfere with the work of the fire department, he shall notify the owner or the person using or operating such wires or equipment to remedy the defect. Every person who fails or refuses to remedy such defects within ten (10) days, or a longer period when the same is granted by the inspector, after receipt of notice shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
(2)  The electrical inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce a discontinuance of electrical service in every case where wiring or equipment is found to be defective or in noncompliance with this article; and, when service has been ordered discontinued, electrical service shall not be restored or reconnected until the defect has been remedied. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
ARTICLE 060.110 - NATIONAL ELECTRICAL SAFETY CODE 

060.110.010 - Adoption of National Electrical Safety Code. 
(a)  Adoption of Code. All electric supply and communication lines installed, altered, or repaired within the corporate limits of the City shall be designed, constructed and maintained to meet the requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code, current edition as adopted and enforced by the state of Colorado, approved by the American National Standards Institute, and published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 345 East Forty-Seventh Street, New York, New York 10017, as adopted and amended by the State of Colorado, which code is incorporated herein and adopted by this reference. 
(b)  Conflicts between National Electrical Safety Code and National Electrical Code current edition(s) as adopted and enforced by the state of Colorado. In the event that there is any conflict between the provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in this Title, and the National Electrical Safety Code, as adopted in this section, then the code giving the strictest requirements shall be followed in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(c)  If the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, as adopted in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
ARTICLE 060.120 - INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE 

060.120.010 - International Fuel Gas Code Adopted; Penalty for Violation; Conflict. 
(a)  For purposes of regulating the minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of fuel gas systems in the City of Glenwood Springs, the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, 4051 West Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478-5795, is hereby adopted except as it is amended in this article. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted in this section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
(c)  If the provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.120.020 - Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code. 
CHAPTER 1-SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 
§101.1 Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, hereinafter referred to as the Glenwood Springs Fuel Gas Code or as "the code." 
§103.2 Appointment (Building Official). 
    Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this code; however, a guarantee that all buildings and structures have been constructed in accordance with all of the provisions of this code is neither intended nor implied. 
§103.4 Liability. 
    The adoption of this code, and any previous codes adopted by the City of Glenwood Springs, shall not be deemed to give rise to a duty of care on the part of any public entity, public employee, or agent, nor shall this code or any previous codes be deemed to create any civil remedy against a public entity, public employee, or agent. The Building Official, member of the Board of Appeals, or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. 
§106.6.2 Fee Schedule. 
    The fees for mechanical work shall be as follows: 
1.  Installation of gas appliances ..... $ 60.00 
2.  Gas systems: addition, alteration, remodel (two inspections) ..... $100.00 
§109 Means of Appeal. 
    An order, decision, or determination by the Building Official may be appealed per Section 113 of the International Building Code. 
CHAPTER 3-GENERAL REGULATIONS 
§303.3 Prohibited locations. 
    Nos. 3 and 4 are hereby deleted. Unvented room heaters are prohibited in the City of Glenwood Springs. 
CHAPTER 4-GAS PIPING INSTALLATIONS 
§403.4.2.1 Galvanized Pipe. 
    Galvanized pipe shall not be used with propane. 
§406.4.1 Test Pressure. 
    The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 1 1/2 times the proposed maximum working pressure, but not less than 10 psig, irrespective of design pressure. Where the test pressure exceeds 125 psig, the test pressure shall not exceed a value that produces a hoop stress in the piping greater than 50 percent of the specified minimum yield strength of the pipe. 
CHAPTER 5-CHIMNEYS AND VENTS 
§501.8 Appliances Not Required to Be Vented. 
    No. 8 is hereby deleted. 
CHAPTER 6-SPECIFIC APPLIANCES 
§603.1 General (Log Lighters). 
    Log lighters are prohibited. 
§621 Un-vented Room Heaters. 
    This section is hereby deleted. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
ARTICLE 060.130 - MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS 

060.130.010 - Street Cut Permit. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the City in the course of his employment, to make or cause or permit to be made any excavation or opening in or under the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefore or to make any such excavation in any manner which does not comply with the permit issued therefore. 
(b)  Application. Any person desiring a permit to excavate in any street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way or other public place shall make application therefore to the city engineer and/or Building Official upon applications furnished for that purpose and shall pay a fee in accordance with Section 090.045 of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code. 
(c)  Excavations controlled by the public works department. All excavations made in any street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way or other public place shall be made under the supervision of the Public Works Department and shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of Article 090.045 of the Municipal Code. The Public Works Department shall have the right to prescribe the method to be used in the excavation, the width thereof and any other reasonable conditions for the protection of utilities or the public or for minimizing the interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(d)  Safety and protection of the public. Any person making or causing to be made any excavation or opening in any street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way or other public place or within five (5) feet (one hundred fifty-two (152) centimeters) of the line of any public right-of-way or public place shall provide barricades or other suitable protective devices that will prevent inadvertent entry into the work area by members of the public and will prevent injury to such persons. No excavations shall be allowed to remain open between sunset and sunrise, unless prior approval of the Public Works Department has been granted. If such approval is granted, such excavations shall be properly barricaded, and properly lighted so as to warn all persons of such danger. All barricades and lights shall be of substantial construction and shall be furnished by the person doing the work. 
(e)  Traffic control plan required. Any person making or causing to be made any excavation or opening in any street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way or other public place which affects the movement of vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians shall have prepared a traffic control plan to be submitted with the application for a permit for such excavation. Preparation of the traffic control plan, and the subsequent installation and maintenance of traffic control devices, shall be by a certified traffic control supervisor, and shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article 090.045 of the Municipal Code. The traffic control plan shall be submitted to, reviewed by and approved by the City Engineer be fore any excavation may begin. 
(f)  Restoration of paving after excavations. All restoration of paving surfaces, after an opening or excavation has been made, shall be made in accordance with Article 090.045 of the Municipal Code. The entire cost of restoring the paving to its original condition shall be paid by the person making the excavation. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.130.020 - Street Obstruction Permit. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct a street or sidewalk with any debris, lumber, sand, gravel, dirt, abandoned or wrecked automobiles or other material or substance without first obtaining a permit from the public works department. Such permits may be granted only where the obstruction is necessary for the construction, alteration or repair of the adjoining property and such permitted obstructions shall be limited to as short a time as is reasonably possible. Each day that an unlawful obstruction is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.130.030 - Access Permit and Regulations. 
(a)  Access prohibition. No person shall install, create or modify a point of vehicular access, by curb cut or otherwise, upon a public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit therefore from the City Engineer. Construction of such point of vehicular access shall be in conformance with design requirements as set forth in Title 070. 
(b)  Fee and inspection. Every applicant for a permit to create a point of vehicular access shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) and submit such forms and information as required by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may impose such conditions as are necessary to accomplish the purpose of this section. Prior to any use of the point of vehicular access, it shall be inspected by the City Engineer who shall issue a written approval if the point of vehicular access as completed conforms to the permit and to the conditions imposed by the City Engineer. 
(c)  Stop work order. The City Engineer may issue a stop work order to any person violating any provisions of this section and require any such person to remove, seal or otherwise block any point of vehicular access established in violation of this section. Upon the failure of such person to remove, seal or otherwise block the point of vehicular access, the City may perform such work, and the owner of the property in which the point of vehicular access is located shall reimburse the City for all costs of materials and labor expended by the City. All costs for materials and labor expended by the City shall constitute expenditures for the maintenance of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and shall constitute a special assessment upon the property in which the point of vehicular access is located and shall constitute a lien against such property having priority over all other liens except general taxes and prior special assessments, which may by certified by the city clerk to the Garfield County Treasurer who shall collect the assessment, together with a ten (10) percent penalty for the cost of collection, in the same manner as other taxes are collected. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.130.040 - Sidewalk and Curb and Gutter Construction Permit. 
(a)  When permits are required. Excepting as set forth in Subsection 060.130.040(b), any person who is permitted pursuant to the provisions of Article 090.040, to build, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk or curb and gutter must, before commencing any work of building, reconstructing and repair of any sidewalk or curb and gutter, make application for and procure from the public works department a permit for such work. The permit shall be issued only to a person who has obtained a license as required by Title 050, or to an owner of property who is personally performing such work upon real property owned by him. Such application shall include a correct description of the lots, tracts or parcels of land in front of which and along which said sidewalk or curb is to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired. No such permit shall be issued by the public works department until an established grade for such sidewalk or curb and gutter shall have been determined by the city engineer. 
(b)  When permit not required. Any property owner whose real property abuts a sidewalk in a City right-of-way need not obtain a permit before commencing any reconstruction or repair of an area of that sidewalk less than fifty (50) square feet (4.7 meters 2 ), however, such person shall advise the public works department of the nature and extent of such repair. For purposes of this subsection, a person may not arbitrarily divide sidewalk repair or reconstruction projects into areas of less than fifty (50) square feet (4.7 meters 2 ), and should the City, in its sole discretion, determine that the entire project encompasses more than fifty (50) square feet (4.7 meters 2 ), a permit shall be required. 
(c)  Cost of permit. There shall be no fee for any permit required by this section. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.130.050 - Permits for Moving Buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person including the owner of any building or his contractor to move any building over the streets of the City without first obtaining a permit therefor. In granting such a permit the public works department and/or Building Official may impose such restrictions or conditions as deemed necessary to protect the streets of the City or any utilities from damage, and may make any other reasonable requirements which are deemed necessary for the protection of the public. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
ARTICLE 060.140 - REGULATION OF RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION 

060.140.010 - Residential Construction Activities Prohibited. 
    In addition to the prohibitions contained in Sections 100.010.030 and 100.070.030, it shall be unlawful for any property owner or renter, contractor, subcontractor, or any person performing residential construction work, as defined in Section 100.070.030.A. within the City to engage in the following activities: 
(1)  Permit or allow any accumulation of trash or garbage on residential property where construction work has been or is being conducted which is not secured within a trash dumpster or container. 
(2)  Permit or allow any trash, garbage or construction debris to blow or otherwise be carried from a residential property where construction work has been or is being conducted onto or about surrounding properties. 
(3)  Permit or allow any excavated material or concrete mixture, including that which is produced by rinsing out a mobile concrete mix truck at any location other than within the boundaries of the lot(s) on which the excavated material originated or concrete mixture was applied, or other site whose owner has not given prior specific permission for such activity. In the event excess excavated material or concrete mixture is applied, whether intentionally or inadvertently, to adjacent lots, drives or sidewalks, any person performing said construction or any person owning the property on which such construction activity takes place, shall remove such excess. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
060.140.020 - Violations; Conflicts. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies provided by this article, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction of the same shall be punished by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is allowed to persist shall constitute a separate and new offense. 
(b)  If the provisions of the construction building codes, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of the Municipal Code then the more restrictive of the two shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
( Ord. No. 20-2017 , § 2, 11-2-2017) 
TITLE 070 - DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 2, 2018, repealed the former Title 070 and enacted a new title as set out herein. The former Title 070, §§ 070.010.010-070.010.090, 070.020.010-070.020.130, 070.030.010-070.030.200, 070.040.010-070.040.130, 070.045.010-070.045.070, 070.050.010-070.050.110, 070.060.010-070.060.080, 070.070.010-070.070.040, 070.080.010-070.080.080, 070.090.010-070.090.230, 070.100.010-070.100.050, 070.110.010-070.110.080, 070.120.005-070.120.265, 070.130.110, 070.140.010-070.140.190, 070.150.010-070.150.120, and 070.160.010-070.160.100, pertained to subdivision, development, and use of land. For a complete derivation of the former Title 070, see the Code Comparative Table. 

ARTICLE 070.010 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

070.010.010 - Title and References. 
    This document is Title 070 of the Municipal Code of the City of Glenwood Springs. It shall be officially known and cited as the "Glenwood Springs Development Code," and is referred to internally in this document as "this Code" and "this Title." 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.010.020 - Effective Date. 
    This Code shall become effective on August 16, 2018. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.010.030 - Purpose and Intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The general purpose of this Code is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the City and to implement the policies, goals, and strategies adopted by the City of Glenwood Springs, including those set forth in the Glenwood Springs Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Intent. More specifically, this Code is intended to create the best built environment for the City by: 
(1)  Promoting orderly, efficient, and integrated development within the City; 
(2)  Providing for a variety of housing and neighborhood types and densities at a range of housing costs, including affordable workforce housing; 
(3)  Regulating the development and use of land based upon the impact of such development or use on surrounding areas or the City; 
(4)  Providing minimum standards for the design and improvement of land, subdivision, and development to ensure that each building site is capable of accommodating a structure devoted to the intended use of the land; 
(5)  Guarding against loss from natural hazards such as flooding, falling rock, landslides, snowslides, debris flow, and unstable soils; 
(6)  Ensuring equitable processing of development proposals by providing uniform procedures and standards; and 
(7)  Providing a legally accepted record of lot lines, easements, and dedications in accordance with this Code and Colorado law. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.010.040 - Authority, Applicability, and Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Authority. This Code is adopted pursuant to the authority in the Glenwood Springs Municipal Charter and C.R.S. § 29-20-101 et seq. (Colorado Land Use Control Enabling Act) and § 31-23-301 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  General Applicability. This Code shall apply to all land, buildings, structures, and uses located within the City of Glenwood Springs, as those terms are defined in Article 070.070: Rules of Construction and Definitions, unless an express exemption is granted within this Code. 
(c)  Compliance Required. 
(1)  No permit, certificate, or approval of any use that is subject to this Code shall be issued or granted by any department, agency, City official, or City employee without a finding of substantial compliance with this Code having been issued by the appropriate review authority. 
(2)  Unless otherwise stated in this Code, no building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or altered without a determination of substantial compliance with this Code. 
(3)  No lot of record that did not exist on the effective date of this Code shall be created by subdivision or otherwise unless it complies with this Code. 
(d)  Municipal Code and Municipal Charter. 
(1)  Whenever any provision of this Title conflicts with other provisions of the Municipal Code, the stricter provision, as determined by the City Attorney, shall govern. 
(2)  If any provisions of this Title conflict with the Municipal Charter, the Charter shall govern. 
(e)  Emergency Powers. The City Council may authorize any deviation from this Code during a local emergency. Local emergencies shall be declared by resolution of the City Council. Any deviations from this Code during such emergency shall be authorized by resolution of the City Council without a requirement for notice or public hearing, and shall be temporary and of set duration. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.010.050 - Severability. 
    Unless expressly provided otherwise, if any portion of this Code or the application of this Code is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of this Code that can be given affect without the invalid portion or application; provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.010.060 - Transition from Prior Regulations. 
(a)  Development Approvals. Any development approved under regulations in effect prior to the effective date of this Code may be carried out under the terms and conditions of the approval and the development standards in effect at the time of approval, provided the approval has not expired and the development complies with any applicable standards of this Code regarding ongoing operations and maintenance. If the prior approval expires, is revoked, or otherwise becomes invalid, any subsequent development of the site shall be subject to the procedures and standards of this Code. 
(b)  Pending Applications. A development application that has been determined to be complete pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(d)(5) prior to the effective date of this Code may be decided under the regulations in effect when the application was determined to be complete, or may be reviewed and decided under this Code at the request of the applicant. Applications shall not be processed under a combination of prior regulations and this Code. 
(c)  Prior Violations. If a development or activity in violation of the prior development regulations fully complies with this Code, it shall no longer be deemed a violation. Unpaid fees and/or penalties from prior enforcement of violations are still valid and shall remain the responsibility of the violator under the prior regulations. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.010.070 - Nonconformities. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section 070.010.070 is to regulate and limit the development and continued existence of uses, structures, lots, signs, and use characteristics such as parking and landscaping, that were lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Code, but that no longer conform to the requirements of this Code. All such situations are collectively referred to in this Section as "nonconformities." While nonconformities may continue, the provisions of this Section are designed to curtail substantial investment in nonconformities to bring about their eventual elimination in order to preserve the integrity of this Code and the goals of the City of Glenwood Springs. 
(b)  Regulations Applicable to All Nonconformities. 
(1)  Authority to Continue. Nonconformities may continue to be used and occupied, subject to regulations as to the maintenance of premises and conditions of operations set forth in this Section, or unless such nonconformity is terminated as provided in this Section. 
(2)  Determination of Nonconformity Status. The burden of establishing the existence of a nonconformity shall be solely on the owner of the property containing the nonconformity. 
(3)  Maintenance and Minor Repair. 
a.  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconformities are permitted and encouraged, provided that the repairs and maintenance do not increase the degree of nonconformity. Minor repairs and maintenance include the following: 
1.  Repairs necessary to maintain and to correct any damage or deterioration to the structural soundness of, or the exterior or interior appearance of, a building or structure without expanding the height or footprint of the building or structure, unless compliant with this Code; 
2.  Maintenance of land to protect against and mitigate health and environmental hazards; 
3.  Repairs that are required to remedy unsafe conditions; and 
4.  Repairs necessary to comply with current building code requirements. 
b.  Repairs and maintenance within a waterway or area of special flood hazard shall comply with Subsection 070.040.020(d). 
(4)  Change of Ownership or Tenancy. Changes in ownership, tenancy, or management of property with an existing nonconformity may occur, but such nonconformities shall continue to be subject to the standards of this Section 070.010.070. 
(5)  Compliance to the Maximum Extent Practicable. Where compliance with the requirements of this Section is precluded by a lack of sufficient developable area due to the size of the lot, the layout of existing development, or the presence of significant wetlands, floodplains, watercourses, hazard areas, or other significant environmental constraints, the applicant shall comply with the requirements of this Section to the maximum extent practicable, as determined by the Director. 
(c)  Nonconforming Uses. Nonconforming uses of land or structures are subject to the following additional limitations: 
(1)  Limitations on Continuation of Nonconforming Uses of Land or Structures. 
a.  A nonconforming use may be extended throughout the same building, provided that: 
1.  No structural alteration of the building (or portion of such building containing the nonconforming use in the case of buildings with multiple uses) shall be permitted; 
2.  No additional dwelling units shall be permitted in the building; and 
3.  No additional nonresidential units and/or uses shall be permitted. 
b.  Any existing occupied single-family residential dwelling that is deemed to be a nonconforming use may make improvements to the main and accessory structures so long as improvements do not increase the degree of nonconformity or increase the height or building footprint. 
c.  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this Code shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming use of land or structure. 
d.  Whenever a nonconforming use of land or a building has been discontinued for a period of one (1) year, future use of land or building shall comply with this Code. 
(2)  Change of Use. 
a.  A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use, provided the Director determines that the new use creates no greater impacts on surrounding properties and is no more intensive than the use it replaces, and no structural alterations to the building are required to accommodate such change. A nonconforming use that has been changed to a less nonconforming use pursuant to this Subsection may not subsequently be changed back to a more nonconforming use. 
b.  A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, may not subsequently be changed back to any nonconforming use unless otherwise permitted by this Code. 
(d)  Nonconforming Structures. Nonconforming structures are subject to the following additional limitations: 
(1)  A nonconforming structure may only be expanded pursuant to Subsection 070.010.070(b)(3), Maintenance and Minor Repair, and any such expansion shall be in full compliance with this Code. 
(2)  No nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases the nonconformity of the structure, but any structure or portion of a structure may be altered to decrease the nonconformity of the structure. 
(3)  A nonconforming structure that has been damaged or destroyed by fire or other causes may be restored to its original condition, provided that such work is commenced within one (1) year of such event and completed within eighteen (18) months of such event. By written request from the property owner, the Director may grant one (1) extension of either the work commencement and/or the completion of work time period. 
(e)  Nonconforming Lots. Nonconforming lots are subject to the following additional limitations: 
(1)  A structure situated on a nonconforming lot shall be considered a nonconforming structure, subject to the provisions of this Section 070.010.070. 
(2)  A nonconforming lot that was made nonconforming by virtue of enactment of this Code may be used for construction of a building allowed in the applicable zoning district, provided that all other zoning district and dimensional standards are met. 
(f)  Nonconforming Site Features. 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  For purposes of this Subsection, the term "nonconforming site feature" includes any driveway, off-street parking or loading area, landscaping, buffer, screening, or exterior lighting element that lawfully existed per regulations in place prior to the effective date of this Code, as well as the lack of any such feature required by subsequently enacted City regulations. 
b.  A nonconforming site feature may continue to exist even though it does not conform to current applicable standards of this Code, subject to the requirements of this Subsection. 
c.  No action shall be taken that increases the degree of the nonconformity of a site feature. 
(2)  Nonconforming Parking. 
a.  Continuation of Nonconforming Parking. Any parking spaces or access to public rights-of-way lawfully existing on the effective date of this Code that are made nonconforming by virtue of enactment of this Code shall be allowed to continue, provided that: 
1.  Any change or expansion of any use or structure shall only be permitted if the additional number of parking spaces required by such change or expansion is provided in accordance with Subsection 070.040.060, Off-Street Parking and Loading. 
2.  Nonconforming parking areas shall not be expanded, except pursuant to Paragraph b. below. 
b.  Upgrading Nonconforming Parking. 
1.  Nonconforming off-street parking facilities shall be upgraded to comply with this Code's minimum parking space requirements when the following development activities occur: 
i.  An addition to or expansion of one (1) or more structures that, over a two-year period, would increase the total gross floor area of the structures by more than fifty (50) percent; or 
ii.  A remodeling of one (1) or more structures that, over a two-year period, would cost more than fifty (50) percent of the current assessed value of the structures. 
2.  Nonconforming off-street parking facilities shall be upgraded to comply with this Code's parking lot landscaping requirements pursuant to Paragraph (3) below. 
(3)  Nonconforming Buffers, Landscaping, Screening, and Exterior Lighting. Nonconforming buffers, landscaping, screening elements, and exterior lighting shall be upgraded to comply with this Code's applicable standards for such features if the site containing the nonconforming site feature is proposed for any of the following development activities: 
a.  An increase in the total square footage of the vehicular use area, including parking, loading, circulation, and driveway areas; 
b.  A structural addition that increases the combined total gross floor area of all existing structures by more than five hundred (500) square feet or twenty (20) percent, whichever is less; 
c.  Building elevation changes involving fifty (50) percent or more of the exterior walls of a roofed structure on the property within a two-year period, excluding minor cosmetic maintenance such as painting, replacing lighting fixtures, or replacing awnings or signs; 
d.  Any tenant change of a stand-alone nonresidential structure that also involves substantial building elevation changes as determined by the Director, excluding minor cosmetic maintenance such as painting, replacing lighting fixtures, or replacing awnings or signs; 
e.  Any tenant change of a nonresidential structure that is the anchor tenant of the property that also involves substantial building elevation changes as determined by the Director, excluding minor cosmetic maintenance such as painting, replacing lighting fixtures, or replacing awnings or signs; 
f.  Expansion of outdoor operations, storage, or display areas on a site containing nonconforming buffers or screening that increases the gross square footage of such areas by a certain percentage shall require upgrading to offset a corresponding percentage of the buffer or screening nonconformity. 
(g)  Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs shall comply with Subsection 070.040.110(m), Nonconforming Signs. 
(h)  Illegal Nonconformities. An illegal nonconformity exists when: 
(1)  A nonconforming structure is destroyed or substantially destroyed by an intentional act of the owner or an agent without a proper permit. If this occurs, the nonconforming structure shall lose its nonconforming status and thereafter shall be required to be in conformity with existing codes. If a nonconforming use was also in the structure, the nonconforming use and all site improvements shall lose their nonconforming status and be required thereafter to come into compliance with existing codes. 
(2)  A use, structure, or site improvement occurs to a nonconformity without being lawfully authorized in accordance with the provisions of this Section. Such use and/or structure shall therefore cease all operations until such time that the required plans and/or permits are approved. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.010.080 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Purpose. This Section 070.010.080 establishes procedures through which the City of Glenwood Springs seeks to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Code and obtain corrections for violations of this Code. This Section also sets forth the remedies and penalties that apply to violations of this Code. 
(b)  Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a Code violation punishable in accordance with Subsection 070.010.080(e). Each of the following activities constitutes a violation of this Code: 
(1)  Activity Inconsistent with this Code. Any erection, construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration, maintenance, expansion, movement, or use of any land, building, structure, or sign that is inconsistent with this Code. 
(2)  Activity Inconsistent with a Permit or Approval. Any development, use, or other activity that is in any way inconsistent with the terms or conditions of any permit or approval required to engage in such activity under this Code. 
(3)  Illustrative Examples of Violations. Examples of violations of this Code include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Increase of the density or intensity of any use of land or structure except in accordance with the requirements of this Code; 
b.  Reduction or diminishment of lot area, setbacks, vegetative buffers, open space, or other standards below the minimum requirements set forth in this Code; 
c.  Creation, expansion, replacement, or change of a nonconformity inconsistent with this Code; 
d.  Failure to install, improve, or maintain any public or private improvements required by the terms of any permit or approval; 
e.  Failure to abide by conditions of any approval or agreements executed in association with an approval; and 
f.  Failure to comply with applicable requirements for a certificate of occupancy or building permit. 
(c)  Continuing Violations. Any violation of this Code shall be considered a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of this Code is continued past the date of the issuance of notice of violation, with each violation punishable in accordance with Subsection 070.010.080(e). 
(d)  Enforcement Actions. 
(1)  Responsibility for Enforcement. This Code shall be administered and enforced by the Director, Building Official, and City Engineer, or such other person as may be designated by the Director. 
(2)  Investigation. Whenever the Director receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of this Code or a permit or approval issued under this Code, the Director shall investigate the complaint and inform the complainant in writing of his or her findings and any actions that have been, or will be taken. 
(3)  Persons Liable. The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land, or any part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this Code or a permit or approval issued pursuant to this Code, may be held responsible for the violation and be subject to the penalties and remedies provided in this Section. 
(4)  Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations. 
a.  If the Director finds that any provision of this Code is being violated, the Director shall send a written notice to the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Additional written notices may be sent at the Director's discretion. 
b.  If the person responsible for the violation does not take action to correct the violation within thirty (30) days of the first notice, a final written notice shall be sent by certified mail with return receipt required to the owner of record of the subject property, or to the homeowners association, as applicable. The final written notice shall state the action the Director intends to take if the violation is not corrected and shall advise that the Director's decision or order may be appealed to the City Council, pursuant to Subsection 070.060.070(c). 
c.  Following an appeal to the City Council for failure to file a timely appeal of a decision, or notwithstanding the foregoing, when a delay would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of the Code, or pose a danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, the Director may immediately issue an order for compliance by personal service, posting of the property, or certified mail with return receipt required to the owner of record of the subject property, or to the homeowners association, as applicable, and seek enforcement through the municipal court as authorized below. 
(5)  Continuation of Prior Enforcement Actions. Nothing in this Code shall prohibit the continuation of previous enforcement actions undertaken by the City pursuant to previous regulations. 
(e)  Penalties and Remedies. The Director, Building Official, or City Engineer, or such other person as may be designated by the Director, shall have the power to enforce this Code subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Fines. Any violation of this Code shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(2)  Deny, Withhold, or Revoke Entitlements. 
a.  The issuing/approval authority shall have the power to deny, withhold, or revoke permits for violation of this Code or violations of any conditions of approval. 
b.  The issuing/approval authority shall hold a hearing to determine the nature and extent of the alleged violation and shall have the power to deny, withhold, or revoke the permit issued to the violator, to require the violator to take corrective measures, or to direct employees or agents of the City to enter onto the premises and to take the corrective measures required by the authority, the cost to be borne by the violator. If the issuing/approval authority is the Director, then the hearing shall be held at the Planning Commission. 
c.  Any entitlement or other form of authorization may be denied, withheld, or revoked after notice and a hearing, when the Director determines that: 
1.  There is a departure from the approved plans, specifications, limitations, or conditions as required under the entitlement; 
2.  The entitlement was established by false representation; 
3.  The entitlement was issued in error; or 
4.  There is any other violation of this Code. 
(3)  Stop-Work Orders. 
a.  The Director, Building Official, or City Engineer may issue a stop-work order whenever any building, structure, site, or portion of a building, structure, or site is being demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in a hazardous manner, in substantial violation of any state or local building law, or in a manner that endangers life or property. 
b.  The Director, Building Official, or City Engineer may issue a stop-work order on any property with an uncorrected violation of this Code or approval issued under this Code. 
c.  A stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work, and shall specify the provision of this Code or other law in violation. 
d.  If a stop-work order is issued, no work shall proceed on any building, structure, site, or portion of a building, structure, or site subject to the order except to correct a violation or to comply with the order. 
e.  Once conditions cited in the stop-work order have been adequately addressed, the Director, Building Official, or City Engineer shall rescind the stop-work order. 
(f)  Continuation of Prior Enforcement Actions. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent the City from pursuing any other remedies it may have for violations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
ARTICLE 070.020 - ZONING DISTRICTS 

070.020.010 - General Provisions. 
(a)  Zoning Districts Established. Table 020.1 lists the zoning districts established by the City's adoption of the Official Zoning Map. 
Table 020.1: Zoning Districts Established Zoning Districts Section Residential Districts RR - Rural Residential 070.020.030 RL - Residential Low-Density 070.020.040 RM1 - Residential Medium-Density 070.020.050 RM2 - Residential Multifamily Limited 070.020.060 RH - Residential High-Density 070.020.070 RT - Residential Transitional 070.020.080 Commercial and Mixed-Use Districts M1 - Mixed-Use Corridor 070.020.090 M2 - Mixed-Use Core 070.020.100 M3 - Mixed-Use Regional 070.020.110 CO - Commercial 070.020.120 RE - Resort 070.020.130 Other Nonresidential Districts I1 - Light Industrial 070.020.140 I2 - River Industrial 070.020.150 IN - Institutional 070.020.160 HP - Hillside Preservation 070.020.170  
(b)  Official Zoning Map. 
(1)  Incorporation of Map. 
a.  The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Code are shown on the official "Zoning District Map of the City of Glenwood Springs" ("Official Zoning Map") which is incorporated into this Code. 
b.  The zoning district map shall be identified by signature of the Mayor, shall be attested by the City Clerk, and shall bear the seal of the City and the date of adoption. 
c.  The zoning district map shall be located in the office of the Director. 
(2)  Zoning District Boundaries. 
a.  Except where otherwise necessary, zoning district boundaries shall follow the City's corporate limits, section lines, lot lines, right-of-way lines, or extensions of such lines. 
b.  Where a zoning district boundary divides a lot or parcel, the location of such boundary, unless indicated by dimension, shall be determined by the scale of the zoning district map by the Director. 
c.  Where a zoning district boundary coincides with a right-of-way line and that right-of-way line is abandoned, the zoning district boundary shall then follow the centerline of the former right-of-way. 
d.  Land that is not part of a public railroad or utility right-of-way and that is not indicated as being in any zoning district shall be considered to be included in the most restrictive adjacent zoning district even when such zoning district is separated from the land in question by a public railroad or utility right-of-way. 
(3)  Boundary Clarification. In the event that a zoning district boundary is unclear or disputed, the Director shall determine the location of the boundary. Such determination is subject to an appeal to the City Council pursuant to Subsection 070.060.070(c), Appeal of Administrative Decision. 
(4)  Amendments to the Map. Amendments to the boundary of any zoning district shall require a rezoning pursuant to Subsection 070.060.040(a), Rezoning, and shall promptly be entered on the zoning district map. A list of rezoning ordinances with number and date shall be kept on file in the office of the Director. 
(c)  Organization of the Zoning Districts in this Article. 
(1)  Base Zoning Districts. 
a.  Sections 070.020.030 through 070.020.170 follow a common structure for describing the purpose and intent for each base zoning district, the applicable dimensional standards, and any district-specific standards. 
b.  Each base zoning district includes an illustration demonstrating the dimensional requirements for that district. The illustrations are not intended to represent a specific location, but rather reflect the general character of the district. 
c.  Each base zoning district includes a table of dimensional standards summarizing the most pertinent dimensional standards applicable to each district. The labels in the table correspond to the applicable illustration. These tables are illustrative only and do not identify all standards that may apply to a particular development. 
d.  Each base zoning district also contains a table cross-referencing other applicable key standards such as uses allowed in the district and the general and specific standards applicable to all development. These tables are illustrative only and do not identify all standards that may apply to a particular development. 
(2)  Planned Unit Development. The Planned Unit Development District in Section 070.020.180 describes the applicable standards for that district. Establishment of a Planned Unit Development follows the procedures in Subsection 070.060.040(b), Rezoning to PUD. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.020 - Summary of Dimensional Standards. 
(a)  Residential Districts. 
Table 020.2: Summary of Residential Dimensional Standards RR RL RM1 RM2 RH RT Lot Standards, Minimum Lot area 40,000 sf 20,000 sf 6,000 sf - - - Lot area, lots created prior to March 1, 1965 5,000 sf Lot area, single-family detached - - - 5,000 sf 4,500 sf 5,000 sf Lot area, attached dwellings sharing common wall - - 7,500 sf 2,500 sf/unit 2,250 sf/unit 2,500 sf/unit Landscaped area (for multifamily dwellings) - - - 20 percent 20 percent 20 percent Setbacks, Minimum Front (from arterial streets) 50 feet 50 feet 30 feet 30 feet 15 feet 15 feet Front (from other streets) 25 feet 25 feet 20 feet 20 feet 10 feet 10 feet Side 10 feet 10 feet [1] 5 feet 5 feet [2] 5 feet [2] 5 feet [2] Rear 25 feet 25 feet 15 feet 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet Building Standards, Maximum Building height 27 feet 27 feet 27 feet 27 feet 40 feet 40 feet Notes: 
[1] Or one-half the height of the principal building, whichever is greater. 
[2] For attached dwellings sharing a common wall, interior side setbacks may be permitted at zero feet.  
(b)  Mixed-Use and Commercial Districts. 
Table 020.3: Summary of Mixed-Use and Commercial Dimensional Standards M1 M2 M3 CO Lot Standards, Minimum Lot area None None None None Landscaped area 15 percent None 15 percent 10 percentSetbacks Front, minimum 5 feet None None 5 feet Front, maximum (from arterials) 60 feet 40 feet 40 feet 60 feet Front, maximum (from other streets) 25 feet 20 feet 25 feet 40 feet Side, minimum 5 feet None None 5 feet Rear, with alley, minimum 10 feet None None 10 feet Rear, without alley, minimum 7.5 feet None None 7.5 feet Building Standards, Maximum Building height 40 feet 40 feet (60 feet by special review) 60 feet 40 feet  
(c)  Other Nonresidential Districts. 
Table 020.4: Summary of Other Nonresidential Dimensional Standards RE I1 I2 IN HP Lot Standards Lot area, minimum None 10,000 sf None None 5,000 sf Landscaped area, minimum 10 percent 20 percent 20 percent 10 percent 20 percent Density, maximum - - - - - Areas on a lot with slopes up to 20 percent: 
1 du/ 10,000 sf 
- Areas on a lot with slopes greater than 20 percent: see 070.040.020(b). Setbacks Front, minimum 5 feet 20 feet 20 feet 15 feet 15 feet Front, maximum 60 feet - - - - Side, minimum 5 feet 10 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet Rear, minimum 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 5 feet 15 feet Building Standards, Maximum Building height 60 feet 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet 27 feet  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.030 - Rural Residential (RR) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The RR district is intended to accommodate very low-density, large-lot single-family residential uses with some limited agricultural uses. The district is intended to provide a transition between surrounding rural lands in the County on large parcels of land and more urbanized areas. 
Figure 020-1: RR District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.5: RR District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area (sq ft) 40,000 Setbacks, Minimum B Front (from arterial streets) (ft) 50 Front (from other streets) (ft) 25 C Side (ft) 10 D Rear (ft) 25 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 27 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Residential Site and Building Design 070.040.080  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.040 - Residential Low-Density (RL) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The RL district is intended to accommodate low-density, primarily single-family residential uses. The RL district can be used as a transitional district between large-lot rural development and medium-density residential neighborhoods. 
Figure 020-2: RL District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.6: RL District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area (sq ft) 20,000 Setbacks, Minimum B Front (from arterial streets) (ft) 50 Front (from other streets) (ft) 25 C Side (ft) 10 D Rear (ft) 25 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 27 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Residential Site and Building Design 070.040.080  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.050 - Residential Medium-Density (RM1) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The RM1 district is intended to accommodate medium-density, primarily single-family uses on smaller- to medium-sized lots. The RM1 district is intended to transition from low-density single-family residential districts to multifamily development districts. 
Figure 020-3: RM1 District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.7: RM1 District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area (sq ft) 6,000 Lot area (sq ft), lots created prior to March 1, 1965 5,000 Lot area (sq ft), attached dwellings sharing common wall 7,500 Setbacks, Minimum B Front (from arterial streets) (ft) 30 Front (from other streets) (ft) 20 C Side (ft) 5 D Rear (ft) 15 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 27 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Residential Site and Building Design 070.040.080  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.060 - Residential Multifamily Limited (RM2) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The RM2 district is intended to accommodate medium-density single-family and limited multifamily residential uses. The RM2 district allows for a more diverse housing stock, including smaller multifamily uses such as two-family dwellings and townhomes, and can provide a transition between single-family districts and high-density residential districts. 
Figure 020-4: RM2 District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.8: RM2 District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area, single-family detached (sq ft) 5,000 Lot area, attached dwellings sharing common wall (sq ft) 2,500 per unit Landscaped area (for multifamily dwellings) (%) 20 Setbacks, Minimum B Front (from arterial streets) (ft) 30 Front (from other streets) (ft) 20 C Side (ft) 5 [1] D Rear (ft) 10 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 27 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Residential Site and Building Design 070.040.080 Note: [1] For attached dwellings sharing a common wall, interior side setbacks may be permitted at zero feet.  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.070 - Residential High-Density District (RH) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The RH district is intended to accommodate various housing types ranging from single-family detached on small lots to multifamily dwellings. The RH district is intended to transition between established neighborhoods and more intense commercial or other nonresidential districts. 
Figure 020-5: RH District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.9: RH District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area, single-family detached (sq ft) 4,500 Lot area, attached dwellings sharing common wall (sq ft) 2,250 per unit Landscaped area (for multifamily dwellings) (%) 20 Setbacks, Minimum B Front (from arterial streets) (ft) 15 Front (from other streets) (ft) 10 C Side (ft) 5 [1] D Rear (ft) 10 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 40 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Residential Site and Building Design 070.040.080 Note: [1] For attached dwellings sharing a common wall, interior side setbacks may be permitted at zero feet.  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.080 - Residential Transitional (RT) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The RT district is intended to provide for transitional areas consisting of primarily residential uses at varied densities, with limited commercial uses that are compatible with surrounding neighborhoods. The RT district is intended to serve as a transitional buffer between residential and nonresidential zoning districts. 
Figure 020-6: RT District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.10: RT District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area, single-family detached (sq ft) 5,000 Lot area, attached dwellings sharing common wall (sq ft) 2,500 per unit Landscaped area (for multifamily dwellings) (%) 20 Setbacks, Minimum B Front (from arterial streets) (ft) 15 Front (from other streets) (ft) 10 C Side (ft) 5 [1] D Rear (ft) 10 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 40 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Residential Site and Building Design 070.040.080 Note: [1] For attached dwellings sharing a common wall, interior side setbacks may be permitted at zero feet.  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.090 - Mixed-Use Corridor (M1) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The M1 district is intended to accommodate mixed-use development with walkable and active streetscapes on Glenwood's primary roadways. The mix of uses in the M1 district is intended to accommodate lighter-intensity commercial districts with limited auto-oriented uses compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods. The M1 district is also intended to offer a diverse mix of housing opportunities at varying densities. 
Figure 020-7: M1 District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.11: M1 District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area (sq ft) None Landscaped area (%) 15 Setbacks, Minimum B Front, min (ft) 5 Front, max (from arterials) (ft) 60 Front, max (from other streets) (ft) 25 C Side, min (ft) 5 D Rear, with alley, min (ft) 10 Rear, without alley, min (ft) 7.5 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 40 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design 070.040.090  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.100 - Mixed-Use Core (M2) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The M2 district is intended to accommodate walkable and active development within Glenwood's core commercial areas, including but not limited to central downtown. The M2 district includes the most recognizable and prominent areas of Glenwood Springs and therefore places an emphasis on high-quality building and site design, as well as the surrounding streetscape. The M2 district is intended to allow for a mix of residential and nonresidential uses while ensuring compatibility with surrounding established neighborhoods. 
Figure 020-8: M2 District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.12: M2 District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area (sq ft) None Landscaped area (%) None Setbacks, Minimum B Front, min (ft) None Front, max (from arterials) (ft) 40 Front, max (from other streets) (ft) 20 C Side, min (ft) None D Rear, min (ft) None Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 40 [1] Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design 070.040.090 Note: [1] 60 feet max building height by special review  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.110 - Mixed-Use Regional (M3) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The M3 district is intended to accommodate large-scale mixed-use development and redevelopment with an emphasis on walkability and active ground-floor uses. The M3 district allows for regional-scale employment, retail, and medium- to high-density residential opportunities with a focus on high-quality building and site design and a clear street organization for easy access for multi-modal movement. 
Figure 020-9: M3 District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.13: M3 District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area (sq ft) None Landscaped area (%) 15 Setbacks, Minimum B Front, max (from arterials) (ft) 40 Front, max (from other streets) (ft) 25 C Side, min (ft) None D Rear, min (ft) None Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 60 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design 070.040.090  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.120 - Commercial (CO) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The CO district is intended to accommodate general commercial uses with some limited residential uses. The CO district provides a transition between mixed-use and/or residential districts and more intense industrial districts, and allows some typically auto-oriented or major corridor uses. 
Figure 020-10: CO District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.14: CO District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area (sq ft) None Landscaped area (%) 10 Setbacks, Minimum B Front, min (ft) 5 Front, max (from arterials) (ft) 60 Front, max (from other streets) (ft) 40 C Side, min (ft) 5 D Rear, with alley, min (ft) 10 Rear, without alley, min (ft) 7.5 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 40 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design 070.040.090  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.130 - Resort (RE) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The RE district is intended to accommodate high-intensity commercial development with flexibility in terms of allowable uses and dimensional standards to accommodate for primary and accessory resort development uses. The RE district is intended to apply to properties that are relatively isolated from adjacent properties due to physical and/or natural features. 
Figure 020-11: RE District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.15: RE District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area (sq ft) None Landscaped area (%) 10 Setbacks, Minimum B Front, min (ft) 5 Front, max (ft) 60 C Side, min (ft) 5 D Rear, min (ft) 10 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 60 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design 070.040.090  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.140 - Light Industrial (I1) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The I1 district is intended to accommodate a diverse mix of office, service, commercial, and lower-intensity industrial uses with limited impacts on adjacent neighborhoods. The allowable uses in the I1 district take place mostly indoors, with minimal outdoor storage and assembly. This district may include research and development operations and small-scale manufacturing uses. 
Figure 020-12: I1 District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.16: I1 District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area (sq ft) 10,000 Landscaped area (%) 20 Setbacks, Minimum B Front, min (ft) 20 C Side, min (ft) 10 D Rear, min (ft) 10 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 40 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design 070.040.090  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.150 - River Industrial (I2) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The I2 district is intended to accommodate a variety of industrial and commercial uses in highly visible areas near Glenwood's river corridors. The I2 district is intended to place greater emphasis on aesthetics and compatibility in these sensitive areas. 
Figure 020-13: I2 District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.17: I2 District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area (sq ft) None Landscaped area (%) 20 Setbacks, Minimum B Front, min (ft) 20 C Side, min (ft) 5 D Rear, min (ft) 10 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 40 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design 070.040.090  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.160 - Institutional (IN) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The IN district is intended to accommodate public and quasi-public uses and activities with unique operational and site characteristics. Uses in the IN district generally include essential services or activities to the City such as community centers, hospitals, and municipal operations. The IN district is intended to offer greater flexibility to base dimensional standards by requiring use of the Master Plan procedure (Subsection 070.060.050(b)) or the Location and Extent procedure (Subsection 070.060.050(d)). 
Figure 020-14: IN District Dimensional Standards

(b)  Standards. 
Table 020.18: IN District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards, Minimum A Lot area (sq ft) None Landscaped area (%) 10 Setbacks, Minimum B Front, min (ft) 15 C Side, min (ft) 5 D Rear, min (ft) 5 Building Standards, Maximum E Building height (ft) 40 Other Key Standards Measurements and Exceptions 070.020.190 Table of Allowed Uses 070.030.020 Use-Specific Standards 070.030.030 Development Standards  Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing 070.040.050  Off-Street Parking and Loading 070.040.060  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design 070.040.090  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.170 - Hillside Preservation (HP) District. 
(a)  Purpose. The HP district is intended to provide for the protection and sensitive development of hillsides. The HP district recognizes the importance of Glenwood's hillside areas in terms of their prominence and character within the City. The HP district is intended to allow for reasonable use of hillsides, while protecting the natural and visual character of the surroundings. More specifically, the purpose of the HP district is to: 
(1)  Minimize the negative environmental and visual effects of mass cut-and-fill of large pads and excessive terracing through retention of the natural topography of the hillsides; 
(2)  Prevent soil erosion and landslides; 
(3)  Provide safe circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and within hillside areas and to provide access for emergency vehicles necessary to serve the hillside areas; 
(4)  Preserve visually significant slope banks, ridge lines, rock outcroppings, native plant materials, natural hydrology, and other areas of visual significance; 
(5)  Encourage innovative architectural, landscaping, circulation, and site design that serve to preserve the significant natural resources and visual character of the City; 
(6)  Protect the public from natural hazards caused by unstable slopes and soils, debris flow, erosion and other geologic hazards of hillside development; and 
(7)  Minimize the threat and subsequent damage of wildfire through safe building practices. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  Dimensional Standards. 
Table 020.19: HP District Dimensional Standards Lot Standards Lot area, minimum 5,000 square feet A Density, maximum (for areas on a lot with slopes up to 20%) 1 dwelling unit per 
5,000 square feet Density, maximum (for areas on a lot with slopes greater than 20%) See Subsection 070.040.020(b) Landscaped area, minimum 20 percent Setbacks, Minimum B Front 15 feet C Side 5 feet D Rear 15 feet Building Standards, Maximum E Building height 27 feet  
(2)  Additional Hillside Standards. Development in the HP district shall comply with the standards in Subsection 070.040.020(b), Hillside Development. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.180 - Planned Unit Development (PUD) District. 
(a)  Purpose. Planned unit developments (PUDs) are intended to allow for greater flexibility in the application of zoning and development standards than would otherwise be achieved through a base zoning district in exchange for greater benefit to the City of Glenwood Springs. 
(b)  Establishment of a PUD District. PUD districts shall be established pursuant to the procedures in Subsection 070.060.040(b), Rezoning to PUD. Development in a PUD district shall be subject to the standards included in and/or referenced in an approved PUD plan. 
(c)  Applicability of Development Standards. 
(1)  Unless specifically modified by the PUD plan during the rezoning to PUD procedure, the PUD shall comply with all standards in this Code. 
(2)  Where the PUD standards conflict with the standards in this Code, the regulations of the approved PUD plan shall control. 
(3)  PUDs shall provide common open space as required by Section 070.040.040, Common Open Space. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.020.190 - Measurements and Exceptions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide uniform requirements for measuring dimensional standards and to list any exceptions to the dimensional standards in this Code. 
(b)  Lot and Site Requirements. 
(1)  Minimum Lot Dimensions. 
a.  Any lot that is created, developed, used, or occupied shall meet the minimum lot dimensions for the applicable zoning district unless otherwise established in this Code. 
b.  No land needed to comply with the minimum lot dimensions or other standards in this Code shall be sold or leased away from such lot. 
c.  New lots shall meet the lot dimensions in this Article and shall comply with Section 070.040.030, Site Development and Improvement Standards. 
(2)  Number of Principal Buildings or Uses per Lot. 
a.  No lot shall contain more dwellings than are permitted by the applicable zoning district. 
b.  Multiple buildings may be permitted on a single lot if each building and site development complies with this Code. 
(c)  Setbacks. 
(1)  Measurement of Setbacks. 
a.  Generally. Setbacks shall be measured as follows: 
1.  Setback, Front. The minimum horizontal distance that a structure must be setback from the front lot line. The front setback extends across the full width of the lot. 
2.  Setback, Rear. The minimum horizontal distance that a structure must be setback from the rear lot line. The rear setback extends across the full width of the lot. 
3.  Setback, Side. The minimum horizontal distance that a structure must be setback from a side lot line. The side setback extends the full depth of the lot from the front property line to the rear property line. 
b.  Single-Family Dwelling, Townhouse. Single-family townhouse dwellings sharing a common wall shall not be required to comply with side setback requirements except for the outside walls of the end units. (Figure 020-15) 

Figure 020-15: Measuring Setbacks for Attached Single-Family
(2)  Contextual Setbacks. 
a.  Front. Where a vacant lot is adjacent to existing structures that do not meet the minimum front setback requirements for that zoning district, the front setback for the vacant lot shall be established as the lesser of the median average or mean average front setback of existing structures on that block. 
b.  Rear. 
1.  For Original Townsite lots, where development is proposed that will be adjacent to existing structures that do not meet the minimum rear setback requirements for that zoning district, the rear setback for the vacant lot shall be established as the lesser of the median average or mean average rear setback of existing structures on that block. 
2.  Also see Subsection 070.040.080(d)(2), Dimensional Standards, for limitations on placement of accessory structures in rear yards. 
(3)  Double-Frontage Lots. In the case of double-frontage lots, front setbacks shall apply to all frontages. 
(4)  Corner Lots. On corner lots, the required front yard setback shall be observed along the street upon which the address is assigned (see measurement "A" in Figure 020-16), and a side yard setback shall be observed along the remaining street (see measurement "B" in Figure 020-16). 

Figure 020-16: Measuring Setbacks on Corner Lots
(5)  Sight Distance Triangle Requirement. On corner lots where a front and side yard are required, no wall, fence, structure, sign, or any plant growth shall obstruct the sight lines of motor vehicle drivers and no such obstruction shall be over forty-two (42) inches tall. Sight distance triangle lines shall be determined by the City Engineer as prescribed in the Engineering Standards. 
(6)  Exceptions to Setback Standards. The features listed in Table 020.20 shall be permitted to project into the required setbacks of the applicable zoning district. The exceptions apply to all zoning districts unless otherwise stated. 
Table 020.20: Authorized Exceptions to Setback Standards Accessibility ramps May be located within required yards. Ramps shall be removed within three (3) months after the need for such ramp is removed. Ramps shall not be located in the public right-of-way without approval by the City. Front porches and stoops May encroach ten (10) feet into required front yard provided such porch or stoop is a minimum of sixty-five (65) percent open (including screens and/or windows) on the front and each side and is no closer than ten (10) feet from the front property line. Ground-mounted solar panels May encroach five (5) feet into required side and rear yards provided no element is located closer than two (2) feet from any property line. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment May encroach five (5) feet into required side and rear yards provided no element is located closer than two (2) feet from any property line and the equipment complies with screening standards in Subsection 070.040.050(f), Screening, Fences, and Walls. Roof eaves and other incidental architectural features May encroach eighteen (18) inches into a required yard. Storage sheds In residential districts, storage sheds less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size may be placed up to, but not closer than three (3) feet from a rear or side property line provided they are not placed on a permanent foundation or over an easement. Uncovered balconies and fire escapes May encroach eighteen (18) inches into required side yard; four (4) feet into required front or rear yard. Uncovered porches, slabs, patios, walks, and steps May encroach into required yards by any amount provided all components of the encroachment are no greater than thirty (30) inches above ground level.  
(d)  Building Height. 
(1)  Measurement. Height shall be measured as the vertical distance above finished grade measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the midpoint of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. (See examples in Figure 020-17) 

Figure 020-17: Examples of Building Height Mesasurment
(2)  Exceptions to Height Requirements. The features listed in Table 020.21 shall be permitted to project beyond the maximum height requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
Table 020.21: Authorized Exceptions to Maximum Height Standards Elevator tower May extend up to ten (10) feet above the maximum height requirement. Spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, towers, or similar inhabitable ornamentation May be twenty-five (25) percent greater than the allowed height with approval from the Director. Parapet walls May extend thirty (30) inches above the maximum height requirement for residential buildings containing two (2) or more dwelling units and for mixed-use and other nonresidential buildings. Rooftop mechanical equipment Except for building-mounted wireless communication facilities, rooftop mechanical equipment may extend five (5) feet above the maximum height requirement provided the equipment complies with screening requirements in Subsection 070.040.050(f)(1). Roof-mounted solar panels May extend five (5) feet above the maximum height requirement. Transmitting antennas Pursuant to Subsection 070.030.030(g).  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
ARTICLE 070.030 - USE REGULATIONS 

070.030.010 - Purpose and Organization of this Article. 
    This article identifies the land uses allowed in the Glenwood Springs zoning districts and establishes the standards that apply to certain uses (use-specific standards). The article is organized as follows: 
(a)  Section 070.030.020, Table of Allowed Uses, lists the uses allowed by zoning district, cross-references applicable use-specific standards, and provides parking standards. 
(b)  Section 070.030.030, Use-Specific Standards, establishes the unique standards applicable to certain land uses. 
(c)  Section 070.030.040, Accessory Uses and Structures, establishes standards applicable to uses and structures that are accessory to the primary use of the property and/or structure. 
(d)  Section 070.030.050, Temporary Uses and Structures, establishes standards applicable to non-permanent (temporary) structures and uses. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.030.020 - Table of Allowed Uses. 
    Table 030.1 lists the uses allowed within each base zoning district. Each listed use is defined in Section 070.070.020, Definitions of Use Categories and Specific Use Types. 
(a)  Explanation of Use Permissions. 
(1)  Permitted Uses by Right. A "P" designation in a cell within Table 030.1 indicates that the use is allowed by right in the respective zoning district. Permitted uses are subject to all other applicable standards in this Code. 
(2)  Special Use Permit Required. An "S" designation in a cell within Table 030.1 indicates that the use is allowed in the respective zoning district only with approval of a special use permit pursuant to Subsection 070.060.050(e), Special Use Permit. Uses requiring special use permits are also subject to all other applicable standards in this Code. The "S" designation does not constitute authorization or ensure that a special use permit will be approved for that use. Each special use permit application shall be evaluated on its own merit based on the approval criteria in Subsection 070.060.050(e)(3)e.2. 
(3)  Prohibited Use. A blank cell in Table 030.1 indicates that the use is prohibited in the respective zoning district. 
(4)  Use-Specific Standards. Regardless of whether or not a use is allowed by right or with approval of a special use permit, additional standards may be applicable to that use. Such use-specific standards are identified and cross-referenced in the last column of Table 030.1. 
(b)  Use for Other Purposes Prohibited. Approval of a use listed in Table 030.1, and compliance with applicable use-specific standards for that use, authorizes that use only. Development or use of a property for any other use not specifically allowed in Table 030.1, and approved under the appropriate process, is prohibited. 
(c)  Table Organization. In Table 030.1, land uses and activities are classified by general "use categories" and specific "use types" based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics such as the type and intensity of activity, the type of customers or residents, operation requirements, how goods or services are sold or delivered, and typical site conditions. This classification provides a systematic basis for assigning present and future land uses into appropriate zoning districts. This classification does not list every use or activity that may appropriately exist within the categories. Certain uses may be listed in one (1) category when they may reasonably have been listed in one (1) or more other categories. The use categories are an indexing tool and are not regulatory. 
(d)  Classification of New and Unlisted Uses. The following procedures shall apply if an application is submitted for a use category or use type that is not specifically listed in Table 030.1. Submission and approval of such an application shall be required prior to approval of any other permit or development approval associated with the use. 
(1)  Director Determination of Appropriate Use Category and Use Type. The Director shall determine the appropriate use category and use type for the proposed use. In such determination, the Director shall consider the potential impacts of the proposed use including the nature of the use and whether it includes dwellings, sales, processing, storage, operations, employment characteristics, nuisances, requirements for public utilities, and transportation requirements. 
(2)  Establish Use-Specific Standards if Necessary. During the initial determination, the Director shall also determine whether or not additional use-specific standards are necessary to reduce potential impacts to the surrounding properties or the community. 
(3)  Notice of Determination. The Director shall send a written notification of the use category and use type determination to the applicant, the Planning Commission, and the City Council within five (5) days of such determination. The determination shall become effective fourteen (14) days after written notification is sent. 
(4)  Post-Determination Actions. 
a.  Appeals of the Director's determination shall be made following the procedures under Subsection 070.060.070(c), Appeal of Administrative Decision. 
b.  If the determination of an appropriate use category and use type results in a finding that the use, structure, or activity will be a common use or would create confusion by remaining unlisted, the Director may initiate an application for a Code Amendment pursuant to Subsection 070.060.040(c), Code Amendment, to revise Table 030.1 accordingly. Until final action is taken on the Code Amendment application, the use determination by the Director shall be binding. 
(e)  Table of Allowed Uses. 
Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses P = permitted by right     S = special use permit required     Blank = use prohibited Districts ? Use Category Use Type RR RL RM1 RM2 RH RT M1 M2 M3 CO RE I1 I2 IN HP Use-Specific 
Standards Required 
Minimum 
Parking RESIDENTIAL USES Household Living Dwelling, live-work P P P P P P P P 070.030.030(c)(2) 1 per dwelling unit Dwelling, multifamily P P P P P P P P 070.030.030(c)(1) 1.5 per dwelling unit, plus 1 guest space per each 5 dwelling units Dwelling, townhouse P P P P P P P P S 070.030.030(c)(1) 1.5 per dwelling unit, plus 1 guest space per each 5 dwelling units Dwelling, single-family detached P P P P P P P P P P S 070.030.030(c)(1) 1 per dwelling unit Dwelling, two-family S S P P P P P P S 070.030.030(c)(1) 1.5 per dwelling unit Mobile home park S S S P 070.030.030(c)(3) 1 per dwelling unit Accessory dwelling unit P P P P P P P P P P S 070.030.040(d)(1) 1 per unit Group Living Convalescent 
or nursing 
home S S P P P P P 1 per 3 beds Personal care boarding home S S S S S S S S S S S S 070.030.030(c)(4) 2 per dwelling unit PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL, AND CIVIC USES Community and Cultural Facilities Assembly S S S S S S P P P P P P S 1 per 250 square feet Civic building S S S S S P P P P P P P P 1 per 300 square feet Club or lodge S P P P P P 1 per 300 square feet Community centered board facility P Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Adult and Child Care Facilities Adult day care S S S P P P P P P S 1 per 300 square feet Child care center S S S S S S P P P P P S 070.030.030(d)(1) 1 per 250 square feet Child day care home, large S S S S S S P P P P 070.030.030(d)(2) 3 per dwelling unit Child day care home, small P P P P P P P P P P S P 2 per dwelling unit Educational 
Facilities School S S S S S S P P P P P S P S High school: 4 per classroom 
All others: 1.5 per classroom Health Care Facilities Hospital P P P P P P 1 per 400 square feet Medical or dental clinic P P P P P P P P 1 per 250 square feet Parks and Open Space Park, playground, and open space P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P No requirement Transit Uses Transit stop P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Transit terminal or station S P P P P P P Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) COMMERCIAL USES Agriculture and Animal-Related Services Commercial farming, animal husbandry, and plant husbandry S P No requirement Community garden P P P P P P S S S S S S P No requirement Kennel S S S S 070.030.030(e)(1) 1 per 1,000 square feet Sale of produce or plants raised on premises (excluding marijuana uses) P P P P P P P P S P S P P S S 070.030.030(e)(2) No requirement Veterinarian hospital or clinic S S S S S P P P 070.030.030(e)(3) 1 per 250 square feet Adult Entertainment Establishments Adult entertainment establishment S 070.030.030(e)(4) 1 per 200 square feet Food and Beverage Establishments Bar, lounge, or tavern S P P P P P P P S 070.030.030(e)(5) 1 per 200 square feet Microbrewery, distillery, or winery P P P P P P P S 070.030.030(e)(6) 1 per 200 square feet seating/tasting area, plus 1 per 500 square feet production area Restaurant S P P P P P S P S 1 per 200 square feet Restaurant, with drive-through S S S S 1 per 200 square feet Funeral and Interment Services Cemetery S S S S S S S P P P 1 per 400 square feet of building area Funeral home, columbarium, crematorium, or mortuary S S S S S S S P P P 1 per 250 square feet Lodging Facilities Accessory tourist rental P P P P P P P P P P P P 070.030.030(e)(7) Per residential use standards Bed and breakfast S S S S P P P P P P P S 070.030.030(e)(8) 1 space per guest room, plus 1 space for the owner/manager Boarding house S S P P P P S S 1 space per guest room, plus 1 space for the owner/management Hotel, motel, hostel, or lodge S P P P P P S 1 space per guest room Short-term rental P P P P P P P P P P P P 070.030.030(e)(9) Per residential use standards Maintenance and Repair Services Repair facility, major P S S P P P 1 per 1,000 square feet Repair facility, minor P P P P P P 1 per 500 square feet Marijuana Establishments Medical marijuana business, excluding cultivation S S S S S 070.030.030(e)(10) 1 per 300 square feet Retail marijuana establishment, excluding cultivation S S S S 070.030.030(e)(11) 1 per 300 square feet Office, Business, and Professional Services Administrative, professional, or government office P P P P P P P P P P 1 per 300 square feet Bank or financial institution P P P P P P P P P P 070.030.030(e)(12) 1 per 300 square feet Printing and copying establishment S P P P P P P P P 1 per 400 square feet Personal Services Commercial laundry and dry cleaning P P P 1 per 400 square feet Personal service, general 
<1,500 sq. ft. P P P P P P P P P 070.030.030(e)(13) 1 per 400 square feet Personal service, general 
=1,500 sq. ft. S P P P P P S S S 070.030.030(e)(13) 1 per 400 square feet Self-service laundry S P P P P P P P P 1 per 400 square feet Recreation and Entertainment, Indoor Indoor recreation facility S S P P P P P P P P 1 per 400 square feet Recreation and Entertainment, Outdoor Commercial outdoor recreation use S S S S P P P P P P P P P P S 1 per 400 square feet building area, plus 1 per 10,000 square feet site area Commercial outdoor recreation-concentrated S S S S S S S S S Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Golf course or country club P P P P S 4 per hole, plus 1 per 250 square feet clubhouse area Recreational vehicle park S S S S S S 070.030.030(e)(14) Retail Sales Building materials and supply store P P P P P P 1 per 400 square feet Convenience store P P P P P S S S 1 per 300 square feet Flea market or swap meet S P P Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Grocery store P P P P P 1 per 300 square feet Liquor store P P P P 070.030.030(e)(15) 1 per 300 square feet Lumber yard P P S Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Pawn shop P P P P 1 per 300 square feet Retail, general <1,500 sq. ft. P P P P P P S P S 070.030.030(e)(16) 1 per 400 square feet Retail, general >1,500 sq. ft. S P P P P P S P S 070.030.030(e)(16) 1 per 300 square feet Retail, shopping center P S S 1 per 300 square feet Vehicles and Equipment Automotive fuel sales and service station S P S S S S S 070.030.030(e)(17) 1 per fueling pump, plus 1 per 400 square feet retail and office area Automotive parts and accessories sales P S P P P P 1 per 400 square feet Automotive repair shop P P S P 1 per 500 square feet, plus 3 per repair bay Automotive sales or leasing S S S P P P 070.030.030(e)(18) 1 per 500 square feet sales area, plus 2 per repair bay Automobile wash S S S S S S 1 per 300 square feet retail and office area, plus 3 stacking spaces per service lane and 1 stacking space per detailing bay if separate from wash bay/lane) Parking as a principal use S S S S S S S S S S No requirement Equipment sales and rental P S S P P P 1 per 300 square feet Mobile home sales P P P No requirement INDUSTRIAL USES Industrial Services Airport/ aviation-related business S Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Asphalt or concrete batch plant P Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Motor or rail freight terminal S S Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Natural resource extraction or processing S Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Printing or publishing facility S S P P 1 per 300 square feet office and retail area, plus 1 per 1,000 square feet all other building area Research and development facility P P P P P P P 1 per 300 square feet office and retail area, plus 1 per 1,000 square feet all other building area Manufacturing and Production Brewery or bottling plant P S S P S P P S 070.030.030(f)(1) Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Fabrication, manufacturing, and testing facility S S S S S S P 070.030.030(f)(2) Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Food processing and packing plant P S Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Marijuana Establishments Marijuana cultivation, with or without retail business or medical establishment S 070.030.030(f)(2) 1 per 1,000 square feet storage, warehousing, and distribution area, plus 1 per 35 square feet manufacturing, assembly, packing, preparation, plus 1 per 300 square feet for retail sales and office area Storage and Warehousing Bulk materials or machinery storage P Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Contractor offices and equipment storage yards P P P P 1 per 400 square feet of building area used as office Mini-warehouse or storage S P P S 070.030.030(f)(4) 3 spaces, plus 1 per resident caretaker Storage of hazardous liquids and gasses S S S Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Warehousing P P S Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Waste and Salvage Salvage yard S Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) Utilities Commercial television, radio, or microwave tower S S No requirement Geothermal heat exchange P P P P P P P P P P No requirement Wastewater treatment facility S S No requirement Wind power generation tower S S S S S S S No requirement WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES Alternative tower structure in right-of-way P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 070.030.030(g) No requirement Alternative tower structure not in right-of-way S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S 070.030.030(g) No requirement Base station in right-of-way P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 070.030.030(g) No requirement Base station not in right-of-way S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S 070.030.030(g) No requirement Eligible facilities request P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 070.030.030(g) No requirement Small cell facility P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P 070.030.030(g) No requirement Tower S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S 070.030.030(g) No requirement ACCESSORY USES Backyard chickens P P P P P P P P 070.030.040(d)(2) No requirement Home occupation P P P P P P P P P P P P 070.030.040(d)(3) No requirement Outdoor storage, accessory S S S S S S S No requirement Parking structure S S S S S S S S P No requirement Warehousing P P P P P P P Based on demand study, see Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5) TEMPORARY USES Temporary sales and structures P P P P P P P P P P Determined at time of temporary use permit. Temporary special event P P P P P P P P 070.030.050(e)  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019) 
070.030.030 - Use-Specific Standards. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Applicability. Use-specific standards shall apply to all zoning districts unless otherwise noted. 
(2)  Cross-References in Table of Allowed Uses. All uses with use-specific standards as indicated in the right-hand column of Table 030.1 shall comply with the applicable standards in this Section 070.030.030. All development shall also comply with the applicable standards in Article 070.040: Development Standards. 
(3)  Resolution of Conflicting Standards. In case of a conflict between these use-specific standards and the standards in Article 070.040, Section 070.040.010 Development Standards, these use-specific standards shall apply unless otherwise noted. 
(b)  Performance Standards for All Uses. 
(1)  Air Quality. 
a.  Uses that emit any air contaminant as defined by the federal government, State of Colorado, or Garfield County, shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and county standards concerning such emissions and with any other emission standards adopted by the City. 
b.  No zoning approval or special use permit issued with respect to any use requiring a permit from a federal, state, county, or City agency with jurisdiction shall be valid until it has been certified to the City that the appropriate permits have been issued to the user and that the use is in compliance with all applicable air pollution laws. 
c.  Noncompliance with any of the applicable air pollution laws shall be justification for revocation of any permits issued by the City. 
(2)  Hazardous Materials Storage and Use. 
a.  General. 
1.  The land use impacts for facilities that store or use hazardous materials in excess of the exempt amounts or maximum allowable quantities in control areas as specified in the Building and Fire Code are declared to be potentially harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare, or potentially damaging to the property values of adjacent properties. 
2.  A special use permit shall be required for any commercial or industrial use involving the storage, handling, or use of hazardous materials when the quantity is in excess of the exempt amount or maximum allowable per control area, as specified in the Building or Fire Code. 
b.  Combustibles and Explosives. The use, handling, storage, and transportation of combustibles and explosives shall comply with the Fire Code and all other provisions of the Municipal Code and applicable state and federal laws. 
c.  Gases. The escape or emission of any gas that is noxious, injurious, or destructive is unlawful and shall be immediately eliminated and, in addition, shall comply with the Municipal Code and all applicable state and federal regulations, including the federal Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act of 1986. 
(3)  Excessive Heat and Humidity. Uses and activities shall not produce any unreasonable, disturbing, or unnecessary emissions of heat or humidity at the property line of the site on which they are situated that cause material distress, discomfort, or injury to a reasonable person. 
(4)  Odors. Unless otherwise provided in this Subsection, uses and activities that produce continuous, regular, or frequent odors and/or emissions, detectable beyond the boundary of the property from which the odor originates, may be prohibited, in whole or in part, if the odor or emission in question is a known health risk or danger or if the Director judges such odor or emission to be harmful to the rights of others to enjoy their property. 
(5)  Light and Glare. All uses shall comply with the standards in Section 070.040.100, Exterior Lighting. 
(6)  Noise. All uses shall comply with the standards in Article 100.070 of the Municipal Code, Regulation of Noise. 
(7)  Vibration. No use or activity shall produce vibrations that are perceptible without instruments at the property line for more than three (3) minutes in any one (1) hour of the day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, or 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday. 
(8)  Evidence of Compliance. The Director shall require such evidence of ability to comply with appropriate performance standards and mitigation measures as deemed necessary by the Director prior to issuance of a building permit and certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Residential Uses. 
(1)  Household Living, Generally. Except for single-family detached dwellings, each dwelling unit shall have a separate entrance or window facing a street frontage. 
(2)  Dwelling, Live-Work. 
a.  Residential areas shall be located on upper floors above non-residential areas, or in the rear of the building behind non-residential areas. 
b.  The non-residential use shall be owned and operated by a resident of the live-work dwelling unit. 
(3)  Mobile Home Park. 
a.  Size of a Mobile Home Park. The area of a mobile home park shall be large enough to accommodate the designated number of mobile home spaces, necessary streets and roadways, parking areas for motor vehicles, and required drainage and stormwater facilities. 
b.  Size and Placement of Mobile Home Spaces. 
1.  Each independent mobile home space shall contain a minimum area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and shall be at least forty (40) feet wide. 
2.  Each dependent mobile home space shall contain a minimum area of one thousand (1,000) square feet and shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet wide. 
3.  Where angular or modular spaces are provided in a mobile home park, each such space shall contain a minimum area of three thousand (3,000) square feet and shall be at least forty-five (45) feet wide. 
4.  Each mobile home space shall abut on a driveway or other access with unobstructed access to a street. 
5.  Each mobile home shall be placed upon a space in the mobile home park so that: 
i.  It is completely within the designated mobile home space; 
ii.  There is a minimum of fifteen (15) feet between mobile homes; 
iii.  It is not located within ten (10) feet of an exterior boundary of the mobile home park; 
iv.  It is not located within twenty-five (25) feet of a public right-of-way; 
v.  It does not obstruct any roadway, walkway, or easement; 
vi.  It is not located within five (5) feet from any roadway in the mobile home park; and 
vii.  No independent mobile home is located on a dependent mobile home space. 
c.  Access. Access roads within the mobile home park shall be provided for each mobile home space. Each access road shall provide for continuous forward movement, shall connect with a street or highway, and shall have a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet when mobile home spaces are on one (1) side only. When mobile home spaces are on both sides of the access road, such road shall have a minimum width of forty (40) feet. 
d.  Provisions for Dependent Mobile Homes. Mobile home parks with dependent mobile homes shall accommodate such mobile homes by providing service buildings, sanitary facilities, and laundry facilities per the Municipal Code. 
(4)  Personal Care Boarding Home. Prior to issuing a special use permit for a personal care boarding home, the following conditions shall be met: 
a.  The applicant shall provide evidence of preliminary approval by the State of Colorado, Department of Public Health & Environment; 
b.  No structural or exterior decorative additions shall be allowed that will alter the residential character of the home or be otherwise incompatible with surrounding residences, except for those necessary to provide accessibility meeting ADA requirements; 
c.  No other similar home-based use shall be allowed on the property including child or adult day care and boarding homes; 
d.  Residents, exclusive of employed caregivers, shall not have their own personal vehicles on site, including the public street; 
e.  The home shall have one (1) kitchen and there shall be no provision for cooking in any other room, other than providing an alternative area for minimal food preparation such as heating or reheating food and beverages; 
f.  There shall be the appropriate number of licensed caregivers on site on a twenty-four-hour basis to properly care for residents, per State of Colorado licensing requirements; and 
g.  The home shall comply with all other city, state, and federal laws and regulations. 
(d)  Public, Institutional, and Civic Uses. 
(1)  Child Care Center. A child care center shall comply with the following conditions: 
a.  The applicant shall provide documentation of preliminary approval from the State of Colorado, Department of Human Services; and 
b.  Buffering of play areas through the use of fencing or a landscape screen in compliance with the height restrictions of this Code may be required when play areas are adjacent to residential uses. 
(2)  Child Day Care Home, Large. A large child day care home shall comply with the same requirements for a child care center in Paragraph (1) above. 
(e)  Commercial Uses. 
(1)  Kennel. 
a.  All animals shall be confined within an enclosed area or on a leash at all times. 
b.  All boarded animals shall be kept within a totally enclosed structure between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
c.  Any open or exercise run shall be at least fifty (50) feet from any adjoining property in a residential zoning district. 
(2)  Sale of Produce or Plants Raised on Premises. 
a.  The sale of produce or plants shall only include those grown on-site. 
b.  The sale of produce or plants shall not include marijuana or marijuana products. 
c.  No permanent structures shall be erected for sale of produce or plants. 
(3)  Veterinarian Hospital or Clinic. A veterinarian hospital or clinic shall comply with the same requirements for a kennel in Paragraph (1) above. 
(4)  Adult Entertainment Establishment. 
a.  Applicability and Intent. These standards are intended to regulate sexually oriented businesses, promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City, thereby helping to reduce and eliminate the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. These standards have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of these standards to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution or the Colorado Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of these standards to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. These standards shall not apply to those areas of an adult motel that are private rooms. 
b.  Location Standards. 
1.  No adult entertainment use shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of the exterior boundary of any residential zoning district, church, public or private school, child care center, public community center, park, fairground, recreation center, publicly owned or maintained building opened for use by the general public, alcoholic beverage establishment located in the City at which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises, or area designated as an urban renewal project area pursuant to C.R.S. § 31-25-107. Further, no adult entertainment use shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of any arterial or major collector roadway. 
2.  No adult entertainment use shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other adult entertainment use, whether such adult entertainment use is within or outside the City boundaries. 
3.  The method of measurement for the one-thousand-foot restriction shall be computed by direct measurement from the exterior boundary of any area identified in these location requirements, or from the nearest property line of the property upon which an adult entertainment business or establishment, or other adult entertainment use is conducted, to the nearest property line of the property whereon the building in which an adult entertainment use is to occur. 
4.  Only one (1) adult entertainment establishment use shall be permitted per building or, in other words, no building, premises, structures or other facility that contains any sexually oriented business shall contain any other kind of sexually oriented business therein. 
c.  Nonconforming Adult Entertainment Establishments. 
1.  Any adult entertainment establishment operating at the effective date of this Code in violation of any relevant provisions of Title 050 or Title 070 of this Code shall be deemed a nonconforming use. An adult entertainment establishment that is deemed a nonconforming use shall be permitted to continue operating for an amortization period of six (6)months. Such nonconforming adult entertainment use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any adult entertainment establishment deemed a nonconforming use shall apply for a license provided for by Article 050.070 of the Municipal Code within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this ordinance, or be subject to the relevant penalty provisions set forth herein and in Article 050.070 of the Municipal Code. 
2.  An adult entertainment establishment lawfully operating as a conforming use pursuant to the receipt of zoning approval and obtaining a license is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of an adult entertainment establishment license, of any area identified in the location requirements above within the specific distancing requirements noted. 
d.  Site Layout and Design Standards. 
1.  Advertisements, displays or other promotional material depicting adult entertainment uses shall not be shown or exhibited to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks or walkways, or from other areas public or semi-public. 
2.  All building openings, entries and windows shall be located, covered or screened to prevent a viewing to the interior from any public or semi-public area; for new construction, the building shall also be oriented to minimize any possibility of viewing the interior from public or semi-public areas. 
e.  Conduct and Operations. 
1.  No licensee, manager, or employee mingling with the patrons of sexually oriented businesses or serving food or drinks shall be nude or in a state of nudity. It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this Section that an employee of a sexually oriented business exposed any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room that is accessible only to employees. 
2.  No licensee, manager, or employee shall encourage or knowingly permit any person on the premises to engage in specified sexual activities, which conduct involving specified sexual activities is unlawful and shall be subject to criminal penalties, as set forth in the Municipal Code. 
3.  It shall be unlawful for an adult entertainment establishment and/or a sexually oriented business to be opened for business, or for the licensee or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons upon licensed premises or permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. Further, it shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if, working as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether a license has been issued for said business under this ordinance, engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a service, or solicits a service between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
4.  It shall be unlawful for an adult entertainment establishment and/or sexually oriented business or for the licensee or any employee of a licensee, regardless of whether a license has been issued for said business under this ordinance, to knowingly allow any patron upon the premises to engage in a specified sexual activity while on said premises. It shall also be unlawful for any licensee or employee of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether a license has been issued for said business under this ordinance, to engage in a specified sexual activity while on the premises of said adult entertainment establishment. 
5.  No one under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be admitted to any adult entertainment establishment where live nude entertainment and performances are featured, which live nude entertainment is characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas. Further, no one under eighteen (18) years of age shall be admitted to any adult entertainment establishment of any kind; and the foregoing minimum age limitations also apply to any employees, agents, servants or independent contractors working on the premises during the hours when adult entertainment is being presented. 
f.  Violations and Penalties. 
1.  Any person who operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment establishment and who violates any provision contained in this Section or does not have a valid license is subject to a suit for injunction and is subject to civil and criminal penalties. 
2.  Except for the amortization period set forth hereinabove, each day of operation in violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
3.  Any adult entertainment establishment that engages in repeated or continuing violations of these regulations shall constitute a public nuisance. For purposes of these regulations, repeated violations shall mean three (3) or more violations of any provision set forth herein within one (1) year dating from the time of a new violation, and a continuing violation shall mean a violation of any provision set forth herein lasting for three (3) or more consecutive days. 
4.  Notwithstanding any other remedies at law or equity, the City Attorney may bring an action in the District Court for an injunction against the operation of such establishments in a manner that violates any of the provisions set forth herein. 
(5)  Bar, Lounge, or Tavern. 
a.  Bars, lounges, or taverns within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zoning district require a special use permit. 
b.  Bars, lounges, or taverns within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zoning district shall close any outdoor seating areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(6)  Microbrewery, Distillery, or Winery. 
a.  Microbreweries, distilleries, or wineries within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zoning district require a special use permit. 
b.  Microbreweries, distilleries, or wineries within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zoning district shall close any outdoor seating areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(7)  Accessory Tourist Rental. 
a.  Applicability and Intent. The requirements of this Subsection shall apply to any residential dwelling unit or a portion of a residential dwelling within the City. This Subsection is applicable within a Planned Unit Development unless specifically identified as a prohibited use by the Planned Unit Development. 
b.  Owner Responsibilities. 
1.  The owner of the property or a resident manager must reside within one (1) of the bedrooms within the dwelling unit which is to be used as the accessory tourist rental and shall be present on the premises for the duration of the rental. 
2.  The owner shall collect and pay all applicable local, state, and federal taxes including sales and lodging taxes. 
3.  The owner is responsible for ensuring the accessory tourist rental meets all applicable local, state, and federal regulations. For example, C.R.S. § 38-45-101 et seq. requiring carbon monoxide alarms in a residential property. 
4.  The owner is responsible for obtaining all required licenses in accordance with Title 050 of the Municipal Code. 
c.  Use and Occupancy Restrictions. 
1.  Parties renting the designated bedroom for transient rental shall have access to a private or shared full bathroom. 
2.  Guest stays may only occur within the dwelling unit that the owner or resident manager occupies. 
3.  The use is limited to one (1) designated bedroom with a maximum occupancy for two (2) people. 
4.  The bedroom used for guest stays shall not include a kitchen or partial kitchen. 
5.  Occupancy of the accessory tourist rental shall not exceed the occupancy allowed for single family use as defined in the Municipal Code, i.e. one (1) or more persons living together on the premises of a dwelling unit, but it shall not include more than five (5) persons unrelated by blood or marriage. Occupancy limits shall be established by International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) and shall be listed on the accessory tourist rental permit. 
6.  Residential units eligible for an accessory tourist rental permit shall not be issued or hold permits for another land use that would further impact traffic at the site of the accessory tourist rental, including special use permits for another land use per the applicable zoning designation of the property, or a license or permit issued through another regulatory agency; except that properties issued a special use permit for a single family dwelling in the Hillside Preservation district or home occupation permit shall be eligible for an accessory tourist rental permit. 
7.  On properties with an accessory dwelling unit, only the primary dwelling on the property shall be eligible for an accessory tourist rental permit and the owner or resident manager must reside in the dwelling unit used as the accessory tourist rental. 
8.  In a multifamily building under single ownership, no more than twenty-five (25) percent but at least one (1) unit may be permitted as an accessory tourist rental provided the owner or the resident manager occupies the accessory tourist rental. 
d.  Operation. 
1.  All vehicles associated with the single family residence and accessory tourist rental use shall be parked in designated parking areas, such as driveways and garages, or on-street parking, where permitted. No parking shall occur on lawns or sidewalks. 
2.  The owner shall be responsible for ensuring that the accessory tourist rental complies with Section 100.010.060 of the Municipal Code, Garbage, Refuse, and Trash Collection. Owners and resident managers shall make arrangements for proper garbage, refuse, and trash collection. 
3.  The following information must be posted in a prominent and visible location in the designated bedroom permitted as an accessory tourist rental: 
i.  City of Glenwood Springs' license(s) and accessory tourist rental permit; 
ii.  Contact information for owner and/or resident manager, including phone number for twenty-four-hour response to emergencies; 
iii.  Description of location of fire extinguishers and emergency egress; and 
iv.  Any other information deemed necessary by the Director or Building Official to ensure the public's health and safety. 
4.  All advertising of an accessory tourist rental, including advertising on website vacation booking sites, shall display the City of Glenwood Springs accessory tourist rental permit number and business license number. 
e.  Permit Procedures. 
1.  Limitation to Either Short-Term Rental or Accessory Tourist Rental. A property owner may not be issued both an accessory tourist rental permit and a short-term rental permit on the same property at the same time; however, should an owner wish to change the use of a permitted accessory tourist rental, he or she may do so by filing an application for a short-term rental permit in accordance with Subsection 070.030.030(e)(9). Upon issuance of a new short-term rental permit, the pre-existing accessory tourist rental permit is automatically revoked. 
2.  Application Requirements. The owner shall submit the application on the form provided by the Director and shall pay the application fee set by City Council resolution. 
3.  Issuance of Permit. All accessory tourist rental uses shall require a permit from the Director. Such permit shall only be issued after the residential dwelling unit and bedroom designated for transient lodging has been approved in accordance with the Municipal Code. The accessory tourist rental permit shall specify any terms and conditions of the permit. All permits shall be issued to the owner of the property. A change in ownership shall necessitate the issuance of a new permit. Permits shall be issued for a period of two (2) years and shall expire at the end of odd numbered years. 
4.  Revocation of Permit. An accessory tourist rental permit may be revoked at any time by the Director should it be determined that the use is not being operated in compliance with this Section or any other section of the Municipal Code. 
(8)  Bed and Breakfast. 
a.  Location and Compatibility. 
1.  Bed and breakfasts shall only be permitted in a building of a residential character. Any modifications made to the building to accommodate the bed and breakfast use shall be compatible with the architectural character of the structure and with the character of the neighborhood. 
2.  Bed and breakfast lodging shall not be allowed in any dwelling unit(s) permitted as an Accessory Dwelling Unit. 
b.  Number of Bedrooms. The total number of bedrooms, including the bedrooms occupied by permanent residents of the building, shall be limited to five (5). 
c.  Operation. 
1.  The structure shall be owner-occupied or shall be occupied by a resident manager. 
2.  Guest stays shall be limited to a maximum of thirty (30) days. 
3.  Any kitchen and dining facilities shall not be operated in the manner of a commercial restaurant and shall serve only residents and guests. No cooking facilities such as stoves, hot plates, or microwave ovens are permitted in the guest rooms. 
4.  Any signage on the subject property shall be non-illuminated, shall architecturally compliment the principal structure, and shall comply with applicable sign regulations in Section 070.040.110, Signs. 
5.  Other than serving guests, a bed and breakfast shall not conduct any other commercial activities such as for-profit private parties or receptions, retail sales, or similar activities. 
(9)  Short-Term Rental. 
a.  Intent. The City of Glenwood Springs recognizes that there are benefits to allowing owners of residential units within the City to rent their dwelling units for periods of time less than thirty (30) days. Short-term rental of dwelling units bring additional visitors to the City, can allow owners to recoup housing costs, and provides revenues for the City through the additional tax collections. The provision of short-term rentals offers additional diversification to the resort and travelling professional accommodations market. However, due to the potential for adverse impacts, short-term rentals must be regulated by the City to protect the health, safety, and welfare of owners, neighbors, and visitors. 
b.  Applicability. 
1.  The requirements of this Subsection shall apply to any residential dwelling unit within the City. This Subsection is applicable within a Planned Unit Development unless the short-term rental of property is specifically identified as a prohibited use by the Planned Unit Development. 
2.  This Subsection does not apply to any dwelling unit permitted as an Accessory Dwelling Unit. 
3.  The City of Glenwood Springs is not a party to and does not enforce any private covenants. Private covenants may restrict the ability for owners to engage in short-term rentals. 
c.  Owner Responsibilities. 
1.  There shall be a designated responsible party, located within the local region, available for immediately responding to any issues arising from the short-term rental. The designated responsible party may be the owner of the property. 
2.  The owner or responsible party shall collect and pay all applicable local, state, and federal taxes including sales and lodging taxes. 
3.  The owner or responsible party is responsible for ensuring the short-term rental meets all applicable local, state, and federal regulations. For example,C.R.S. § 38-45-101 et seq. requiring carbon monoxide alarms in residential property. 
4.  The owner or responsible party is responsible for obtaining all required licenses in accordance with Title 050 of the Municipal Code. 
d.  Use and Occupancy Restrictions. 
1.  Occupancy limitations of a short term rental shall be established by the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) and shall be indicated on the short term rental permit. 
2.  On properties with an accessory dwelling unit, only the primary dwelling on the property shall be eligible for a short-term rental permit. 
3.  In a multifamily building under single ownership, no more than twenty-five (25) percent but at least one (1) unit may be permitted as a short-term rental. 
e.  Operation. 
1.  All vehicles associated with the short-term rental use shall be parked in designated parking areas, such as driveways and garages, or on-street parking, where permitted. No parking shall occur on lawns or sidewalks. 
2.  The owner shall be responsible for ensuring that the short-term rental complies with Section 100.010.060 of the Municipal Code, Garbage, Refuse, and Trash Collection. Owners and resident managers shall make arrangements for proper garbage, refuse, and trash collection. 
3.  The following information must be posted in a prominent and visible location in the short-term rental: 
i.  City of Glenwood Springs' license(s) and short-term rental permit; 
ii.  Contact information for owner and/or resident manager, including phone number for twenty-four-hour response to emergencies; 
iii.  Description of location of fire extinguishers and emergency egress; and 
iv.  Any other information deemed necessary by the Director or Building Official to ensure the public's health and safety. 
4.  All advertising of a short-term rental, including advertising on website vacation booking sites, shall display the City of Glenwood Springs short-term rental permit number and business license number. 
f.  Permit Procedures. 
1.  Limitation to Either Short-Term Rental or Accessory Tourist Rental. A property owner may not be issued both a short-term rental permit and an accessory tourist rental permit on the same property at the same time; however, should an owner wish to change the use of a permitted short-term rental permit, he or she may do so by filing an application for an accessory tourist rental permit in accordance with Subsection 070.030.030(e)(7). Upon issuance of a new accessory tourist rental permit, the pre-existing short-term rental permit is automatically revoked. 
2.  Application Requirements. The owner shall submit the application on the form provided by the Director and shall pay the application fee set by City Council resolution. 
3.  Issuance of Permit. All short-term rental uses shall require a permit from the Director. Such permit shall only be issued after the short-term rental application has been approved in accordance with the Municipal Code. The short-term rental permit shall specify any terms and conditions of the permit. All permits shall be issued to the owner of the property. A change in ownership shall necessitate the issuance of a new permit. Permits shall be issued for a period of two (2) years and shall expire at the end of odd numbered years. 
4.  Revocation of Permit. A short-term rental permit may be revoked at any time by the Director should it be determined that the use is not being operated in compliance with this Section or any other section of the Municipal Code. 
(10)  Medical Marijuana Business. 
a.  Purpose. The City Council intends to regulate the use, acquisition, production, and distribution of medical marijuana in a manner consistent with Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, Article 43.3 of Title 12 Colorado Revised Statutes and any other applicable laws and regulations of the state. Nothing within this article is intended to promote or condone the production, use, sale, or distribution of medical marijuana other than in compliance with applicable state law. 
b.  License Required. Medical marijuana businesses shall comply with the City Code Article 050.080. 
c.  Location of a Licensed Business. Medical marijuana businesses shall be located in areas of the City only as allowed in the City Code. No medical marijuana business shall be located: 
1.  Within five hundred (500) feet of any existing public or private school facility where classes are held for children aged kindergarten through the 12th grade. The distance shall be computed by a straight line measurement from the nearest property line of the school property to the nearest property line of the site housing the medical marijuana business; or 
2.  Within nine hundred (900) feet of another medical marijuana business or any retail marijuana establishment. A medical marijuana business may locate on the same licensed premises as a retail marijuana establishment of the same class and same ownership, only if the licensed premises is located to meet the distance requirements from other medical marijuana businesses and retail marijuana establishments. This distance shall be computed by a straight line measurement between property lines of the sites housing the two (2) facilities. 
3.  In any zoning district not specifically allowed by the City Code. 
d.  Requirements Related to Operation of a Medical Marijuana Business. 
1.  Medical marijuana businesses shall meet all operational criteria for the procurement, dispensing, labeling, sanitation, security, and any other criteria as required by the state pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and the City Code Article 050.080. 
2.  In addition, all medical marijuana businesses shall comply with the following local restrictions: 
i.  Medical marijuana businesses shall limit their hours of operation to between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday or as otherwise limited by state law; 
ii.  Medical marijuana businesses shall apply for a sign permit through the Community Development Department. All exterior signage associated with a medical marijuana business will meet the standards established in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and in the City Code. In addition, no sign associated with a medical marijuana business shall use the word "marijuana," "cannabis," or any other word or phrase commonly understood to refer to marijuana or a graphic/image of any portion of a marijuana plant, or paraphernalia associated with medicinal marijuana use unless immediately preceded by the word "medical" or the message of such sign includes the words "for medical use" or "for medicinal purposes" in letters that are no smaller than the largest letter on the sign; and 
iii.  Marijuana plants, products, accessories, and associated paraphernalia contained in a medical marijuana facility shall not be visible from a public sidewalk, public street or right-of-way, or any other public place. 
iv.  No discernible odor shall be projected beyond the exterior walls of the licensed premises. 
(11)  Retail Marijuana Establishment. 
a.  Purpose. The City Council intends to allow state-licensed retail marijuana establishments to exist in Glenwood Springs in accordance with Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution, Article 43.4 of Title 12 Colorado Revised Statutes, and any other applicable state laws and regulations as well as the additional local licensing requirements and other restrictions set forth in the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code. Nothing within this Article is intended to promote or condone the production, use, sale, testing or distribution of marijuana other than in compliance with applicable state law. 
b.  License Required. Retail marijuana establishments shall comply with City Code Article 050.090. 
c.  Location of Licensed Establishment. Retail marijuana establishments shall be located only in areas of the City as allowed in the City Code. No retail marijuana establishment shall be located: 
1.  Within five hundred (500) feet of any existing public or private school facility where classes are held for children aged kindergarten through the 12th grade. The distance shall be computed by a straight line measurement from the nearest property line of the school property to the nearest property line of the site housing the retail marijuana establishment; 
2.  Within nine hundred (900) feet of another retail marijuana establishment or a medical marijuana business. A retail marijuana establishment may locate on the same licensed premises as a medical marijuana business of the same class and same ownership, only if the licensed premises is located to meet the distance requirements from other retail marijuana establishments and medical marijuana businesses. This distance shall be computed by a straight line measurement between property lines of the sites housing the two (2) facilities; and 
3.  In any zoning district not specifically permitted by the City Code. 
d.  Requirements Related to Operation of a Retail Marijuana Establishment. 
1.  Retail marijuana establishments shall meet all operational criteria for the procurement, display, dispensing, labeling, sanitation, security, and any other criteria as required by the state pursuant to the CRMC and the City Code Article 050.090. 
2.  In addition, all retail marijuana establishments shall comply with the following local restrictions: 
i.  Hours of operation shall be limited to between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday; and 
ii.  A sign permit shall be obtained through the Community Development Department. All exterior signage associated with a retail marijuana establishment will meet the standards established in the CRMC and in the City Code. 
iii.  Storage of retail marijuana shall be considered an accessory use. Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the licensed premises of a retail marijuana business shall be used for such purposes. 
iv.  No discernible odor shall be projected beyond the exterior walls of the licensed premises. 
(12)  Bank or Financial Institution. 
a.  In the M1, CO, RE, I1, I2, and IN districts, drive-through services require a special use permit. 
b.  In the M2 district, drive-through services are prohibited. 
(13)  Personal Service, General. 
a.  In the M1, CO, RE, I1, I2, and IN districts, drive-through services require a special use permit. 
b.  In the M2 district, drive-through services are prohibited. 
(14)  Recreational Vehicle Park. 
a.  Dimensional Standards. 
Table 030.2: RV Park Dimensional Standards Maximum density 15 RV spaces per acre Minimum RV space size 1,500 square feet Minimum setback from RV to residential zoning district 50 feet Minimum RV setbacks (to any accessory structure or to another RV space):   Front 20 feet   Side 10 feet   Rear 15 feet Minimum distance between RVs and accessory structures 10 feet Minimum setback from access road and internal drives to RVs or accessory structures 5 feet Maximum height of accessory structures Lesser of two stories or 27 feet  
b.  Laundry Drying and Outdoor Storage Yards. Laundry drying yards and outdoor storage yards shall be screened from view by an opaque hedge, wall, or fence not less than six (6) feet in height. 
c.  Driveways and Access. 
1.  Each recreational vehicle space shall front upon a common driveway of not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width which shall be lighted, paved, and maintained in a dust-proof condition. All entry driveways to the recreational vehicle park shall have clear and unobstructed access to a public street, and shall be lighted, paved, and maintained in a dust-proof condition. 
2.  There shall be one (1) common access to the recreational vehicle park, and there shall be no individual access to an individual recreational vehicle space from any public street or alley. Additional emergency access may be required at the discretion of the City. 
d.  Parking and Storage. No recreational vehicle, accessory recreational vehicle, boat, or other vehicle shall be stored or parked unattached on a drive within a recreational vehicle park. Special storage areas for such accessory vehicles shall be clearly designated within the recreational vehicle park and shall be screened from view by an opaque hedge, wall, or fence not less than six (6) feet in height. 
e.  Park Models. Recreational vehicle spaces for park models shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the total number of recreational vehicle spaces in the park. Under no circumstances shall park models be used as permanent residences within a recreational vehicle park. 
f.  Accessory Structures. All accessory structures shall be permanently constructed and shall have a consistent architectural style. 
g.  Snow Removal. Recreational vehicle parks designed, occupied, and used for business between November and May of a calendar year shall provide adequate areas for storage of snow. 
h.  Pet Area. A separate pet walking area shall be located within the recreational vehicle park and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
i.  RV Space Landscaping. A minimum of one (1) five-gallon shade tree shall be planted per recreational vehicle space in the general vicinity of the space. The trees shall be selected to have a mature height of between twenty (20) and thirty (30) feet and a mature canopy of ten (10) to twenty (20) feet. Existing landscaping shall be preserved whenever possible and may be credited to offset the requirements set forth in this Subsection. 
j.  Operation. The owner of any recreational vehicle park shall comply with the following operational requirements: 
1.  Park Rules and Regulations. The park owner shall disseminate to all park users written rules and regulations which are consistent with the requirements of the special use permit and with the requirements of this Code. 
2.  Twenty-Four-Hour Management. The park owner shall provide twenty-four-hour on-site management of the park at all times the park is in use. 
3.  Park Use. Except as set forth herein, the owner shall restrict park access and the use of accessory recreational facilities in the park to the occupants of the recreational vehicle spaces and their confirmed guests. Accessory recreational facilities in the park may be rented on a contract basis to other groups, but shall not be open for general public use. 
4.  Trash Collection. Dumpsters shall be emptied daily during the months of May through September and twice weekly during the months of October through April. 
(15)  Liquor Store. Drive-through services are prohibited in all zoning districts except for the M2 and CO districts. 
(16)  Retail, General. In the I2 district, retail sales exceeding ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the structure and/or site shall require a special use permit. 
(17)  Automotive Fuel Sales and Service Station. The following types of modifications to the site and use require a special use permit and approval from the Fire Department: 
a.  Change of the number of fuel pumps; 
b.  Change of the location of fuel pumps; and 
c.  Change in the type of service or location of bulk fuel tanks. 
(18)  Automotive Sales or Leasing. 
a.  In the M2 district, automotive sales and leasing, including vehicles for sale, shall take place entirely indoors. 
b.  No vehicles for sale or lease may be parked or stored in the public right-of-way. 
(f)  Industrial Uses. 
(1)  Brewery or Bottling Plant. 
a.  In the M1, M2, M3, and RE districts, production, processing, and storage of all materials and equipment shall be located entirely within an enclosed building. 
b.  Loading and unloading of the manufactured products shall not occur between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(2)  Fabrication, Manufacturing, and Testing Facility. 
a.  This use shall not include the testing of marijuana products. 
b.  In the M1, M2, M3, and RE districts, fabrication, manufacturing, and testing facilities shall be limited to no more than ten thousand (10,000) gross building square footage and shall occur entirely within an enclosed building. 
c.  Except in the I2 district, loading and unloading of production material and manufactured products shall not occur between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(3)  Marijuana Cultivation. No marijuana cultivation facility shall be located: 
a.  Within five hundred (500) feet of any existing public or private school facility where classes are held for children aged kindergarten through the 12th grade. This distance shall be computed by a straight line measurement from the nearest property line of the school property to the nearest property line of the site housing the marijuana cultivation facility; or 
b.  Within nine hundred (900) feet of another marijuana cultivation facility, medical marijuana business, or retail marijuana establishment. This distance shall be computed by a straight line measurement between property lines of the sites housing the two (2) facilities. 
c.  No discernible odor shall be projected beyond the exterior walls of the licensed premises. 
(4)  Mini-Warehouse or Storage. 
a.  Design. 
1.  Doors to individual storage units shall not face any abutting street frontage. 
2.  One-story buildings shall be a maximum of fifteen (15) feet in height. 
b.  Other Activities. No other residential or nonresidential activities shall take place on the premises other than the rental of storage units. 
c.  Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage shall not be permitted other than for boats, trailers, or vehicles, which shall be stored in screened areas. Screening for such areas shall comply with Subsection 070.040.050(f). 
(g)  Wireless Communication Facilities. 
(1)  Purpose. In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, the Glenwood Springs City Council finds that these regulations are necessary to: 
a.  Provide for the managed development and installation, maintenance, modification, and removal of wireless communications infrastructure in the City with the goal of having the fewest number of wireless communication facilities ("WCF") required to complete a network without unreasonably discriminating against wireless communications providers of functionally equivalent services including all of those who install, maintain, operate, and remove WCFs; 
b.  Promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare by reducing the visibility of WCFs to the fullest extent possible through techniques including but not limited to camouflage design techniques and undergrounding of WCFs and the equipment associated therewith; 
c.  Develop smaller, less intrusive WCFs to supplement existing larger WCFs; 
d.  Utilize wall mounted panel antennas; 
e.  Construct roof mounted antennas only when wall mounted antennas will not provide adequate service or are not otherwise feasible; 
f.  Locate towers in non-residential areas, in a manner that minimizes the total number of towers needed throughout the community; 
g.  Promote the colocation of WCFs on new and existing sites; 
h.  Locate antennas and towers, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimized; 
i.  Enhance the ability of wireless communications service providers to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; 
j.  Effectively manage WCFs in the right-of-way; and 
k.  Manage amateur radio facilities and over-the-air receiving devices in the City. 
(2)  Applicability. 
a.  Base Stations, Alternative Tower Structures, Small Cell Facilities, and Towers. The requirements in this Subsection shall apply to all WCF applications for base stations, alternative tower structures, small cell facilities, and towers as defined in Subsection 070.030.030(g)(7), Definitions, and further addressed herein. 
b.  Exemptions. The requirements set forth in this Subsection shall not apply to: 
1.  Amateur Radio Antennas. Amateur radio antennas that are owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or are used exclusively for receive-only antennas, provided that the height be no more than the distance from the base of the antenna to the property line is met. 
2.  Pre-Existing WCFs. Any WCF for which a permit has been properly issued prior to November 1, 2017, shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Subsection, other than the operational standards set forth in this Subsection. Changes and additions to pre-existing WCFs (including trading out of antennas for an equal number of antennas) shall meet applicable operational standards set forth in this Subsection. 
3.  Miscellaneous Antennas. Antennas used for reception of television, multi-channel video programming and radio such as over the air reception devices ("OTARD") antennas, television broadcast band antennas, and broadcast radio antennas, provided that any requirements related to special uses of this Code and the requirement that the height be no more than the distance from the base to the property line are met. The Director has the authority to approve modifications to the height restriction related to OTARD antennas and OTARD antenna structures, if in the Director's reasonable discretion, modifications are necessary to comply with federal law. 
(3)  Operational Standards. 
a.  Federal Requirements. All WCFs shall meet the current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Authority ("FAA"), the FCC and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate WCFs. If such standards and regulations are amended, then the owners of the WCF governed by this Subsection shall bring such facility into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the time period mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to meet such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the WCF at the owner's expense. 
b.  Radio Frequency Standards. All WCFs shall comply with federal standards for radio frequency emissions. If concerns regarding compliance with radio frequency emissions standards for a WCF have been made to the City, the City may request that the owner or operator of the WCF provide information demonstrating compliance. If such information suggests, in the reasonable discretion of the City, that the WCF may not be in compliance, the City may request and the owner or operator of the WCF shall then submit a project implementation report which provides cumulative field measurements of radio frequency emissions of all antennas installed at the subject site, and which compares the results with established federal standards. If, upon review, the City finds that the facility does not meet federal standards, the City may require corrective action within a reasonable period of time, and if not corrected, may require removal of the WCF pursuant to this Section. Any reasonable costs incurred by the City, including reasonable consulting costs to verify compliance with these requirements, shall be paid by the owner or operator. 
c.  Signal Interference. All WCFs shall be designed and sited, consistent with applicable federal regulations, so as not to cause interference with the normal operation of radio, television, telephone and other communication services utilized by adjacent residential and non-residential properties; nor shall any such facilities interfere with any public safety communications. The applicant shall provide a written statement from a qualified radio frequency engineer, certifying that a technical evaluation of existing and proposed facilities indicates no potential interference problems and shall allow the City to monitor interference levels with public safety communications during this process. Additionally, the owner or operator shall notify the City at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the introduction of new service or changes in existing service, and shall allow the City to monitor interference levels with public safety communications during the testing process. 
d.  Legal Access. In all applications for WCFs an applicant must warrant and represent that it has the written agreement of the owner of the property which is the subject of the application for legal access to and from the WCF and the applicant must also warrant and represent that it will have legal access to the utilities to operate and maintain the WCF. 
e.  Operation and Maintenance. To ensure the structural integrity of WCFs, the owner of a WCF shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building and safety codes. If upon inspection, the City concludes that a WCF fails to comply with such codes and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon written notice being provided to the owner of the WCF, the owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of notice to bring such WCF into compliance. Upon good cause shown by the owner, the City's building official may extend such compliance period not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of said notice. If the owner fails to bring such WCF into compliance within said time period, the City may remove such WCF at the owner's expense. 
f.  Abandonment and Removal. If a WCF has not been in use for a period of three (3) months, the owner of the WCF shall notify the City of the non-use and shall indicate whether re-use is expected within the ensuing three (3) months. Any WCF that is not operated for a continuous period of six (6) months shall be considered abandoned. The City, in its sole discretion, may require an abandoned WCF to be removed. The owner of such WCF shall remove the same within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice from the City. If the WCF is not removed within said thirty (30) days, the City may remove it at the owner's expense and any approved permits for the WCF shall be deemed to have expired. 
(4)  Design Standards. The requirements set forth in this Subsection shall apply to the location and design of all WCFs governed by this Section as specified below; provided, however, that the City may waive these requirements it if determines that the goals of this Section are better served thereby. To that end, WCFs shall be designed and located to minimize the impact on the surrounding area and to maintain the character and appearance of the City, consistent with other provisions of the Code. 
a.  Camouflage/Concealment. All WCFs and any transmission equipment shall, to the extent possible, use camouflage design techniques including, but not limited to the use of materials, colors, textures, screening, undergrounding, landscaping, or other design options that will blend the WCF to the surrounding natural setting and built environment. Design, materials, and colors of WCFs shall be compatible with the surrounding environment. Designs shall be compatible with structures and vegetation on the same parcel and adjacent parcels. 
1.  Camouflage design may be of heightened importance where findings of particular sensitivity are made (e.g. proximity to historic or aesthetically significant structures, views, and/or community features). In such instances where WCFs are located in areas of high visibility, they shall (where possible) be designed (e.g., placed underground, depressed, or located behind earth berms) to minimize their profile. 
2.  The camouflage design may include the use of alternative tower structures should the Director determine that such design meets the intent of the Code and the community is better served thereby. 
3.  All WCFs, such as antennas, vaults, equipment rooms, equipment enclosures, and tower structures shall be constructed out of non-reflective materials (visible exterior surfaces only). 
b.  Wall-Mounted WCFs. Wall-mounted WCFs shall not extend above the roofline unless mounted to a penthouse. 
c.  Roof-Mounted WCFs. Roof-mounted WCFs shall be approved only where an applicant demonstrates a wall-mounted WCF is inadequate to provide service and shall be evaluated for approval based upon the following criteria: 
1.  Roof-mounted whip antennas shall extend no more than twelve (12) feet above the parapet of any flat roof or ridge of a sloped roof or penthouse to which they are attached; 
2.  Roof-mounted panel antennas shall extend no more than seven (7) feet above the parapet of a flat roof or ridge of a sloped roof to which they are mounted; and 
3.  Other roof-mounted related accessory equipment shall extend no more than seven (7) feet above any parapet of a flat roof upon which they may be placed, and shall not be permitted on a sloped roof. 
d.  Hazardous Materials. No hazardous materials shall be permitted in association with WCFs, except those necessary for the operations of the WCF and only in accordance with all applicable laws governing such materials. 
e.  Siting. 
1.  No portion of any WCF may extend beyond the property line of the lot upon which it is located. 
2.  Colocation. WCFs may be required to be designed and constructed to permit the facility to accommodate WCFs from at least two (2) wireless service providers on the same WCF unless the City approves an alternative design. No WCF owner or operator shall unfairly exclude a competitor from using the same facility or location. 
3.  WCFs shall be sited in a location that does not reduce the parking for the other principal uses on the parcel below Code standards. 
f.  Lighting. WCFs shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable governmental authority, or the WCF is mounted on a light pole or other similar structure primarily used for lighting purposes. If lighting is required, the City may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. Lighting shall be shielded or directed to the greatest extent possible so as to minimize the amount of glare and light falling onto nearby properties, particularly residences. 
g.  Landscaping and Fencing. 
1.  WCFs shall be sited in a manner that does not reduce the landscaped areas for the other principal uses on the parcel, below Code standards. 
2.  WCFs shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screen the view of the WCF from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of the front, side, and rear landscaped setback on the perimeter of the site. 
3.  In locations where the visual impact of the WCF would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether by the director. 
4.  Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as WCFs sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the site perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. 
5.  No trees larger than four (4) inches in diameter measured at four and one-half (41/2) feet high on the tree may be removed, unless authorized by the director. To obtain such authorization the applicant shall show that tree removal is necessary, the applicant's plan minimizes the number of trees to be removed and any trees removed are replaced at a ratio of 2 to 1. 
h.  Noise. Noise generated on the site shall not exceed the standards permitted in the Code, except that a WCF owner or operator shall be permitted to exceed Code noise standards for a reasonable period of time during repairs, not to exceed two (2) hours without prior authorization from the City. 
i.  Additional Design Requirements. Additional design requirements shall be applicable to the various types of WCFs as specified below: 
1.  Base Stations. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, such as a base station (including, but not limited to the antennas and accessory equipment) it shall be of a neutral, non-reflective color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure, or uses other camouflage/concealment design techniques so as to make the antenna and related facilities as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
2.  Alternative Tower Structures and Small Cell Facilities. 
i.  Shall be designed and constructed to look like a building, facility, or structure typically found in the area; 
ii.  Height or size of the proposed alternative tower structure or small cell facility should be minimized as much as possible and shall be subject to the maximum height restrictions of the zoning district in which they are located, subject to a maximum height limit of sixty (60) feet; 
iii.  Shall be sited in a manner that is least obtrusive to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
iv.  Shall take into consideration the uses on adjacent and nearby properties and the compatibility of the facility to these uses; 
v.  Shall be compatible with the surrounding topography, tree coverage, and foliage; 
vi.  Shall be designed utilizing design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and 
vii.  Visual impacts of the proposed ingress and egress shall be minimized. 
3.  Alternative Tower Structures and Small Cell Facilities Located in the Right-of-Way. The following requirements apply in addition to those set forth in Subsection 070.030.030(g)(4)i.2: 
i.  Shall be no higher than thirty-five (35) feet; 
ii.  Shall be no more than ten (10) feet higher (as measured from the ground to the top of the pole) than any existing utility or traffic signal within five hundred (500) feet of the pole or structure; 
iii.  Any new pole for an alternative tower structure or small cell facility shall be separated from any other existing WCF facility by a distance of a least six hundred (600) feet, unless the new pole replaces an existing traffic signal, street light pole, or similar structure determined by the Director; 
iv.  Pole-mounted components shall be located on an existing utility pole serving another utility; or be located on a new utility pole where other utility distribution lines are aerial, if there are no reasonable alternatives; 
v.  Shall be camouflaged/concealed consistent with other existing natural or manmade features in the right-of-way near the location where the alternative tower structure will be located; 
vi.  Shall, to the extent feasible, be consistent with the size and shape of pole-mounted equipment installed by communications companies on utility poles near the alternative tower structure; 
vii.  Shall, when located near a residential property, be placed in front of the common side yard property line between adjoining residential properties. In the case of a corner lot, the facility must be placed in front of the common side yard property line adjoining residential properties, or on the corner formed by two (2) intersecting streets; 
viii.  Shall be designed such that antenna installations on traffic signals are placed in a manner so that the size, appearance, and function of the signal will not be considerably altered; 
ix.  Facility antennas, mast arms, equipment, and other facilities shall be sized to minimize visual clutter; 
x.  Any ground mounted equipment shall be installed in an underground or partially underground equipment vault (projecting not more than thirty-six (36) inches above grade), or co-located within a traffic cabinet of a design approved by the Director; and 
xi.  Shall not alter vehicular circulation or parking within the right-of-way or impede vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian access or visibility along the right-of-way. Must comply with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act and all applicable local, state, and federal law and regulations. No alternative tower structure nor small cell facility may be located or maintained in a manner that causes unreasonable interference. Unreasonable interference means any use of the right-of-way that disrupts or interferes with this use by the City, the general public, or other person authorized to use or be present upon the right-of-way, when there exists an alternative that would result in less disruption or interference. Unreasonable interference includes any use of the right-of-way that disrupts vehicular or pedestrian traffic, any interference with public utilities, and any other activity that will present a hazard to public health, safety, or welfare. 
4.  Towers. 
i.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish, or, subject to any applicable FAA standards, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness as determined by the City; 
ii.  Tower structures should use existing land forms, vegetation, and structures to aid in screening the facility from view or blending in with the surrounding built and natural environment; 
iii.  Monopole support structures shall taper from the base to the tip; 
iv.  All towers, excluding towers in right-of-way, shall be enclosed by security fencing or wall at least six (6) feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. No security fencing or any portion thereof shall consist of barbed wire or chain link material; 
v.  Towers shall be subject to the maximum height restrictions of the zoning district in which they are located, subject to a maximum height limit of sixty (60) feet. Towers in right-of-ways shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and shall meet all of the design requirements of alternative tower structures in the right-of-way; 
vi.  Towers should be sited in a manner that that is least obtrusive to residential structures and residential district boundaries where feasible; 
vii.  Towers should take into consideration the uses on adjacent and nearby properties and the compatibility of the tower to these uses; 
viii.  Towers should be designed utilizing design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and 
ix.  Visual impacts of the proposed ingress and egress shall be minimized. 
x.  No new towers shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the City that no existing WCFs can accommodate the needs that the applicant proposes to address with its tower application. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing WCF can accommodate these needs may consist of the following: 
a.  No existing WCFs are of sufficient height and are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
b.  Existing WCFs do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed WCF; 
c.  The applicant's proposed WCFs would cause electromagnetic interference with the WCFs on the existing WCFs or the existing WCF would cause interference with the applicant's proposed WCF; and 
d.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing WCFs unsuitable for colocation. 
xi.  A tower, located outside of the right-of-way, shall meet the greater of the following minimum setbacks from all property lines: 
a.  The setback for a principal building within the applicable zoning; 
b.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the facility height, including WCFs and transmission equipment; or 
c.  The tower height, including antennas, if the tower is in or adjacent to a residential district or residential zoned property. 
d.  Towers over forty (40) feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter (1/4) mile from any existing tower that is over forty (40) feet in height, unless the applicant has shown to the satisfaction of the City that there are no reasonably suitable alternative sites in the required geographic area which can meet the applicant's needs. 
5.  Related Accessory Equipment. Accessory equipment for all WCFs shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  All buildings, shelter, cabinets, and other accessory components shall be grouped as closely as technically possible; 
ii.  The total footprint coverage area of the WCF's accessory equipment shall not exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet; 
iii.  No related accessory equipment or accessory structure shall exceed twelve (12) feet in height; and 
iv.  Accessory equipment, including but not limited too remote radio units, shall be located out of sight whenever possible by locating behind parapet walls or within equipment enclosures. Where such alternate locations are not available, the accessory equipment shall be camouflaged or concealed. 
(5)  Review Procedures and Requirements. No new WCF shall be constructed and no colocation or modification to any WCF may occur except after a written request from an applicant, reviewed and approved by the Director in accordance with this Subsection. All WCFs shall be reviewed pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Subsection: 
a.  Submittal Requirements. In addition to an application form, signal interference letter, and payment of all application and review fees, as established by resolution of City Council, each applicant shall submit a scaled site plan, photo simulation, scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate qualified professionals, showing the location and dimension of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, drainage, and other information deemed by the director to be necessary to assess compliance with this Section. 
b.  License Fee. No new WCF facility shall be constructed or colocated upon any tower or other structure in a right-of-way without first negotiating and agreeing to the payment of a license fee not to exceed the amount that would be authorized of an entity regulated pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 224. 
c.  Inventory of Existing Sites. 
1.  Each applicant for a WCF shall provide to the director a narrative and map description of the applicant's existing or then currently proposed WCFs within the City, and outside of the City within one (1) mile of its boundaries. In addition, the applicant shall inform the City generally of the areas of the City in which it believes WCFs may need to be located within the next three (3) years. The inventory list should identify the site name, site address, and a general description of the facility (for example, rooftop antennas and ground mounted equipment). This provision is not intended to be a requirement that the applicant submit its business plan, proprietary information, or make commitments regarding locations of WCFs within the City. Rather, it is an attempt to provide a mechanism for the City and all applicants for WCFs to share general information, assist in the City's comprehensive planning process, and promote colocation by identifying areas in which WCFs might be appropriately constructed for multiple users. 
2.  The City may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this Section or other organizations seeking to locate WCFs within the jurisdiction of the City, provided however, that the City is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
d.  Special Use Permit Required. 
1.  In all zoning districts, applications for base stations and alternative tower structures not within the right-of-way, and towers may be permitted only upon acquisition of a special use permit in accordance with Subsection 070.060.050(e), Special Use Permit. 
2.  All applications for towers shall demonstrate that other alternative design options such as base stations or alternative tower structures are not viable options as determined by the City. Notwithstanding anything in this Subsection to the contrary, no towers located in the right-of-way shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
e.  Applications for Base Stations and Alternative Tower Structures within Right-of-Way. In all zoning districts, each application for a base station or alternative tower structure within the right-of-way shall be reviewed and considered for approval by the Director for conformance with this Subsection and the applicant's execution of a license agreement as approved by the Director. 
1.  Appeal of Director Decision. Applicants may appeal the Director's decision by submitting a written notice of appeal to the City Manager within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the Director's decision. The notice of appeal must specifically set forth the grounds for appeal and include all documentation the applicant deems relevant. The City Manager shall within ten (10) business days of receipt of the notice of appeal and after review of all documentation submitted by the applicant and the Director's decision issue a final decision which may affirm, overturn or modify the Director's decision. 
2.  Referral to Planning and Zoning Commission. Except for WCF's in the right-of-way that meet all requirements of this Subsection, the Director may refer the application to Planning and Zoning Commission for special use permit review if the Director finds the proposed WCF to have a significant visual impact (e.g., proximity to historic or designated view corridors, or on significant community features), or otherwise is substantially incompatible with the structure on which the WCF will be installed, or it does not meet the clear intent of this Subsection. 
f.  Review Procedures for Eligible Facilities Requests. 
1.  Application. In all zoning districts, eligible facilities requests shall be considered a use by right subject to administrative review and determination by the Director. The City shall prepare, and make publicly available, an application form which shall be limited to the information necessary for the City to consider whether an application is an eligible facilities request. Such information may include, without limitation, whether the request: 
i.  Would result in a substantial change; 
ii.  Violate a generally applicable law, regulations, or other rule reasonably related to public health and safety. 
The application may not require the applicant to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed modification or colocation. 
2.  Type of Review. Upon receipt of an application for an eligible facilities request pursuant to this Section, the Director shall review such application to determine whether the application so qualifies. 
3.  Timeframe for Review. Subject to the tolling provisions of Subsection 070.030.030(g)(5)f.4, Tolling of the Timeframe for Review, within sixty (60) days of the date on which an applicant submits an application seeking approval under this Section, the City shall approve the application unless it determines that the application is not covered by this Subsection. 
4.  Tolling of the Timeframe for Review. The sixty-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement of the City and the applicant, or in cases where the director determines that the application is incomplete: 
i.  To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application; 
ii.  The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental written submission in response to the City's notice of incompleteness; and 
iii.  Following a supplemental submission, the City will notify the applicant within ten (10) days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in Paragraph i. above. In the case of a second or subsequent notice of incompleteness, the City may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness. 
5.  Failure to Act. In the event the City fails to act on a request seeking approval for an eligible facilities request under this Section within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted. The deemed grant becomes effective when the applicant notifies the City in writing after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed granted. 
6.  Interaction with Telecommunications Act Section 332(c)(7). If the City determines that the applicant's request is not an eligible facilities requests set forth in this Subsection the presumptively reasonable timeframe under Section 332(c)(7), as prescribed by the FCC's Shot Clock order, will begin to run from the issuance of the City's decision that the application is not a covered request. To the extent such information is necessary, the City may request additional information from the applicant to evaluate the application under Section 332(c)(7) reviews. 
g.  Abandonment and Removal. Prior to approval, affidavits shall be required from the owner of the property and from the applicant acknowledging that each is responsible for the removal of a WCF that is abandoned or is unused for a period of six (6) months. 
h.  Decision. Any decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a WCF, shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. The applicant shall receive a copy of the decision. 
i.  Compliance with Applicable Law. Notwithstanding the approval of an application for colocation as described herein, all work done pursuant to WCF applications must be completed in accordance with all applicable building and safety requirements as set forth in the Code and any other applicable regulations. In addition, all WCF applications shall comply with the following: 
1.  Comply with any permit or license issued by a local, state, or federal agency with jurisdiction of the WCF; 
2.  Comply with easements, covenants, conditions and/or restrictions on or applicable to the underlying real property; 
3.  Be maintained in good working condition and to the standards established at the time of application approval; and 
4.  Remain free from trash, debris, litter, noxious weeds, graffiti, and other forms of vandalism. Any damage shall be repaired as soon as practicable, and in no instance more than ten (10) calendar days from the time of notification by the City or after discovery by the owner or operator of the site. 
j.  Compliance Report. Upon request by the City, the applicant shall provide a compliance report within forty-five (45) days after installation of a WCF, demonstrating that as installed and in operation, the WCF complies with all conditions of approval, all applicable Code requirements and standard regulations. 
(6)  Special Use Permit Standards for Approval. In addition to the design standards set forth in this Subsection, WCFs, subject to acquisition of a special use permit shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedure set forth in Subsection 070.060.050(e), Special Use Permit, subject to the following criteria: 
a.  Base Stations. 
1.  Such facilities shall be architecturally compatible with respect to attachments, and colored to match the building or structure to which they are attached; 
2.  The maximum protrusion of such facilities from the building or structure face to which they are attached shall be six (6) feet; 
3.  Wall-mounted WCFs shall not extend above the roofline unless mounted to a penthouse; and 
4.  Roof-mounted WCFs shall be approved only where an applicant demonstrates a wall mounted WCF is inadequate to provide service and evaluated for approval based upon the following criteria: 
i.  Roof-mounted whip antennas shall extend no more than twelve (12) feet above the parapet of any flat roof or ridge of a sloped roof or penthouse to which they are attached; 
ii.  Roof-mounted panel antennas shall extend no more than seven (7) feet above the parapet of a flat roof or ridge of a sloped roof to which they are mounted; and 
iii.  Other roof-mounted transmission equipment shall extend no more than seven (7) feet above any parapet of a flat roof upon which they may be placed, and shall not be permitted on a sloped roof. 
b.  Alternative Tower Structures. 
1.  Such structures shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding area; 
2.  Height or size of the proposed alternative tower structure should be minimized as much as practically possible; 
3.  WCFs shall be sited in a manner that evaluates the proximity of the facility to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
4.  WCFs shall take into consideration the uses on adjacent and nearby properties and the compatibility of the facility to these uses; 
5.  Compatibility with the surrounding topography; 
6.  Compatibility with the surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
7.  Compatibility of the design of the site, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and 
8.  Impact on the surrounding area of the proposed ingress and egress, if any. 
c.  All Other Towers. The City shall within the framework of the review criteria set forth in this Subsection consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit, although the City may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one (1) or more of these criteria if the City concludes that the goals of this Subsection are better served thereby. 
1.  Height or size of the proposed tower; 
2.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
3.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
4.  Compatibility with the surrounding topography; 
5.  Compatibility with the surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
6.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
7.  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
8.  No new towers shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the City that no existing WCFs can accommodate the needs that the applicant proposes to address with its tower application. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing WCF can accommodate these needs may consist of the following: 
i.  No existing WCFs with a suitable height are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
ii.  Existing WCFs do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed WCF; 
iii.  The applicant's proposed WCFs would cause electromagnetic interference with the WCFs on the existing WCFs or the existing WCF would cause interference with the applicant's proposed WCF; and 
iv.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing WCFs unsuitable for colocation. 
(7)  Definitions. For purposes of this Subsection, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
a.  Alternative Tower Structure. Man-made trees, clock or water towers, bell steeples, light poles, buildings, and similar alternative design mounting structures that are compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures, and camouflage or conceals the presence of antennas or towers so as to make them architecturally compatible with the surrounding area. This term also includes any antenna or antenna array attached to an alternative tower structure or a stand-alone pole in the right-of-way that accommodates small cell facilities to the extent the pole meets the camouflage and concealment standards of Subsection 070.030.030(g), Wireless Communication Facilities. 
b.  Antenna. Any device used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves such as, but not limited to panel antennas, reflecting discs, microwave dishes, whip antennas, directional and non-directional antennas consisting of one (1) or more elements, multiple antenna configurations, or other similar devices and configurations. Exterior apparatus designed for telephone, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of wireless communications signals. 
c.  Antenna, Dish. Dish (parabolic or cylindrical) antennas used for microwave and satellite transmission and reception for commercial purposes. This definition shall not apply to wireless cable satellite dish antennas or dish antennas less than one (1) meter measured diagonally. 
d.  Base Station. 
1.  A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The definition of base station does not include or encompass a tower as defined herein or any equipment associated with a tower. Base station includes, without limitation: 
i.  Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City pursuant to this Article has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support; and 
ii.  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplied, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks) that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. 
2.  The definition of "base station" does not include any structure that, at the time the application is filed with the City under Subsection 070.030.030(g), Wireless Communication Facilities, does not support or house equipment described herein in Subparagraphs i. and ii. of this definition. 
e.  Camouflage, Concealment, or Camouflage Design Techniques. A WCF which is camouflaged or utilizes camouflage design techniques when any measures are used in the design and siting of WCF's with the intent to minimize or eliminate the visual impact of such facilities to surrounding uses. A WCF site utilizes camouflage design techniques when it (i) is integrated as an architectural feature of an existing structure such as a cupola, or (ii) is integrated in an outdoor fixture such as a flagpole, or (iii) uses a design which mimics and is consistent with the nearby natural, or architectural features (such as an artificial tree) or is incorporated into or replaces existing permitted facilities (including without limitation, stop signs or other traffic signs or freestanding light standards) so that the presence of the WCF is not readily apparent. 
f.  Colocation. The mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. 
g.  Eligible Facilities Request. Any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station involving: (i) colocation of new transmission equipment, (ii) removal of transmission equipment, or (iii) replacement of transmission equipment. 
h.  Eligible Support Structure. Any tower or base station as defined in this Code, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under Subsection 070.030.030(g), Wireless Communication Facilities. 
i.  Existing. A constructed tower or base station that was reviewed, approved, and lawfully constructed in accordance with all requirements of applicable law as of the time of an eligible facilities request, provided that a tower that exists as a legal, non-conforming use and was lawfully constructed is existing for purposes of this definition. 
j.  OTARD. An over-the-air receiving device. 
k.  OTARD Antenna. 
1.  An antenna that is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite services, that is one (1) meter or less in diameter; or 
2.  An antenna that is designed to receive video programming services via multipoint distribution services, including multichannel multipoint distribution services, instruction television fixed services, and local multipoint distribution services, and that is one (1) meter or less in diameter or diagonal measurement; or (iii) 
3.  An antenna that is designed to receive television broadcast signals. 
l.  OTARD Antenna Structure. Any pole, tower, or other structure designed and intended to support an OTARD antenna. 
m.  Site (for towers other than towers in the right-of-way and eligible support structures). The current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower or eligible support structure and any access or utility easements currently related to the site. A site, for other towers in the right-of-way, is further restricted to that area comprising the base of the structure and to other related accessory equipment already deployed on the ground. 
n.  Small Cell Facility. A WCF where each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than three (3) cubic feet; and primary equipment enclosures are no larger than seventeen (17) cubic feet in volume. The following associated equipment may be located outside of the primary equipment enclosure and, if so located, is not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosure, back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switch and cut-off switch. 
o.  Substantial Change. A modification that substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure, which meets any of the following criteria: 
1.  For towers other than alternative tower structures in the right-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than ten (10) percent or by the height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten (10) percent or more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater; 
2.  For towers other than towers in the right-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater for eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet; 
3.  For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or for towers in the right-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten (10) percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure; 
4.  For any eligible support structure, it entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site; or would impair the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or 
5.  For any eligible support structure, it does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment, unless the non-compliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation that would not exceed the thresholds identified in Paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this definition; and 
6.  For any eligible support structure, it does not comply with the generally applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes or with other laws codifying objective standards reasonably related to health and safety, or it does not comply with any relevant federal requirements. 
p.  Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting one (1) or more any Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") -licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. The term includes self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term also includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and such other similar structures. 
q.  Transmission Equipment. Equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
r.  Wireless Communications Facility, or "WCF". A facility used to provide personal wireless services as defined at 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C); or wireless information services provided to the public or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public via licensed or unlicensed frequencies; or wireless utility monitoring and control services. A WCF does not include a facility entirely enclosed within a permitted building where the installation does not require a modification of the exterior of the building; nor does it include a device attached to a building, used for serving that building only and that is otherwise permitted under other provisions of the Code. A WCF includes an antenna or antennas, including without limitation, directions, omni-directional and parabolic antennas, base stations, support equipment, alternative tower structures, and towers. It does not include the support structure to which the WCF or its components are attached if the use of such structures for WCFs is not the primary use. The term does not include mobile transmitting devices used by wireless service subscribers, such as vehicle or hand-held radios/telephones and their associated transmitting antennas, nor does it include other facilities specifically excluded from the coverage of Subsection 070.030.030(g), Wireless Communication Facilities. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.030.040 - Accessory Uses and Structures. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish minimum standards for accessory uses that are incidental and customarily subordinate to principal uses. These standards are established to minimize adverse impacts on surrounding properties and the community. 
(b)  Accessory Uses and Structures Allowed. All principal uses allowed in a zoning district per Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses, shall be deemed to include those accessory uses, structures, and activities typically associated with that use, unless specifically prohibited in this Section. Typical accessory uses and structures are identified in Section 070.070.020, Definitions of Use Categories and Specific Use Types. Accessory uses are subject to the standards in this Section and any applicable use-specific standards for the associated principal use in Section 070.030.030. 
(c)  General Standards for Accessory Uses and Structures. 
(1)  Compliance with this Code. Accessory uses and structures are subject to the dimensional standards in Article 070.020: Zoning Districts, and the development standards in Article 070.040, unless otherwise stated in this Section. 
(2)  Ownership. Accessory structures and uses shall be under the same ownership as the principal structure and use. The property shall use the same utility meter with the exception of an accessory dwelling unit. 
(3)  Relationship to Principal Uses and Structures. 
a.  Any accessory use or structure shall be conducted and located on the same lot as the principal use and structure. 
b.  Unless otherwise allowed by this Code, an accessory use or structure shall not be established prior to the establishment of the principal use or structure. 
c.  No accessory use or structure shall be allowed unless the primary structure or use is being used. 
(4)  Size of Accessory Structures. Unless otherwise stated in this Code, the maximum size for an accessory structure shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet. The maximum total for all accessory structures on a lot shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(5)  Dimensional Standards for Accessory Structures. 
a.  Accessory structures shall not be located in a required front yard. 
b.  Accessory structures may be located in a required rear yard provided that not more than forty (40) percent of the rear yard is covered. 
c.  Accessory structures shall observe a ten-foot setback from the rear lot line when such line abuts an alley, or a seven-and-one-half-foot setback where there is no alley. 
d.  Accessory structures shall observe a five-foot setback from side lot lines. 
e.  Accessory structures shall not be located over a recorded easement or over any known utility. 
(6)  Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage associated with any accessory use or structure is prohibited. 
(d)  Additional Standards for Specific Accessory Uses and Structures. 
(1)  Accessory Dwelling Units. 
a.  Purpose and Intent. The intent of this Subsection is to promote small rental housing units in the form of accessory dwelling units on lots with detached single-family dwellings, to increase the stock of attainable rental housing in the community, use available land more efficiently, and minimize the additional infrastructure that must be provided to support such rental units. These standards are established to minimize impacts to the surrounding residential neighborhoods and the community. 
b.  Applicability. These standards apply to all accessory dwelling units. Private covenants, conditions, or restrictions on any development, subdivision, or use of land do not preclude compliance with this Section. 
c.  Ownership. An accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold independently of the principal dwelling on the parcel. 
d.  Where Permitted. 
1.  Accessory dwelling units are allowed in zoning districts according to Table 030.1, Table of Allowed Uses. 
2.  Accessory dwelling units are allowed within a planned unit development unless specifically identified as a prohibited use by the planned unit development. 
3.  Accessory dwelling units are allowed by right within a historic district only when they are internal to an existing residential dwelling or existing accessory structure. 
4.  Accessory dwelling units shall only be permitted on a lot where a detached single-family dwelling exists or will be constructed concurrently with the accessory dwelling unit. 
e.  Compatibility. Colors, materials, and design of the accessory dwelling unit shall be substantially the same as the principal dwelling. If applicable, construction of accessory dwelling units shall be required to comply with the building design standards in Section 070.040.080, Residential Site and Building Design. 
f.  Number and Size of Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory dwelling units shall comply with all of the following: 
1.  Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted per parcel. 
2.  The gross floor area of an accessory dwelling unit shall be no less than three hundred (300) square feet of living area and no more than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet living area. For purposes of this standard, "living area" shall be calculated by excluding the following areas from the overall gross building area: 
i.  The thickness of the exterior walls; 
ii.  Garage areas; 
iii.  Basement areas where the ceiling height measured from the floor is less than six (6) feet; and 
iv.  Any other building areas where the floor to ceiling height is either less than five (5) feet or area is not accessible by a stairway. 
3.  The area of an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed forty-nine (49) percent of the area of the principal dwelling. The percentage used to demonstrate compliance with this requirement shall be determined by dividing the proposed building area of the accessory dwelling unit measured in square feet by the proposed building area of the principal dwelling measured in square feet. Where a portion of the principal dwelling is to be converted to an accessory dwelling unit, the size of the principal dwelling used in the calculation shall be its square footage after subtracting the building area of the accessory dwelling unit. 
g.  Dimensional Standards. 
1.  The accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the applicable zoning district requirements unless otherwise noted in 070.030.040(c)(5)c. 
2.  A detached accessory dwelling unit shall be located in the rear yard or side yard of the principal building. 
3.  The height of a detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed twenty-seven (27) feet. 
h.  Utilities and Dedications. Any costs associated with any utility service or line extension upgrade shall be borne by the developer. An accessory dwelling unit may be metered independently from the primary dwelling. If an unmetered property requests a meter for an accessory dwelling unit, the entire property shall become metered. System improvement fees shall be charged as required by Subsection 070.040.030(g), Dedications and Impact Fees, or as established by City Council. Also see 080.060, System Improvement Fees. 
(2)  Backyard Chickens. The following requirements, restrictions, and standards shall apply to backyard chicken use: 
a.  Applicability. Chicken coops are allowed as an accessory use only on those parcels where the principal use of the parcel meets one (1) of the configurations listed in this Subparagraph. An existing chicken coop shall cease to be allowed where the principal use of the parcel is altered to no longer meet one (1) of the following configurations: 
1.  Detached single-family dwelling; 
2.  Detached single-family dwelling with either one (1) attached or one (1) detached accessory dwelling unit; 
3.  A two-family dwelling (duplex) where both dwelling units are held in common ownership; or 
4.  A school or community centered board facility. 
b.  Number. 
1.  One (1) backyard chicken permit shall be allowed per parcel. 
2.  There shall be a maximum of six (6) hens allowed. 
3.  Roosters are prohibited. 
c.  Site Layout and Design. 
1.  Parcels must be a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet in size. 
2.  A chicken coop shall be located so that it has the least amount of impact to adjacent dwellings and properties. Therefore, a chicken coop shall only be located in a rear yard, have a rear yard setback of ten (10) feet when the rear lot line abuts an alley, or a seven and one-half (71/2) foot rear yard setback when there is no alley. Chicken coops shall have a side yard setback of at least five feet. In addition to the rear and side yard setbacks, a chicken coop shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to any structure with habitable space on adjacent properties. 
3.  The footprint of a chicken coop and enclosed Run shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. The maximum height of the chicken coop shall be eight (8) feet. A chicken coop shall either have a floor raised a minimum of three (3) feet, or must incorporate hardware cloth that has openings one-half (1/2) inch or less throughout the mesh which is buried to a minimum of one (1) foot around the perimeter of the coop. Chicken coops and runs shall be completely enclosed with wire or other material to contain the chickens and prevent wildlife intrusion. 
4.  Chicken coops and runs shall be surrounded on all sides by electrified fencing, except for any side abutting a solid wall or structure. The electrified fencing shall consist of two (2) strands of electrified wire placed at approximately twelve (12) inches and three (3) feet above the floor of the chicken coop and either attached directly to the chicken coop or within one (1) foot of the exterior of the chicken coop. All chicken coop access doors shall also be protected by the electric fencing. The energizer for the fencing shall be an alternating current (AC) system with at least 0.7 joules of current. If a solar system is utilized it must be capable of at least 0.7 joules. Use of twelve (12) to fourteen (14) gauge high-tensile galvanized steel wire is recommended for the electric fencing. A system consisting of more than two (2) electrified wires with an alternating hot/ground setup is preferred. The system shall be functioning at all times that hens are housed within the chicken coop. Additional electrified fencing layouts may be required if it is determined that the level of protection is not adequate. The electrified fencing shall be signed to warn humans of its presence. 
5.  Any fencing surrounding a chicken coop or run shall be buried at least one (1) foot below grade to prevent predators from gaining access under the fence 
d.  Operation. 
1.  Chickens shall not be permitted to "free range." Chickens shall be further protected by being enclosed within the chicken coop from dusk till dawn. 
2.  Chicken feed shall be kept within the residence or garage so that it can be secured from rodents and other wildlife. 
3.  No slaughtering of chickens may occur outside of the residence or garage. 
4.  Chicken coops and runs shall be maintained in a clean fashion to prevent odors, and chicken manure shall be removed and stored in a sealed container or removed from the property immediately. Spillage and leftover feed must be removed daily to prevent rodent propagation and odors. 
e.  Permit Procedures. 
1.  Application Requirements. The owner shall submit an application on the form provided by the Director and shall pay the application fee set by City Council resolution. 
2.  Issuance of Permit. 
i.  All backyard chicken uses shall require a permit from the Director. Such permit shall only be issued after the backyard chicken application has been approved in accordance with the Municipal Code. The backyard chicken permit shall specify any terms and conditions of the permit. All permits shall be issued to the owner of the property. A change in ownership shall necessitate issuance of a new permit. 
ii.  Any pre-existing keeping of chickens is illegal and therefore must comply with this Section or be removed. 
3.  Revocation of Permit. A backyard chicken permit may be revoked at any time by Director should it be determined that the use is not being operated in compliance with this Section or any other section of the Municipal Code. 
(3)  Home Occupations. 
a.  Purpose and Intent. The intent of these home occupation standards is to provide a framework identifying the type and level of business activity considered acceptable in a residence. These standards are established to protect the character of neighborhoods in residential zoning districts from adverse impacts associated with business activities. 
b.  Applicability. The requirements of this Subsection shall apply to any business, occupation, or commercial activity undertaken for compensation within a residence. The requirements of this Subsection do not apply to home offices, provided there are no employees, and no client visits. 
c.  Number of Home Occupations. No more than one (1) home occupation shall be permitted on a lot. 
d.  Floor Area of Home Occupation. A home occupation shall not use more than thirty (30) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling and all accessory buildings. 
e.  Residential Compatibility. 
1.  A home occupation shall be incidental and subordinate to the use of the property for residential purposes, shall not change the residential character of the property, and shall not create the appearance or impact of commercial activity to the surrounding neighborhood. 
2.  No structural or decorative additions shall be allowed to accommodate a home occupation that will alter the residential character of the home or otherwise be incompatible with surrounding residences. 
f.  Outdoor Storage Prohibited. Outdoor storage of materials or equipment related to a home occupation is prohibited. 
g.  Resident Operated. The home occupation shall be operated by a resident of the property. 
h.  Parking and Deliveries. 
1.  The home occupation shall be limited to the parking and storage of one (1) vehicle associated with the home occupation on the property or nearby streets. Such vehicle may be a pickup truck or van of up to one-and-one-half ton capacity, or a personal passenger vehicle. The parking and storage of vehicles on the property or nearby streets containing or intended to transport hazardous or explosive materials such as gasoline, oil, oxygen tanks, or contaminated water is prohibited. The parking and storage on the property or nearby streets of construction vehicles and equipment, including but not limited to, excavators, graders, rollers, and trailers, is also prohibited. 
2.  Delivery vehicles used to deliver to or pick up goods from the home occupation are limited to passenger vehicles, mail carriers, and express carriers. Semi-tractor trailers shall not be used for deliveries to home occupations. 
i.  Client and Employee Visitation. 
1.  Visits by clients and off-site employees to the premises of the home occupation shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
2.  The home occupation shall not generate more than a combined total of six (6) client or off-site employee visits per day. 
3.  No more than a combined total of two (2) clients or off-site employees shall be present on the premises at any one (1) time. 
j.  Business License. The operator of a home occupation shall first obtain a business license from the City if applicable. 
k.  Utilities and Municipal Services. A home occupation shall not cause a demand upon public utilities or other municipal services different from or in excess of that which is typically associated with a residence. 
(4)  Sale of Produce or Plants Raised on the Premises. See Subsection 070.030.030(e)(2). 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019) 
070.030.050 - Temporary Uses and Structures. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish standards and permitting procedures for temporary uses and structures and to minimize the impacts such uses and structures may have on surrounding properties or the community. These standards are also intended to ensure that temporary uses and structures are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period, and do not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building or structure. 
(b)  Temporary Uses and Structures Allowed. Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses, lists the allowed temporary uses and structures. Uses and structures not listed in the table require approval under the procedure in Subsection 070.030.020(d), Classification of New and Unlisted Uses. 
(c)  Permit Required. Prior to establishing a temporary use or structure, a temporary use permit shall be approved pursuant to the following procedures: 
(1)  Application Requirements. The owner shall submit the application on the form provided by the Director and shall pay the application fee set by City Council resolution. 
(2)  Issuance of Permit. All temporary uses shall require a permit from the Director. Such permit shall only be issued after the temporary use has demonstrated compliance with the standards set forth in (d) below. The temporary use permit shall specify any terms and conditions of the permit. Permits shall be issued for a period of time as set forth in (d) below. 
(3)  Revocation of Permit. A temporary use permit may be revoked at any time by the Director should it be determined that the use is not being operated in compliance with this Section or any other section of the Municipal Code. 
(d)  General Standards for All Temporary Uses and Structures. 
(1)  Compliance with this Code. Temporary uses and structures are subject to the dimensional standards in Article 070.020: Zoning Districts, and the development standards in Article 070.040: Development Standards, unless otherwise stated in this Section. 
(2)  Compatibility. 
a.  The allowance of such use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare, and the use is compatible with the purpose and intent of the specific zoning district in which it will be located. 
b.  The use is compatible in intensity, characteristics and appearance with existing land uses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed location, and the use, value, and qualities of the uses surrounding the proposed location will not be adversely affected by the use or activities with it. Factors such as location, access, traffic generation, noise, light, dust control and hours of operation will be considered. 
(3)  Where Permitted. 
a.  Merchandise shall not be displayed within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of the curb line of any two (2) streets; within the required setback area of the parcel on which the use is to be located; within ten (10) feet of any curb cut; or within fifty (50) feet of any structure primarily used as a residence. 
b.  Permanent retail businesses may display their merchandise in the area outside and immediately adjacent to their buildings. If the sidewalk or the pedestrian way in front of the building is used for display of merchandise, a minimum width of four (4) feet must be maintained for pedestrian passage. 
c.  A temporary use or structure shall not be located on publicly-owned property, including rights-of-way, unless the applicant first obtains a revocable license to encroach pursuant to Subsection 070.060.050(f). 
(4)  Required Licenses. The applicant has all licenses required by this Code and by state law, including a sales tax license, and department of health approval for food sales. 
(5)  Operation and Development Standards. 
a.  Adequate off-street parking is provided to serve the use, and the use does not displace the required off-street parking spaces or loading areas of the principal permitted uses on the site or interfere with the flow of traffic. 
b.  The proposed use and structure has a neat and clean appearance. 
c.  Trash and rubbish resulting from the use shall be completely contained on the approved site and shall be properly disposed of daily. 
d.  Proposed lighting shall not glare onto adjoining properties or onto public streets. 
e.  Noise makers of any kind, including amplifiers, shall adhere to the City's noise requirements in Article 100.070 of the Municipal Code. 
f.  Temporary uses and structures shall comply with all other applicable development standards in this Code. 
(6)  Time Limits. 
a.  A temporary use permit shall be valid for a maximum time period of fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days. Such permit may be renewed up to three (3) times in any calendar year. 
b.  The following uses may be granted temporary use permits for an extended time period beyond the limitation set forth in Paragraph a: 
1.  Christmas tree sales - up to thirty (30) consecutive days; 
2.  Agricultural and produce sales - up to one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days; or 
3.  Retail food sales - up to one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days. 
(e)  Additional Standards for Temporary Special Events. Temporary special events shall comply with all licensing requirements, including sales tax, and shall obtain a special community event permit in accordance with Title 050 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
ARTICLE 070.040 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

070.040.010 - Purpose. 
    This article includes standards that regulate the physical layout and design of development within Glenwood Springs to ensure the protection of the health, welfare, safety, and quality of life. These standards address the physical relationship between development and adjacent properties, public streets, neighborhoods, and the natural environment, in order to implement the comprehensive plan vision for a more attractive, efficient, and livable community. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.040.020 - Sensitive Area Protection. 
(a)  General Provisions. 
(1)  Purpose. This Section 070.040.020 is intended to protect and enhance the natural features that contribute significantly to Glenwood Springs's quality and character, including but not limited to the varying topography and hillsides, floodplains, wetlands, viewsheds, and other significant features. This Section also is intended to ensure that land subject to natural hazards such as flooding, falling rock, landslides, mud flows, or snowslides is not approved for development without appropriate consideration by the City of potential conditions and safeguards to help protect life, health, and property. 
(2)  Applicability. This Section shall apply to any proposed development that requires one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Any development permit required by Section 070.060.050, Development Permits, including: 
1.  Site/Architectural Plan Review (Subsection 070.060.050(a)); 
2.  Master Plan (Subsection 070.060.050(b)); 
3.  Construction Plans (Subsection 070.060.050(c)); 
4.  Location and Extent Review (Subsection 070.060.050(d)); 
5.  Special Use Permit (Subsection 070.060.050(e)); and/or 
6.  Right-of-Way Encroachment License (Subsection 070.060.050(f)). 
b.  A variance required by Subsection 070.060.070(a), Variance; 
c.  A permit for excavation and/or grading, as required by the Engineering Standards; 
d.  A building permit for construction of a new building or structure; or 
e.  A building permit for addition, alteration, or repair of an existing building or structure, the value of which exceeds fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the building or structure. 
(3)  Additional Submittal Requirements. 
a.  In order to evaluate and ensure compliance with the standards in this Section, the Director may require existing conditions reports and other technical reports and plans, as set forth in the Administrative Manual, that identify slopes, soil conditions, floodplains, geologic hazards, and other sensitive features present on the site, and that recommend steps to mitigate any hazards in order to comply with this Code. 
b.  Such reports shall be prepared to standards adopted by the City Engineer. Best practices to mitigate such hazards recommended in such reports shall be required. Geotechnical and geologic reports shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer. 
(4)  Limits of Disturbance. 
a.  Establishment of Limits of Disturbance. Except for properties in the Downtown Core, for every development subject to this Section the applicant shall establish "limits of disturbance" that indicate the specific area(s) of a site within which construction and development activity shall be contained. The limits of disturbance shall be shown on the site/architectural plan. 
b.  Criteria for Establishing Limits of Disturbance. In establishing limits of disturbance, the following criteria and standards shall be considered and applied, as well as applicable requirements from the City's Engineering Standards: 
1.  Minimize visual impacts from the development, including but not limited to screening from adjacent and downhill properties, ridgeline area protection, and protection of scenic views; 
2.  Erosion prevention and control, including but not limited to protection of steep slopes and natural drainage channels; 
3.  Fire prevention and safety, including but not limited to location of trees and vegetation near structures; 
4.  Preservation of significant trees or vegetation; 
5.  Conservation of water including but not limited to preservation of existing native vegetation, reduction in amounts of irrigated areas, and similar considerations; 
6.  Wildlife habitat protection, including but not limited to preservation of critical wildlife habitat and identified migration corridors and routes; 
7.  Stream corridor and wetland protection and buffering; and 
8.  Preservation of the maximum amount of the site's natural topography, tree cover, and vegetation. 
c.  Maximum Limits of Disturbance. 
1.  Single-Family Detached Residential Uses. For single-family detached residential uses subject to the requirements of Subsection 070.040.020(b), Hillside Development, the limits of disturbance for an individual single-family detached residential use and any accessory structure shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total gross area of the underlying lot or lots, or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, whichever is less. For most single-family residential development, limits of disturbance will cover the area(s) needed to provide the building sites for the principal structure and any major accessory structure(s), plus the area(s) necessary to provide an access driveway and necessary septic systems, utilities, services, and drainage facilities. 
2.  All Other Developments. For all other types of development, including planned unit developments, the limits of disturbance, including parking areas and accessory buildings and structures, shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, as determined by setback, common open space, landscaping, and other requirements of this Code. 
3.  On-Site Wastewater Treatment Systems. For all types of development, leach fields constructed in connection with an on-site sewer system shall not be counted toward the maximum limits of disturbance provided the leach field is revegetated with native vegetation in accord with state onsite wastewater treatment regulations. 
d.  Location of Limits of Disturbance. 
1.  Zero Lot Lines. Where appropriate to preserve or to protect steep slopes or other natural features, a structure may be located on a lot in such a manner that one (1) or both of the side facades of a structure rest directly on a lot line. This provision shall not be interpreted to exempt a structure from any applicable building and fire code provisions or requirements. 
2.  Contiguity. Limits of disturbance necessary to accommodate proposed development may be non-contiguous in order to best meet the criteria and standards set forth in this Section. 
3.  Clustering. Clustering of building pads and parking areas within a building site is strongly encouraged and may be required to minimize the size of the limits of disturbance and to maintain the maximum amount of open space in the development. 
e.  Modification of Limits of Disturbance. The Director has discretion to administratively increase the limits of disturbance by a maximum of twenty (20) percent where applicable, provided one (1) of the following criteria is met: 
1.  The modification is designed to yield: 
i.  More effective preservation of existing mature trees, vegetation, riparian areas, rock outcrops, or other significant natural features of the site; 
ii.  Less visual impact on the property or on the surrounding area; or 
iii.  Better protection of wildlife habitat; or, 
2.  Strict application of the standard(s) would render a site undevelopable. 
(5)  Clustering. Clustering of development in sensitive areas is strongly encouraged and may be required to meet the requirements of this Section. (Figure 040-1) 
a.  When Allowed. Minimum lot size may be reduced through clustering of development if the applicable decision-making body finds that: 
1.  The clustering proposal, compared with a more traditional site development plan, better attains the policies and objectives of this Article, such as providing more open space, preserving existing trees and vegetation coverage, and preserving sensitive environmental areas such as stream corridors, slide areas, wetlands, and steep slopes; 
2.  The clustering proposal will have no significant adverse impact on adjacent properties or development, or the applicant has agreed to adopt appropriate mitigation measures such as landscaping, screening, illumination standards, and other design features as recommended by the Director to buffer and protect adjacent properties from the proposed clustered development; 
3.  The architecture, height, building materials, building colors, and other design features of the development are compatible with adjacent properties or development and blend with the surrounding natural landscape; and 
4.  The clustering proposal meets all other applicable requirements set forth in this Article or in other applicable ordinances or regulations. 

Figure 040-1: Clustering
b.  Minimum Lot Size Reduction. Minimum lot sizes required for the underlying zoning district in Article 070.020: Zoning Districts, may be reduced by up to twenty-five (25) percent for lots within cluster developments that satisfy the above standards. 
c.  Pre-Application Conference Required. Any applicant proposing to reduce minimum lot sizes through clustering shall be required to attend a pre-application conference pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(b), Pre-Application Conference, prior to submitting a development application. 
(6)  Interpretation. The provisions of this Section 070.040.020 shall be deemed to be minimum requirements. Nothing in this Section shall impair the obligations of or interfere with private agreements in excess of the minimum requirements. Where this Section imposes a restriction different from that imposed by other applicable provisions of law, contract, or deed, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(7)  Disclaimer of Liability. This Section 070.040.020 is intended to provide some degree of protection to life, safety, and property. It is based on scientific and engineering considerations that are continually being developed and proven. Compliance with this Section cannot ensure freedom from risk to life, safety, or property. This Section shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee of the City for any damage that may result from reliance on this Section or any administrative decision lawfully made pursuant to this Code. 
(b)  Hillside Development. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Subsection is to: 
a.  Minimize the negative environmental and visual effects of mass cut-and-fill of large pads and excessive terracing through retention of the natural topography of the hillsides; 
b.  Prevent soil erosion and landslides; 
c.  Provide safe circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and within hillside areas and to provide access for emergency vehicles necessary to serve the hillside areas; 
d.  Preserve visually significant slope banks, ridge lines, rock outcroppings, native plant materials, natural hydrology, and other areas of visual significance; 
e.  Encourage innovative architectural, landscaping, circulation, and site design that serve to preserve the significant natural resources and visual character of the City; 
f.  Protect the public from natural hazards caused by unstable slopes and soils, debris flow, erosion and other geologic hazards of hillside development; and 
g.  Minimize the threat and subsequent damage of wildfire through safe building practices. 
(2)  Applicability. This Subsection shall apply to any of the application types listed in Subsection 070.040.020(a)(2), Applicability (Sensitive Area Protection), that meet any of the following criteria: 
a.  Hillside Preservation District. Any proposed development in the Hillside Preservation district; see Section 070.020.170. 
b.  Slopes. Any proposed development on a lot with average slopes in excess of twenty (20) percent within the limits of disturbance area. 
c.  Areas of Geologic Hazard. Any proposed development in Areas of Geologic Hazard, which consists of the Hazard Avoidance Districts and Hazard Mitigation Districts as defined in Subsection 070.040.020(c)(2)b., Establishment of Geological Hazards Districts. 
(3)  Lot and Density/Intensity Requirements. 
a.  Minimum Lot Size. All development subject to this Subsection shall comply with the minimum lot size and lot width standards required in the underlying zone district and with other development standards in this Article 070.040: Development Standards. 
b.  Allowed Density/Intensity. 
1.  Residential Development. The maximum number of residential units permitted within areas subject to the Hillside Development standards shall be pursuant to Table 040.1 below. In addition, a detached accessory dwelling unit may be allowed so long as the limits of disturbance does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total gross area of the underlying lot or lots, or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, whichever is less. 
Table 040.1: Allowed Residential Development Average Slope of Overall Site (within LOD) Residential: Allowable Units 20% to 25% 1 dwelling unit per 10,000 square feet 25% to 30% 1 dwelling unit per 20,000 square feet  
2.  Nonresidential Development. The maximum amount of nonresidential gross square footage permitted within areas subject to the Hillside Development standards shall be the square footage allowed by the zoning district. Nonresidential buildings are prohibited on slopes greater than twenty (20) percent; however, open decks and support structures for existing buildings may be constructed. 
3.  Calculating Density/Intensity. For the purposes of calculating density/intensity, only the average slope within the proposed area within the limits of disturbance of a specific lot or parcel shall be considered. 
c.  Prohibition of Development on Steep Slopes. No development, including clearing, excavation, and grading, shall be allowed on slopes greater than thirty (30) percent. Structures shall be set back from ascending or descending slopes greater than thirty (30) percent in accordance with the requirements of the current adopted building code. 
d.  Consolidation of Substandard Lots. 
1.  General Rule: Consolidation Required. Two (2) or more lots or parcels subject to these Hillside Development standards shall be considered to be a single, undivided lot or parcel for the purposes of this Code, if all the following factors apply: 
i.  The lots or parcels are contiguous; 
ii.  The lots or parcels are in single and common ownership and are of record on the effective date of this Code; 
iii.  No structures are located on the lots or parcels; 
iv.  All or part of the lots or parcels do not meet the minimum lot area or lot width requirements set forth in the base zoning district; and 
v.  Such lots have not been improved with individual and separate connections to municipal water or sewer systems. 
No portion of such lots or parcels subject to this consolidation provision shall be used or sold in a manner that renders compliance with the lot width and lot area requirements set forth in this Subsection less feasible. 
2.  Exception. Notwithstanding the general rule for consolidation set forth in c. above, if a lot or parcel that would otherwise be subject to the general consolidation rule meets the minimum lot area or lot width requirements set forth in the underlying zone district, then consolidation shall not be required. 
e.  Slope Calculations. 
1.  Slope shall be calculated as the vertical rise in feet measured over a horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage. Slope calculations shall not include areas outside the limits of disturbance. 
2.  The applicant shall indicate on a site/architectural plan the limits of proposed development and disturbance and shall include the calculation of the average slope of that area. 
(4)  Site Development Standards. 
a.  Building Envelope and Site Design Generally. Building envelopes and setbacks shall be determined on the basis of natural landforms, vegetation, and underlying geology. The designation of the limits of disturbance, which shall include all structures and access areas, shall be designed to avoid and minimize disturbance to sensitive areas and geologic and natural vegetative features. Natural vegetation, rock outcroppings, and significant landforms shall be retained to the maximum extent practicable. Flexibility and creativity are encouraged in designing development around existing features. 
b.  Protection from Potential Hazards. All proposed development shall be designed to protect the public from the potential hazards of drainage, debris flow, rock fall, fire, and erosion. Projects shall be designed with existing features in order to minimize disturbance to, and therefore mitigation of, surficial hillside geology. 
c.  Access Roads. New roads shall comply with the street standards in Section 070.040.070, Access and Circulation. Such access shall be approved by the Fire Department and the City Engineer. 
d.  Fire Hazard Mitigation. 
1.  Brush and vegetated areas shall be cleared and maintained according to the Fire Department. 
2.  New vegetation shall be fire- and drought-resistant species. 
3.  Roofs, overhangs, and exposed balconies shall be fire-rated according to the adopted Fire Code. 
4.  Water supply, fire breaks, and access shall be approved by the Fire Department. 
5.  Buildings shall be sited so that fire hazard clearing zones will not affect mature vegetation. 
e.  Viewshed Protection. Proposed development shall retain the essential visual qualities of the site so that views from public open space areas, rights-of-way, and other public places will not be negatively impacted. In designing a proposed development, applicants shall adhere to the following principles: 
1.  Following construction, off-site views of retaining walls, structures, parking areas, and landscaping on the development site shall be minimized. 
2.  The disturbance areas shall be reclaimed as soon as possible after construction ends. 
f.  Geology, Soils, and Grading. Development shall be designed to reduce the potential for soil erosion and slope degradation during and after construction. In addition to meeting the standards of Subsection 070.040.020(a)(5), Clustering, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  A grading permit shall be required for disturbance in excess of one thousand (1,000) square feet. Grading plans shall be submitted and reviewed according to the City's Engineering Standards. 
2.  Structures shall be designed to step down with the existing topography. To the maximum extent feasible, building designs that require extensive cut and fills shall not be allowed. 
3.  Except for driveways, cut-and-fill slopes shall be entirely contained within a lot (i.e., natural grade at the lot lines shall be maintained). 
4.  Sharp angles shall be rounded off, in a natural manner, at the top and ends of cut and fill slopes (within approximately five (5) feet of the sharp angle) unless steep angles are a natural character of the site. Where this would damage tree root systems, the amount of rounding off may be reduced and shrubs used instead to hide the transition. 
5.  The subdivider and/or property owner shall maintain in perpetuity and repair (or supply a program for preventative maintenance) of manufactured slope areas, erosion control devices, retaining walls, drainage structures and fire prevention measures as specified in an approved development. 
6.  Trees and vegetation shall be maintained to provide slope stability and prevent visual scarring wherever possible. When this requirement conflicts with fire hazard mitigation such as defensible space, appropriate mitigation shall be provided as determined by the Fire Department and the Director. A revegetation landscape plan is required for disturbed site areas. 
7.  Final contours and slopes shall reflect existing landforms to the maximum extent practicable. 
8.  The grade of a lot shall not be raised or lowered more than four (4) feet at any point for construction of any structure or improvement, except: 
i.  The site's original grade may be raised or lowered a maximum of six (6) feet if retaining walls are used to reduce the steepness of man-made slopes, provided that the retaining walls comply with the requirements set forth in this Subsection. 
ii.  Grade changes or retaining walls up to six (6) feet may be allowed if necessary to construct a driveway from the street to a garage or parking area, 
iii.  For the purposes of this Subsection, basements and buildings set into a slope are not considered to lower the natural grade within their footprint. 
g.  Retaining Walls and Fencing. 
1.  Generally, a retaining wall shall be no higher than six (6) feet, except that a wall varied in height to accommodate a variable slope shall have an average height no greater than four (4) feet and a maximum height no greater than eight (8) feet in any sixty-foot length. A higher wall is permitted: 
i.  Where used internally at the split between one- and two-story portions of a building; and 
ii.  Where substantially hidden from public view at the rear of a building, where it may not exceed the eave height of the building. 
2.  Visible retaining walls and fencing shall be designed to maintain human scale and reduce the visual impact of cut lines on the hillside through the use of indigenous materials, terracing and aligning construction with the natural topography. 
3.  Indigenous materials and/or earth-toned concrete shall be used, and terraced to match existing terrain. 
4.  Terraced walls and retaining structures should incorporate landscaping, if approved by the City Engineer. 
5.  Retaining walls and fencing shall comply with all standards in Subsection 070.040.050(f)(3), Retaining Wall Standards. 
h.  Water Supply. Water supply and pressure shall be adequate to serve both residential and emergency services pursuant to the adopted Fire Code. 
i.  Drainage. 
1.  Natural drainage courses shall not be disturbed by construction activity, and natural runoff shall be maintained unless approved by the City Engineer. 
2.  A drainage plan prepared by a licensed professional engineer shall be submitted in accordance with the City's Engineering Standards. 
(5)  Building Design Standards. 
a.  Structure Design Generally. Building massing and roof lines shall be designed to blend with the natural terrain. When possible, the massing of the structure shall be broken up using the slope and terrain to vary the exterior dimensions. 
b.  Ground Plane. 
1.  Buildings that firmly meet the ground convey an appearance of greater permanence and are strongly encouraged. 
2.  To the maximum extent feasible, placing buildings on piers such that exterior walls do not continue down to the ground shall be prohibited because of aesthetic and energy efficiency concerns. This requirement shall not apply in areas of waterways and areas of special flood hazard. 
c.  Building Mass and Scale. 
1.  To the maximum extent feasible, building design shall incorporate changes in the planes of walls and changes in the slope and height of roof lines to add variety, create visual interest, and minimize scale. 
2.  Building mass and wall lines shall be broken up to conform to existing slope and avoid unbroken expanses of building mass and walls that can intrude into the natural setting and dominate a site. 
d.  Building Colors. 
1.  Colors that enhance the natural colors of the building materials shall be used in developing an overall color scheme. Predominant tones on exterior walls shall tend toward neutral colors such as warm earthy hues, dark green of forests, greys and grey-brown of the mountains, the tan of grasses, and similar colors. Bright, harshly contrasting color combinations shall be avoided. 
2.  Exterior building, roofing, and exposed rooftop mechanical equipment shall be warm or dark earth-toned colors with low reflectivity. 
3.  Color and intensity of color proposed for all exterior building and roofing materials, including exposed rooftop mechanical systems such as HVAC equipment, roof vents, air handling/exchange units, shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council, as applicable. 
4.  Exterior building and roofing colors shall not include white, off-white, high-intensity primary colors, and/or fluorescent colors. 
e.  Building Materials. 
1.  Primary building materials shall be selected for their ability to withstand Glenwood Springs' variable mountain climate. Materials with demonstrated durability include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Brick; 
ii.  Stone; 
iii.  Cementitous siding products; 
iv.  Log construction; 
v.  Cast concrete; or 
vi.  Other comparable materials as approved by the Director. 
2.  Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) shall not be utilized in high-traffic areas, such as at primary building entrances, where it may be easily damaged. 
f.  Parking Areas. 
1.  Parking lots and detached garages accessory to residential uses shall be located so that they can be screened to blend into the natural environment and will not require backing onto an arterial or collector street. 
2.  To the maximum extent feasible, parking lots and detached garages accessory to residential uses shall be located where they can be screened so they do not dominate the streetscape. Parking facilities shall be designed to follow the existing topography and to provide adequate snow storage areas. 
(c)  Development in Areas of Geologic Hazard. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this Subsection 070.040.020(c) is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to geologic conditions in specific areas by regulations designed to: 
a.  Protect human life, safety and property; 
b.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities; 
c.  Minimize the need for relief and clean-up operations due to geologic events with their accompanying public and private costs; 
d.  Minimize the need for expensive mitigation measures to protect public and private property; and 
e.  Alert property owners and potential buyers of geologic hazards existing in certain areas so that they may protect their own property and avoid endangering the property of others. 
(2)  General Provisions. 
a.  Types of Geologic Hazards. As used in this Subsection, the term "geologic hazard" shall include the following hazards, as defined in Colorado Geological Survey Open File Report 78-10 ("C.G.S. 78-10"): 
1.  "Corrosive soils" are potentially corrosive to concrete and steel. 
2.  "Debris flow hazard" means severe and moderate debris flow hazard. 
i.  "Severe debris flow hazard" poses possible serious damage to structures and risk to life, and mitigation is necessary. 
ii.  "Moderate debris flow hazard" poses possible minor damage to structures and risk to life. Mitigation is recommended and may be required and major cleanup is probable. 
3.  "Landslide hazard" is shown in areas of identified landslide features. Slides are mostly older features but have potential for reactivation. 
4.  "Rockfall hazard criteria" includes an identifiable source area for rocks and the presence of fallen rocks with intermediate diameters of two (2) feet or more. 
5.  "Slope instability" denotes areas of past and current mass wasting processes. 
b.  Establishment of Geological Hazards Districts. There are hereby created within the City the following Geologic Hazards Districts: 
1.  Hazard Avoidance District. This district includes undeveloped parcels with the potential or presence of severe debris flow, and/or rockfall. The district also includes developed parcels with the potential or presence of severe geologic hazards where additional development will significantly increase the risk of damage from the hazard or significantly increase the cost to the community of mitigating the hazard. 
2.  Hazard Mitigation District. This district includes parcels with severe geologic hazards where significant development already exists and where additional development will not significantly increase the risk of damage from the hazard nor significantly increase the cost to the community of mitigating the hazard. It also includes areas with the potential or presence of moderate debris flow, and/or rockfall hazards. 
c.  Geologic Hazards District Map. The locations and boundaries of the Geologic Hazards Districts established by this Subsection shall be those established by the official report entitled "Geologic Hazards of the Glenwood Springs Metropolitan Area" as released by the C.G.S. 78-10. The geologic hazards maps that accompany C.G.S. 78-10 are hereby adopted as the "official geologic hazards maps" and shall be maintained along with accompanying sensitive area reports by the Office of the City Engineer. These maps shall serve as official reference in case of dispute regarding the location of hazards, and the City Engineer's interpretation of these maps shall be final. The maps shall be interpreted by the City Engineer as follows: 
1.  Hazard Avoidance Districts. 
i.  Undeveloped parcels lying entirely or partly in any area identified as a severe hazard zone on the Map of Debris Flow Fan Deposits and Hazards and/or the General Geologic Hazards Map. 
ii.  Developed parcels identified as lying entirely or partly in any area identified as a severe hazard zone on the aforesaid maps where the City Engineer has determined that additional development will increase the risk of damage from the hazards and/or significantly increase the cost to the community of mitigating the hazards. 
2.  Hazard Mitigation Districts. 
i.  Parcels lying entirely or partly in any area identified as a moderate hazard zone on the Map of Debris Flow Fan Deposits and Hazards and/or the General Geologic Hazards Map. 
ii.  Developed parcels identified as lying entirely or partly in any area identified as a severe hazard zone on the aforementioned maps where the City Engineer has determined that additional development will not increase the risk of damage from the hazard and/or will not significantly increase the cost to the community of mitigating the hazard. 
d.  Annexation of Land Within an Area of Geologic Hazard. Upon annexation of any land within an area of geologic hazard, as determined on the official geologic hazards maps, such land shall be added to the appropriate geologic hazards district, and all provisions of this Subsection shall apply. 
(3)  Geologic Hazards District Standards. 
a.  Hazard Avoidance Districts. No improvement, building, structure, excavation, dumping, or backfill shall be placed, built, undertaken or approved in a Hazard Avoidance District except for fences, geologic stabilization structures, or paths for nonmotorized use unless, before application for a development permit or, if no development permit is required, for a grading or building permit, the applicant demonstrates to the City Engineer and the Director by clear and convincing evidence that one (1) of the following conditions is met: 
1.  The land to be affected does not lie within an area of severe debris flow, rockfall hazard, or a drainage basin contributing to any such hazard, as shown on the official geologic hazards maps, and the proposal is in conformance with the purposes of this Subsection. 
2.  The severe hazard does not exist on the subject site in the proposal and is in conformance with the purposes of this Subsection. Such a determination shall require detailed analysis of the area by a qualified geologist and an engineering geology report, which report may be submitted by the City to the Colorado Geologic Survey for review. For purposes of this provision, the area" means the site of the proposed development as well as adjacent land and upslope drainage basins as necessary to compare the area analysis with the official geologic hazards maps. Upon submittal of this report by the applicant, application may be made for a development, grading, or building permit, but such a permit shall not be issued until the City Engineer and the Director have determined that the conditions of this Paragraph are met. 
3.  The proposed development meets all of the following conditions: 
i.  It will include no human habitation; 
ii.  It will not require City water, wastewater, streets or other public service; 
iii.  It will not increase the hazard to other public or private property; and 
iv.  It is consistent with the intent and purposes of this Article. 
4.  The subject site lies within an area with rockfall hazard but not debris flow and not within a drainage basin contributing to any such hazard as shown on the official geologic hazards maps. In the case of such a determination by the City Engineer, a mitigation plan shall be required before issuance of a development, grading or building permit. The mitigation plan shall be produced and certified by a qualified engineer and shall demonstrate to the City Engineer and the Director by clear and convincing evidence that rockfall damage will be prevented by a catchment wall or other means. 
b.  Hazard Mitigation Districts. 
1.  Applicability. All new structures and additions or improvements subject to this Subsection and proposed in a hazard mitigation district shall be subject to the requirements of Subsection 070.040.020(c)(3)b.2., Standards, unless before application for a development permit, or, if no development permit is required, for excavation or building permit, the applicant demonstrates to the City Engineer and the Director by clear and convincing evidence that one (1) of the following conditions is met: 
i.  The land to be affected does not lie within an area of severe or moderate debris flow, rockfall hazard, or a damage basin contributing to any such hazard as shown on the official geologic hazards maps. 
ii.  The severe or moderate hazards as specified in C.G.S. 78-10 do not exist on the subject site and the proposal is in conformance with the purposes of this Subsection. Such a determination shall require detailed analysis of the area by a qualified geologist in an engineering geology report, which report may be submitted by the City to the Colorado Geological Survey for review. For purposes of this provision, "the area" means the site of the proposed development, as well as the adjacent land and upslope drainage basin as necessary to compare the area analysis with the official geologic hazard maps. Upon submittal of this report by the applicant, application may be made for a development, excavation, or building permit, but such permit shall not be issued until the City Engineer and the Director have determined that the conditions of this Subparagraph are met. 
2.  Standards. 
i.  In areas with moderate or severe debris flow hazard as shown on the official geologic hazards maps, before issuance of a development permit or, if no development permit is required, an excavation or building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate to the City Engineer and the Director by clear and convincing evidence that any structure or grading change that may divert debris flow or floodwaters from the subject property will not increase hazards to other public or private properties. Such a determination shall require an engineering geology report produced and certified by a qualified engineer. 
ii.  Before issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall demonstrate to the City Engineer and the Building Official by clear and convincing evidence that all applicable requirements in the City's Engineering Standards are met. 
(4)  Public Improvements in Areas of Geologic Hazard. Public improvements, including but not limited to streets, water, wastewater, and electrical services, will not be extended into the Hazard Avoidance District, except where: 
a.  An area or a proposed development meets one (1) of the conditions of Subsection 070.040.020(c)(3)a., Hazard Avoidance Districts; or 
b.  The public good is better served by the extension which shall be in compliance with the City goals and policies. Such determination shall be made by the City Council upon a recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
(d)  Development in Waterways and Areas of Special Flood Hazard. 
(1)  Findings of Fact. 
a.  The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
b.  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(2)  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this Subsection 070.040.020(d) to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions to specific areas by provisions designed to: 
a.  Protect human life and health; 
b.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
c.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
d.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
e.  Minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure and other public facilities such as water, sewer and gas mains, electric and communication stations, and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
f.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner so as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
g.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is located in a flood hazard area. 
(3)  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this Subsection uses the following methods: 
a.  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
b.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
c.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
d.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
e.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(4)  Lands to Which this Subsection Applies. This Subsection shall apply to all areas of Special Flood Hazard Areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(5)  Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Glenwood Springs," dated October 15, 1985, with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Title. The Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this Subsection and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by the City. The Floodplain Administrator shall keep a copy of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), DFIRMs, FIRMs and/or FBFMs on file and are available for public inspection. 
(6)  Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this Subsection. 
(7)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use changed within the Special Flood Hazard Area without full compliance with the terms of this Subsection and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(8)  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This Subsection is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Subsection and another provision of this Code, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(9)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Subsection, all provisions shall be: 
a.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
b.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
c.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(10)  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Subsection is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Subsection does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Subsection shall not create liability on the part of the City, any official or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Subsection or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(11)  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The City Engineer is hereby appointed as Floodplain Administrator to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Subsection and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(12)  Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator. Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this Subsection, including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by Subsection 070.040.020(d)(13). 
b.  Review, approve, or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by adoption of this Subsection. 
c.  Review floodplain development permit applications to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
d.  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
e.  Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this Subsection, including proper elevation of the structure. 
f.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
g.  When Base Flood Elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 070.090.060, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation data and Floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this Subsection. 
h.  For waterways with Base Flood Elevations for which a regulatory Floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the City's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (1/2) foot at any point within the City. 
i.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, the City may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the City's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half (1/2) foot, provided that the City first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12, and receives FEMA approval. 
j.  Notify, in riverline situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency which is the Colorado Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
k.  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(13)  Permit Procedures. 
a.  Application. Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevations of proposed landscape alterations; existing or proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes and the location of the foregoing in relation to Special Flood Hazard Area. Additionally, the following information is required: 
1.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
3.  A certificate from a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria in Subsection 070.040.020(d)(16)b.; 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
5.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Subsection 070.040.020(d)(12). 
b.  Approval Criteria. Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this Subsection and the following relevant factors: 
1.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
2.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
3.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
4.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
5.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
6.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
7.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
8.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
9.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and 
10.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(14)  Variance Procedure. 
a.  The Planning and Zoning Commission ("Commission") shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this Subsection. 
b.  The Commission shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this Subsection. Such appeals shall be subject to the procedures set forth in Subsection 070.060.070(c). 
c.  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Commission may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction upon completing the administrative procedures set forth in Subsection 070.060.070(c). 
d.  The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
e.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this Subsection. 
f.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the requirements of Section 070.090.130 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justifications required for issuing the variance increases. 
g.  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this Subsection, the Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this Subsection as stated in Subsection 070.040.020(d)(2), Statement of Purpose. 
h.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
i.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
j.  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
1.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
i.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
ii.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with this Code or the City goals, policies and plans. 
k.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the Base Flood Elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
l.  Variances may be issued for new constructions and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
1.  The criteria outlined in Subsections 070.040.020(d)(14)a.-i. are met; and 
2.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(15)  General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required: 
a.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
b.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
c.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
d.  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
e.  All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
f.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
g.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
h.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(16)  Specific Standards. In all Special Flood Hazard areas where Base Flood Elevation data has been provided as set forth in Subsection 070.040.020(d)(5), Subsection 070.040.020(d)(12)g., and/or Subsection 070.040.020(d)(21), the following provisions are required: 
a.  Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, architect or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
b.  Nonresidential Construction. 
1.  With the exception of Critical Facilities outlined in 070.040.020(d)(22), new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated to one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: be designed so that at one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
2.  A registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this Subsection. Such certifications shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator, as set forth in Subsection 070.040.020(d)(13). 
c.  Enclosures. 
1.  New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
2.  Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
d.  Manufactured Homes. 
1.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the City's FIRM on sites: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork) are elevated to one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
2.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in existing manufactured home parks or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the City's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of the previous paragraph shall be elevated so that either: (1) the lowest floor of the manufactured home, electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), are one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation; or (2) the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
e.  Recreational Vehicles. 
1.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the City's FIRM sites either: (1) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; (2) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or (3) meet the permit requirements of Subsection 070.040.020(d)(13), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in Paragraph d. above. 
2.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
f.  Prior Approved Activities. Any activity for which a floodplain development permit was issued by the City or a CLOMR was issued by FEMA prior to the effective date of this Subsection may be completed according to the standards in place at the time of the permit or CLOMR issuance and will not be considered in violation of this Subsection if it meets such standards. 
(17)  Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones). Located within the Special Flood Hazard Area established in Subsection 070.040.020(d)(5), are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
a.  Residential Construction. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the City's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
b.  Nonresidential Construction. 
1.  With the exception of Critical Facilities, outlined in Subsection 070.040.020(d)(22), all new construction and Substantial Improvements of non-residential structures, must have the lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the City's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified), or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado Professional Engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Subsection, as proposed in Subsection 070.040.020(d)(13), are satisfied. 
2.  Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(18)  Floodways. Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. The State of Colorado has adopted Floodway standards that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standard (see definition of Floodway in Subsection 070.040.020(d)(25)). Located within Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Subsection 070.040.020(d)(5) are areas designated as Floodways. Since the Floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory Floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed by a licensed Colorado Professional Engineer and in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase (requires a No-Rise Certification) in flood levels within the City during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If Paragraph a. above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Subsections 070.040.020(d)(15) through 070.040.020(d)(22). 
c.  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, the City may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in Base Flood Elevations, provided that the City first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(19)  Alteration of a Watercourse. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a Special Flood Hazard Area, the following standards apply: 
a.  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
b.  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual one-hundred-year floodplain. 
c.  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
d.  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer or Certified Professional Hydrologist. 
e.  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and City floodplain requirements and regulations. 
f.  Within the Regulatory Floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a Floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00 foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions Floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a No-Rise Certification, unless the City first applies for a CLOMR and Floodway revision in accordance with Subsections 070.040.020(d)(15) through 070.040.020(d)(22). 
g.  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(20)  Properties Removed from the Floodplain by Fill. A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F), unless such new structure or addition complies with the following: 
a.  Residential Construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill. 
b.  Nonresidential Construction. The lowest floor (including basement), electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities (including ductwork), must be elevated to one (1) foot above the Base Flood Elevation that existed prior to the placement of fill, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that the structure or addition is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level that existed prior to the placement of fill with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(21)  Standards for Subdivision Proposals. 
a.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a flood-prone area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage. 
b.  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of Subsection 070.040.020(d)(6), Subsection 070.040.020(d)(13), and the provisions of Subsections 070.040.020(d)(15) through 070.040.020(d)(22). 
c.  Base Flood Elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Subsection 070.040.020(d)(5) or Subsection 070.040.020(d)(12). 
d.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
e.  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(22)  Standards for Critical Facilities. A Critical Facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the City at any time before, during and after a flood. 
a.  Classification of Critical Facilities. 
1.  It is the responsibility of the City to identify and confirm that specific structures meet the following criteria: Critical Facilities are classified under the following categories: (a) essential services (b) hazardous materials (c) at-risk populations, and (d) vital to restoring normal Services. 
2.  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. These facilities consist of: 
i.  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and emergency operation centers); 
ii.  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures but excluding clinics, doctor's offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions; 
iii.  Designated emergency shelters; 
iv.  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables and conduits); 
v.  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and 
vi.  Air transportation lifelines (airports [municipal and larger], helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure [aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars]). 
vii.  Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), non-potable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenance. 
viii.  Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the one-hundred-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of this Subsection, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the City on an as-needed basis upon request. 
3.  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxins and/or water-reactive materials. These facilities may include: 
i.  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plants, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
ii.  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxins and/or water-reactive materials; 
iii.  Refineries; 
iv.  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
v.  Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
vi.  Facilities shall be determined to be Critical Facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the workplace, AND the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a Critical Facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the three hundred fifty-six (356) chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010), also known as Extremely Hazardous Substances (EHS); or ten thousand (10,000) pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification" 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010) and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards", 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation of this Subsection, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations. Specific exemptions to this category include: 
a.  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
b.  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
c.  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
d.  These exemptions shall not apply to building or other structures that also function as Critical Facilities under another category outlined in this Subsection. 
vii.  At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. These facilities consist of: 
a.  Elder care (nursing homes); 
b.  Congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals (day care and assisted living); 
c.  Public and private school (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before-school and after-school care serving twelve (12) or more children. 
viii.  Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. These facilities consist of: 
a.  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, City administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); 
b.  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only). 
c.  These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the City that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the one-hundred-year floodplain or are compliant with this Subsection, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the City on an as-needed basis upon request. 
b.  Protection for Critical Facilities. All new and substantially improved Critical Facilities and new additions to Critical Facilities located within the Special Flood Hazard Area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be Critical Facilities. For the purposes of this Subsection, protection shall include one (1) of the following: 
1.  Location outside the Special Flood Hazard Area; or 
2.  Elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofing of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to at least two (2) feet above the Base Flood Elevation. 
c.  Ingress and Egress for New Critical Facilities. New Critical Facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the City, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a one-hundred-year flood event. 
(23)  Amendments. Any amendments of this Subsection or the maps or studies incorporated herein shall be subject to and governed by the provisions of Subsection 070.040.020(d)(5). 
(24)  Development in Waterways and Areas of Special Flood Hazard. No improvement, building, structure, excavation, dumping or backfill shall be placed, built, undertaken or approved within a thirty-foot setback area horizontally from the high water mark of any river or live stream, except for bridges, paths for non-motorized use, irrigation structures or flood control and erosion protection devices. 
(25)  Definitions Related to Floodplain Regulations. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Subsection shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Subsection the most reasonable application. 
a.  One-Hundred-Year Flood. A flood having a recurrence interval that has a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (one (1) percent annual chance of flood). The term "one (1) percent chance flood" is synonymous with the term "one-hundred-year flood." The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred (100) years. 
b.  One-hundred-Year Floodplain. The area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a one-hundred-year flood. 
c.  Five-Hundred-Year Flood. A flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2 percent chance annual of flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every five hundred (500) years. 
d.  Five-Hundred-Year Floodplain. The area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a five-hundred-year flood. 
e.  Addition. Any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
f.  Alluvial Fan Flooding. A fan-shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream that flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream channels and boulder bars, and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are predominantly formed by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet flood, channel avulsions and other stream processes. 
g.  Area of Shallow Flooding. A designated Zone AO or AH on a Community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist; where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
h.  Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on a FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
i.  Basement. Any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
j.  Channel. The physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries. 
k.  Channelization. The artificial creation, enlargement, or realignment of a stream channel. 
l.  Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the Federal Government. It is divided into fifty (50) titles that represent broad areas subject to Federal regulation. 
m.  Community. Any political subdivision in the state of Colorado that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including but not limited to, cities, towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, Indian tribes, and drainage and flood control districts. 
n.  Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR). FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
o.  Critical Facility. A structure or related infrastructure but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Section 070.090.210, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the City at any time before, during and after a flood. 
p.  Development. Any manmade change in improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
q.  DFIRM Database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses that accompany DFIRMs). The FEMA Mapping Specifications and Guidelines outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases. 
r.  Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM). The FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as "regulatory floodplain maps" for insurance and floodplain management purposes. 
s.  Elevated Building. A non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
t.  Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the Floodplain Management Regulations adopted by the City. 
u.  Expansion to Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
v.  Federal Register. The official daily publication for Rules, proposed Rules, and notices of Federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 
w.  FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
x.  Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways; 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
3.  Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current). 
y.  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a Community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the Community. 
z.  Flood Insurance Study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine Base Flood Elevations for some areas. 
aa.  Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir. 
bb.  Floodplain Administrator. The City Engineer, who is the City official designated to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
cc.  Floodplain Development Permit. A permit required before construction or development begins within any Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within the City, the City shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the City including the placement of manufactured homes so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within flood-prone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this Subsection. 
dd.  Floodplain Management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
ee.  Floodplain Management Regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
ff.  Flood Control Structure. A physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
gg.  Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and/or non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
hh.  Floodway (Regulatory Floodway). The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The Colorado statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half (1/2) foot (six (6) inches). Letters of Map Revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
ii.  Freeboard. The vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
jj.  Functionally Dependent Use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
kk.  Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
ll.  Historic Structure. Any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
i.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
ii.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
mm.  Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). FEMA's official revision of an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) or the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). 
nn.  Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F). FEMA's modification of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
oo.  Levee. A manmade embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10. 
pp.  Levee System. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
qq.  Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating, or recreation or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
rr.  Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle. 
ss.  Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
tt.  Mean Sea Level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a Community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
uu.  Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS). A form with data regarding the properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment, and spill-handling procedures. 
vv.  National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). FEMA's program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable Federal regulations promulgated in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The U.S. Congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
ww.  New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of Flood Plain Management Regulations adopted by the City. 
xx.  No-Rise Certification. A record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A No-Rise Certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado Professional Engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the one-hundred-year floodway show on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM). 
yy.  Physical Map Revision (PMR). FEMA's action whereby one (1) or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric features. 
zz.  Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
aaa.  Special Flood Hazard Area. The land in the floodplain within a Community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
bbb.  Start of Construction. The date the building permit was issued, including substantial improvements, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
ccc.  Structure. A walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground as well as a manufactured home. 
ddd.  Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred. 
eee.  Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The value of the structure shall be determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority in the area of interest. This includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of an historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
fff.  Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ). A quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by facilities to the State that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements. 
ggg.  Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this Subsection when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this Subsection. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
hhh.  Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the City's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance with Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
iii.  Water Surface Elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.040.030 - Site Development and Improvement Standards. 
(a)  Purpose. This Section is intended to ensure that, for all subdivision and for every development requiring a development permit, the developer shall: 
(1)  Provide, pay for, and install or cause to be installed, where needed: water distribution systems, storm drain structures, wastewater lines, pumps and appurtenant devices, curbs and gutters, street base course material and wearing course material, bridges, electrical transformers, street lights, underground communications systems and wiring, gas distribution systems, fire hydrants, fire alarms and other fire-control devices, street signs and traffic-control devices; 
(2)  Preserve or replace trees, shrubs, ground cover and other vegetation, and structures; 
(3)  Stabilize soil and prevent erosion and culverts or other devices to enclose open ditches and inhibit access to them by children; 
(4)  Reserve and dedicate to the City lands or easements where needed by the nature of the development for public purposes, including, but not limited to: utility easements and easements for drainage purposes, pedestrian easements, parkland or fees in lieu of such dedications; 
(5)  Delay or phase development if necessary to ensure that the City can provide necessary municipal services and facilities; and 
(6)  Ensure the completion of installation of curbs, gutters, street paving, and other improvements and to ensure that dedications are made. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Unless exempted in Paragraph (2) below, this Section shall be applicable to: 
a.  All subdivision of land within the City that results in the partitioning, dividing, combining, or altering of any lot, parcel, or tract of land, including subdivisions created by an exercise of the power of eminent domain by an agency of the state or the City; and 
b.  All development requiring a development permit. 
(2)  Exemptions. The standards of this Section shall not apply to: 
a.  Creation or realignment of an easement; and 
b.  Adjustment of the boundary line or the transfer of land between two (2) adjacent property owners that does not result in the creation of any additional parcels. 
(c)  Engineering and Construction Plans. 
(1)  Registered Engineer. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to have an engineer registered in the State of Colorado prepare a complete set of engineering plans in accordance with all applicable City codes for the construction of all required improvements. Such plans shall be in conformance with the approved preliminary plat and/or development permit. 
(2)  City Engineer Approval. All plans and supporting engineering reports for improvements required by this Section shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. All improvements shall be in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and/or development permit and all City standards, policies, and requirements. 
(d)  Nonconforming Design, Improvements, and Dedications. 
(1)  General Rule: Conformity Required. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, any development that is not in conformance with the requirements of this Section for design, improvements, or dedications shall be made to conform with such requirements before being issued a development permit or a building permit for construction of a new building. 
(2)  Exception Regarding Streets. 
a.  Where a development borders an existing nonconforming street, street layout and design requirements may be waived by the City Engineer for development proposals where no new streets will be designed or constructed, provided that such waiver is not detrimental to public safety or to the intent and purpose of this Code. Any such waiver shall be expressly stated in the conditions of the development permit. 
b.  Development on a lot bordering a street that does not meet minimum right-of-way width may be allowed where vehicular access to the lot is available from other than the nonconforming street. 
c.  Where the only vehicular access to a lot is a street that does not meet the minimum right-of-way width, a dedication shall be required that will increase the street right-of-way width by one-half (1/2) the deficient amount. 
(e)  Site Development and Improvement Standards. 
(1)  Drainage Plan. Every development plan shall include a drainage plan that meets the requirements of the City's Engineering Standards. 
(2)  Erosion and Sediment Control, Slope Stabilization, and Revegetation Plan. Every development plan shall include an erosion and sediment control plan that meets the requirements of the City's Engineering Standards. 
(3)  Lot and Block Design. 
a.  Lot Size and Access. 
1.  Each lot in a development shall be designed to provide an adequate, accessible building site for a structure devoted to the intended use of the land. 
2.  Lot sizes shall be in conformance with applicable zone district regulations or Planned Unit Development regulations. Where individual water or sewage systems are proposed for each lot, lot sizes shall be in conformance with standards of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
b.  Solar Access. Lots and blocks shall be designed to afford the maximum solar access to each building site. 
1.  Lot Orientation. 
i.  All residential development is strongly encouraged to consider siting to maximize solar access for individual units as well as for parking areas and internal streets. 
ii.  To the maximum extent feasible, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the single-family lots in a subdivision shall: 
a.  Have a north-south dimension of ninety (90) feet or more; and 
b.  Have a front lot line that is oriented within thirty (30) degrees of a true east-west axis. 
2.  Lots Adjacent to Railroad Right-of-Way. If any part of a residential development borders an active railroad right-of-way, lots adjacent to such right-of-way shall either have a minimum depth of one hundred fifty (150) feet or be provided with a landscaped fifty-foot buffer strip adjacent to the railway or a parallel street adjacent to the railway. No dwelling unit shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the active railroad right-of-way. 
(4)  Uniform Street Standards. Design and improvement of streets shall comply with the City's Engineering Standards. 
(5)  Water Distribution. The water main distribution system of a development shall be designed to connect with the City water system, to be compatible with the existing system and to make water available to each lot in the proposed development. Fire hydrants shall be located to ensure protection to each lot based on utilization of existing City firefighting equipment and shall be approved by the Fire Chief. 
(6)  Wastewater Collection. 
a.  Where the City wastewater collection system is within four hundred (400) feet of an existing wastewater main collection system, the wastewater collection system shall connect with the City system and provide service to each lot in the proposed development. Design of the system shall be the responsibility of the developer. The system shall be designed as required in the City's Engineering Standards and is subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
b.  When the City wastewater collection system is not within four hundred (400) feet of an existing wastewater main collection system, the developer shall be responsible for installation of a wastewater collection system for the development. Such system shall meet all federal, state, and local laws and regulations concerning design and installation of the system. 
(7)  Underground Utilities. 
a.  All wires, cables or other equipment for the distribution of electric energy and telecommunication signals, with the exception of transformers, meters, junction boxes, and like equipment, shall be placed underground where practicable. 
b.  Where subdivisions or developments are approved along or with crossing existing overhead power and communications facilities, energy and telecommunications may be obtained from these existing facilities. The connections to these facilities shall be placed underground unless otherwise approved by the Public Works Department due to economic, engineering, or aesthetic reasons. 
c.  Utility easements and rights-of-way shall be provided in the subdivision or development meeting the requirements of City systems for the installation and maintenance of energy distribution, telecommunication facilities, water, wastewater, and storm drainage facilities. 
(f)  Assurance and Acceptance of Public Improvements. 
(1)  Assurance for Completion of Public Improvements. 
a.  The development permit shall set forth the plan, method, and parties responsible for the installation of all required public improvements and shall make reasonable provision for the completion of said improvements in accordance with design and time specifications. 
b.  Except when sufficient security has been posted in accordance with f. below, the improvements required by the Engineering Standards shall be installed by the developer or his/her successor and shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of any building in the development. 
c.  The City, at its sole discretion, shall determine when such improvements shall be constructed in the event the developer or his/her successor posts security for such improvements. 
d.  The developer, or his/her successor, shall be responsible for posting sufficient security in accordance with f. below for the improvements required by the Engineering Standards prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of any building in the development. Under no circumstances shall these improvements be installed without the prior written approval from the City, which approval shall be contingent upon the developer submitting a sufficient maintenance plan which shall include provisions for adequate irrigation and fertilization techniques to ensure sustenance of such improvements. In the event such improvements require replacement, at the sole discretion of the City, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the developer, or his/her successor shall be required to make or fund such replacements. The City, at its sole discretion, shall determine when such improvements shall be constructed in the event the developer, or his/her successor, posts security for such improvements. 
e.  The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of all public improvements in the development unless otherwise provided in this Code. 
f.  In cases where strict application of the requirements of b. above and d. above would place undue hardship on the applicant for a building permit, he/she may provide security approved by the City Attorney and by the City Manager to cover the cost of completion of the required improvements and the maintenance of any incomplete street sections which might be involved. This security shall be to ensure to the City that the improvements are installed in the event that the applicant fails to install them as agreed. As improvements are completed, the applicant may apply to the City Manager for release of all or part of the security, which release shall also be approved by the City Engineer and the City Attorney. 
g.  The developer or his/her successor shall retain, at his/her sole expense, a licensed professional engineer for appropriate on-site construction inspections to ensure that all improvements as set forth in b. above and d above are installed as required, pursuant to City standards and specifications. The engineer shall certify, in writing, to the City Engineer that the improvements were installed in compliance with the approved development plan or subdivision agreement pursuant to City standards and specifications, and as-built drawings, prepared in accordance with the Engineering Standards, shall be provided prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Acceptance by City of Public Improvements. All public improvements including streets, alleys, water mains, and wastewater mains as specified in the development permit, shall be guaranteed for two (2) years from the date of the City's acceptance. Until such improvements have been accepted by the City, the applicant shall be responsible for maintenance thereof. A bond or other security, in an amount determined by the City Manager to cover the cost of maintenance of improvements before acceptance, shall be posted by the applicant before the City accepts any public improvements. Acceptance of public improvements shall be requested by the applicant of the City Manager and shall be granted only after the City Approves the certification required in Subsection 070.040.030(f)(1)g. above. 
(g)  Dedications and Impact Fees. 
(1)  General Requirements. Dedication of land and easements shall be made by means of a subdivision plat or deed. Dedications shall be made to fulfill the foregoing requirements for utility easements, drainage easements, pedestrian easements, streets, and alleys. In addition, land shall be dedicated to the City to be used for parks and recreation, in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 070.040.030(g)(2) below. 
(2)  Parkland Dedication. For every residential development, the City shall require the dedication of certain sites for parks and recreation use in accordance with the provisions of this Subsection. 
a.  Description. 
1.  Dedicated park land may include floodplain lands, national and state historical or natural features, and proposed public areas set aside in state, regional, county or City comprehensive plans. Land dedicated shall not include sites for technical, private or public schools or public agencies; sites for service organizations that are not open to the general public; and sites unsuitable for public use due to steep slopes, rock formations, adverse topography, utility easements, or other features that may be harmful to health and safety. 
2.  A minimum of eighty (80) percent of park land dedicated shall have a slope of not greater than twenty (20) percent and shall lend itself to utilization for public recreation purposes including, but not limited to, the following: play fields, tennis courts, picnic sites, trails, and boating areas. 
3.  Wherever a development proposal includes any part of a bikeway, hiking trail, pedestrian path or skiing trail designated on the City's trail system as identified in the City's Rivertrail Master Plan, the developer shall dedicate a public easement in compliance with the plan. This land may be included as part of the required parkland dedication. 
b.  Amount. Park land shall be dedicated in the ratio of 0.007 acres per resident or seven (7) acres per one thousand (1,000) residents of the proposed development, to be computed as follows: 
1.  3.5 residents per single-family dwelling unit; 
2.  3.0 residents per two-family dwelling unit; and 
3.  2.5 residents per multi-family dwelling unit. 
4.  1.25 residents per accessory dwelling unit (ADU). 
c.  Applicability. 
1.  Pre-Existing Development and Redevelopment. Except where there is an increase in intensity of use from a prior approval, the City Council shall waive all parkland dedication requirements where previous arrangements have been made and approved at the time of annexation, subdivision, or development of the same property. In the event that there is an increase in intensity of use, an applicant shall only be required to dedicate additional lands based on the ratio of the existing approved intensity of use or development to the proposed new use or development. 
2.  New Development. 
i.  The provisions of this Subsection shall apply to all new residential development, including the residential component of mixed-use development. 
ii.  Where mixed-use development (commercial/industrial/institutional and residential use) is proposed, the parkland dedication requirement shall be calculated based on the adopted residential per-acre value. 
d.  Partial Waiver of Dedication Requirements. 
1.  Private Recreation Facilities. The total acreage required to dedicated park lands may be reduced by up to fifty (50) percent in exchange for provision of private recreation facilities in the development if the Planning Commission finds all of the following: 
i.  The private recreation facilities offered will fulfill a major portion of the recreational demands of the residents of the proposed development; 
ii.  The private recreation facilities will be completed at the same time as or prior to the housing facilities in the development; 
iii.  The private recreation facilities will be maintained as such for a minimum period of ten (10) years; and 
iv.  Adequate provisions are made so that Paragraphs ii. and iii. above are ensured. 
2.  Partial Waiver. The Planning Commission may recommend, and the City Council may authorize, a partial waiver of the parkland dedication requirements. The City Council may authorize a partial waiver of parkland dedication requirements of up to twenty-five (25) percent of the calculated requirements, subject to the finding that one (1) or more of the following community goals can be satisfied: 
i.  The application can provide deeded access by easement or fee title to public lands, river corridors, or other public facilities. 
ii.  The application proposes public on-site recreational and/or active and passive open space amenities that exceed the minimum requirements as required by this Code. 
iii.  The application proposes to construct improvements to the City's trail system as identified in the Rivertrail Master Plan, or other applicable plans, goals or policies and is consistent with the design standards contained therein. 
iv.  The perpetual protection of private lands with important view corridors, natural habitat or river bank via the conveyance of a conservation easement as provided for by state statute. 
v.  The contribution of improvements to an existing City park or recreation facilities, on a dollar-for-dollar basis. 
vi.  The contribution to off-site greenway and streetscape improvements, on a dollar-for-dollar basis. 
e.  Fees in Lieu of Dedication. 
1.  Applicability. 
i.  In the event parkland is not needed within the area of development due to the size of the development or due to the close proximity of other parkland to the development, the City Council may require the applicant to pay the City a fee in lieu of land dedications or to transfer other property owned by the applicant to the City for use as parkland. 
ii.  The amount of a cash payment required shall be based on the number of acres of parkland dedication that otherwise would be required, less any reductions for private recreation facilities as provided above. 
2.  Fee In Lieu Calculation. 
i.  A fee in lieu of parkland dedication shall be determined by an appraisal provided and paid for by the applicant to determine the property's value. All appraisals shall be no more than six (6) months old and shall be prepared by a qualified appraiser; 
ii.  A contract purchase price on the subject property may be substituted at the determination of the City Council; or 
iii.  Based on a per-acre value for residential land in an amount to be adopted by the City Council by ordinance. 
3.  Payment. 
i.  If the City Council determines to accept other property not within the development instead of or as a partial payment toward the cash payment required hereunder, the value of the other property shall be its market value, as determined by a qualified appraiser selected jointly by the City and the applicant. The cost of such appraiser shall be paid by the applicant. 
ii.  Payment in lieu of land dedication shall be required as a condition of the development permit and made prior to issuance of a building permit. 
iii.  Such payment shall be placed in a recreation fund to be established and maintained by the City for the acquisition and improvement of land for parks, playgrounds, and recreation areas in the City that may benefit the residents of the City in general, as well as those of the proposed subdivision. 
(3)  Fisherman's Easement. 
a.  When a development or subdivision fronts on a river or creek within the City, a public fisherman's easement may be requested and may be included as a portion of the required parkland dedication. A fisherman's easement shall typically consist of a ten-foot wide corridor centered on the normal high water line of the river. A wider easement may be requested where topography warrants. 
b.  The City Council and/or the Planning Commission shall consider input from the Parks and Recreation Commission and the River Commission in reviewing parkland dedications for riverfront properties. 
c.  The City or a property owner may request that a habitat protection easement substitute for a fisherman's easement where the riparian or adjacent habitat is sensitive and may be damaged by human intervention. Any request shall be accompanied by a report prepared by a qualified biologist or ecologist documenting the negative impacts of human encroachment. The report shall also address maintenance, monitoring, and stewardship of the easement. The City Council and/or Planning Commission shall render a decision based on a goal of protecting habitat. Parkland credit shall be given for the habitat protection easement. 
(4)  School Land Dedication. 
a.  Applicability. To help offset the financial impact of new residential development on the school district serving the residents of the City, any new residential or mixed-use development within the City shall dedicate land or make payments in lieu of such land dedication in accordance with the provisions of this Subsection. 
b.  Amount Required. 
1.  The standard for school land dedication shall be LAND AREA PROVIDED PER STUDENT × STUDENTS GENERATED PER DWELLING UNIT = LAND TO BE DEDICATED. 
2.  The land dedication requirement shall be one thousand seven hundred seventy-six (1,776) square feet of land per potential student. 
3.  The number of students generated per type of dwelling unit shall be based on the following table: 
Table 040.2: Students per Dwelling Unit Type Dwelling Unit Type Students per Unit Single-family units 0.55 Two or more attached unit 0.375 Accessory dwelling unit 0.00  
c.  Fee in Lieu of Dedication. If it is determined that there is no appropriate land for school use available in a development, a fee in lieu of dedication may be made by multiplying the amount of land to be dedicated by the fair market value of land in the development or based on a per-acre value in amount to be established by the City Council by resolution and set forth in the City's fee schedule, whichever is less. 
1.  The City shall determine the value of lands in the City annually for the calculation of in-lieu-of payments. Such determination may require appraisals of land costs within a proposed development. The value of lands shall be established on a per-acre basis and converted to a per-square-foot basis for the purpose of in-lieu-of payment calculations. 
2.  Fee in lieu of land dedication shall be required as a condition of the development permit and made prior to issuance of a building permit. 
d.  Acceptance of Dedication or Fee. 
1.  The City reserves the right to waive or vary the dedication requirements in this Subsection when a development provides affordable housing. 
2.  The City shall consult the District in determining whether dedicated land is appropriate for school purposes and whether a fee in lieu of dedication is required. Such determination shall be the sole decision of the City and the District. 
3.  Within thirty (30) days following receipt of each fee in-lieu-of land dedication for schools, the City shall pay the fee directly to the District. The District shall use the fees for the purchase of land or the construction of new facilities within the Glenwood Springs attendance area. 
(5)  Fire and Emergency Services Impact Fee. In order to help offset the financial impacts of new development on the residents of the City, all new development shall pay a fire and emergency services impact fee as provided for in this Subsection. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this Subsection is to: 
1.  Provide a rational system for identifying and mitigating growth-related costs associated with growth and development and the expansion of emergency services and facilities made necessary by land development activities, a growing population and economic activity levels; 
2.  Ensure that the impact fees established by this Subsection are based on, and do not exceed, the cost of providing additional capital improvements necessitated by new development; and 
3.  Regulate the use and development of land to ensure that new development bears a roughly proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to provide adequate emergency services within the City. 
b.  Applicability. Any new residential or commercial construction within the City that requires a building permit shall be required to pay an emergency services impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this Subsection. 
c.  Time for Payment of Impact Fee. Payment of the emergency services impact fee shall be made to the Fire Department prior to issuance of a building permit. No building permit shall be issued until proof of payment of the emergency services impact fee is provided to the Building Department. Nothing herein shall prevent the prepayment of all or a portion of applicable emergency services impact fees at the time of development or subdivision approval. 
d.  User of Impact Fees. 
1.  All impact fees collected pursuant to this Subsection shall be used for capital improvements as defined in Subsection (a)(2) above. 
2.  The City may enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the applicable emergency service providers regarding the method of collection and administration of the impact fee program. 
e.  Calculation of Emergency Services Impact Fee and Credit for Improvements. 
1.  The emergency services impact fee shall be calculated as follows: 
2.  Upon approval by the City, the City shall calculate the amount of any credit that may be granted to any developer for the amounts due or to become due for capital improvements installed, purchased, and paid for by such developer when such capital improvements offset the need or amount of the impact fee that would otherwise be required. 
f.  Unpaid Impact Fees. The City reserves the right to withhold or revoke any permits, certificates or other such approvals for which the payment of impact fees is delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.040.040 - Common Open Space. 
(a)  Purpose. Common open spaces are set aside for the use and enjoyment of a development's residents, employees, or users. Common open space serves numerous purposes, including preservation of natural areas and resources, ensuring greater resident access to open areas and recreation, reducing the heat island effect, enhancing stormwater quality, and providing public health benefits. Goals and requirements for common open space complement this Code's requirements for dedicated parkland, and serve similar purposes. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Unless new development is expressly exempted in accordance with Subsection (2) below, the standards in this Section shall apply to all new development subject to: 
a.  Planned Development Rezoning (Subsection 070.060.040(b)); 
b.  Special Use Permit (Subsection 070.060.050(e)); 
c.  Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat Approval (Subsection 070.060.060(b)); 
d.  Minor Subdivision Plat Approval (Subsection 070.060.060(a)); 
e.  Major Site/Architectural Plan Approval (Subsection 070.060.050(a)(5)); or 
f.  Minor Site/Architectural Plan Approval (Subsection 070.060.050(a)(4)). 
(2)  Exemptions. The following development is exempt from the standards of this Section: 
a.  Properties located in the M2 zoning district; 
b.  Condominiumization or subdivision of existing residential and nonresidential units; and 
c.  Development of a single-family detached or duplex dwelling on an existing lot. 
(c)  Required Common Open Space Area. 
(1)  Required Total Common Open Space Area. A development shall provide the minimum area of common open space identified in Table 040.3, based on the development's base zoning district and use classification. 
Table 040.3: Required Common Open Space Use Classification Minimum Total Common Open Space Area (as percentage of development site area) Residential Uses 20% Mixed-Uses 15% Institutional Uses 10% Commercial Uses 10% Industrial Uses 5%  
The total amount of land set aside as common open space shall not be less than the applicable percentage in the above table, unless the City Council makes an individualized finding that supports an alternate requirement. Any such alternate requirement shall be reasonably related to the impacts upon the City's parks and recreation system and infrastructure that will be generated by the residents and users of the subject development. 
(2)  Allowable Common Open Space Areas. The features and areas identified in Table 040.4 shall be credited towards compliance with the common open space requirements of this Section. They are listed generally in order of priority. 
Table 040.4: Allowable Common Open Space Areas Area Counted as 
Common Open Space Description Design and Maintenance Requirements Natural Resource and Hazard Areas Natural water features (including lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, rivers, wetlands, drainageways), riparian buffers, flood hazard areas, existing tree canopy and specimen trees, steep slopes, and important wildlife habitat areas, including such areas used for required public recreation area  Preservation of any existing natural resource and hazard areas shall have highest priority for locating open space. 
 Maintenance is limited to the minimum removal and avoidance of hazards, nuisances, or unhealthy conditions. 
 See sensitive area protection standards (Subsection 070.040.020). Active Recreational Areas Land occupied by areas and facilities used for active recreational purposes, such as pools, playgrounds, tennis courts, jogging trails, ball fields, and clubhouses, including required public recreation area  Land shall be compact and contiguous unless used to link or continue an existing or planned open space resource. 
 Areas shall have at least one (1) direct access to a building or to a street, bikeway, or walkway accessible to the public or the development's occupants and users. Stormwater Management Devices Up to seventy-five (75) percent of land area occupied by stormwater management devices (including retention and detention ponds and other bioretention devices), when such features are treated as an open space site amenity To qualify, stormwater management devices shall support passive recreation uses by providing access and pedestrian elements such as paths and benches. Formal Plantings and Gardens Formally planned and regularly maintained open areas that provide passive recreation opportunities, including arranged plantings, gardens, gazebos, and similar structures, as well as roof gardens  Formal plantings and gardens shall have at least one (1) direct access to a building, or to street, bikeway, or walkway accessible to the public or the development's occupants and users. 
 Such features shall be oriented to surrounding development. Squares, Forecourts, Plazas, Courtyards, and Outdoor Dining Areas Squares, forecourts, plazas, courtyards, and outdoor dining areas that provide gathering places or active and passive recreational opportunities  Squares, forecourts, plazas, courtyards, and outdoor dining areas shall be at least two hundred (200) square feet, but no more than one (1) acre, in area. 
 Such features shall have at least one (1) direct access to a principal building, or to a street, bikeway, or walkway accessible to the public or the development's occupants and users. 
 Surrounding principal buildings shall be oriented toward the square, forecourt, plaza, or outdoor dining area where possible. Required Buffer and Landscape Areas All areas occupied by required buffers and landscaping, except interior parking lot landscaping and planting strips between the sidewalk and street. Buffers required within front setbacks or along public rights-of-way to screen parking (Subsection 070.040.060(h)(6)c.3.i.) shall count as common open space. See landscaping standards (Subsection 070.040.050).  
(3)  Areas Not Allowable as Required Common Open Space. The following areas shall not be counted towards required common open space: 
a.  Areas containing drainage and geologic hazard improvements; 
b.  Private yards not subject to an open space or conservation easement; 
c.  Street rights-of-way or private access easements, including sidewalks located within those rights-of-way or easements; 
d.  Open parking areas and driveways; 
e.  Land covered by structures, unless designated for active recreational uses; 
f.  Decks, porches, patios, and balconies reserved for individual dwelling units; 
g.  Designated outdoor storage areas; and 
h.  Stormwater ponds not located and designed as a site amenity (for example, with low fencing, vegetative landscaping, gentle slopes, fountain or other visible water circulation device, and pedestrian access or seating). 
With the exception of trails, spaces with any dimension of less than fifteen (15) feet shall not count toward satisfying the common open space requirement. 
(4)  Design Standards for Common Open Space. Areas used as a required common open space shall meet the following design standards: 
a.  Design Generally. The design, siting, grades, and solar access of the proposed common open space shall be such that the space is amenable to active and passive recreation; shall relate to the overall design of the site; and shall not be determined solely by those areas left over after the selection of the location for the building, parking areas, utilities, and other necessary site improvements. In addition, the design and siting of common open space located in commercial areas should minimize negative impacts of surrounding commercial activity or traffic on the enjoyment of the space by the residents as much as is feasible. 
b.  Location. To the maximum extent practicable, required common open space shall be located and configured to include, protect, or enhance as many of the allowable types of common open space shown in Table 040.4 as possible, with a priority generally reflecting the order in which the types are listed in the table. 
1.  Required common open space shall be located to be readily accessible and useable by occupants and users of the development. Where possible, a portion of the open space should provide focal points for the development through prominent placement or easy visual access from streets. 
2.  The common open space shall be directly accessible to all residential units, to the maximum extent practicable. For example, clustering units around a common open space provides greater accessibility to each residential unit and is preferable to locating the open space at the end of a row of units where it is less accessible to many of the units. (Figure 040-2) 

Figure 040-2: Common Open Space
3.  If the development site is adjacent to existing or planned parks, greenways, or other public open space, required common open space shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be located to adjoin, extend, and enlarge the park, greenway, or other public open space. 
4.  If the development contains, or adjoins an existing or planned transit station, required common open space shall, to the maximum extent practicable, adjoin the transit station site or be integrated with the transit station or other open space adjoining the transit station in accordance with any City-adopted plans for the transit station area. Such required common open space shall be furnished with at least three (3) of the following types of community amenities: 
i.  Benches or seating areas; 
ii.  Raised landscape planters; 
iii.  Shade structures; 
iv.  Public art (e.g., sculptures, murals, water elements, carvings, frescos, mosaics, mobiles); 
v.  A courtyard; 
vi.  Decorative shelters for transit riders (as approved by the Director); or 
vii.  Similar community amenities approved by the Director. 
c.  Configuration. 
1.  Required common open space areas shall be compact and contiguous unless a different configuration is needed to continue an existing trail or accommodate preservation of natural features. 
2.  With the exception of trails, common open space shall be consolidated into one (1) large space where possible and shall not be fractured into small sizes and irregular shapes that do not function well for recreation. 
d.  Setbacks and Easements. Setbacks and easements generally shall not count toward satisfying the common open space requirement; however, the Director shall have the authority to waive this requirement upon finding that the setback or easement area is consistent with the intent and design requirements of this Section and has sufficient solar access and landscaping to be amenable to recreation. 
e.  Connections to Public Trails, Parks, and Other Recreation Areas. Applicants are encouraged to use common open space to connect to public trails and public parks and recreation areas wherever possible. For example, connections to the River Trail, nearby parks, publicly owned open spaces, or connections that make short cuts from the end of a cul-de-sac to a neighboring through street with a sidewalk are desirable. If not dedicated to the public, these connections shall qualify as common open space, subject to the approval of the Director. 
(5)  Development Within Required Common Open Space Areas. Development within required common open space areas shall be limited to that appropriate to the purposes of the type(s) of common open space (see Table 040.4). 
(6)  Ownership, Management, and Maintenance of Common Open Space. 
a.  Required common open space area shall be managed and maintained as permanent open space through one (1) or more of the following options: 
1.  Open space may be held in common ownership by the owner(s) of the development, who will be responsible for managing and maintaining the land for its intended open space purposes. 
2.  Open space areas may be conveyed to a property owners' or homeowners' association that holds the land in common ownership and will be responsible for managing and maintaining the land for its intended open space purposes. 
3.  Open space areas may be conveyed to a third-party beneficiary such as an environmental or civic organization that is organized for, capable of, and willing to accept responsibility for managing and maintaining the land for its intended open space purposes. 
b.  Easements may be established on those parts of individually owned lots including open space areas that require the areas to be managed consistent with their intended open space purposes and prohibit any inconsistent future development. Any options involving private ownership of required common open space area shall include association by-laws, deed restrictions, covenants, or other legal instruments that ensure continued use of the land for its intended open space purposes and provide for the continued and effective management, operation, and maintenance of the land and facilities. Such instruments shall be approved by the City as sufficient to comply with this standard before or conjunction with approval of any subdivision plat for the development, or any permit approval (if no subdivision approval is required). 
c.  Responsibility for managing and maintaining common open space areas lies with the owner of the land comprising the areas. Failure to maintain common open space areas in accordance with the approved development shall be a violation of this Code. Identification of who bears responsibility for managing and maintaining common open space areas shall be shown on any recorded subdivision plat for the development or any approved development permit (if no subdivision approval is required). 
(7)  Alternative Options for Meeting Common Open Space Requirements. 
a.  Off-Site Provision. 
1.  In lieu of providing required common open space area on a development site in accordance with Subsection 070.040.040(c), the developer may, with the approval of the City Council in accordance with the criteria in Paragraph 3. below, provide all or some of required common open space on land outside the development site. No development application proposing off-site provision of required common open space shall be approved unless and until the City Council approves such proposal (even where the application would normally be decided by City staff or another board). 
2.  Where off-site provision of required common open space is proposed, the application shall include a map showing the location, boundaries, and topography of the site, as well as any additional information necessary to ascertain the site's suitability as common open space. 
3.  Any approved off-site common open space shall be shown as reserved or dedicated open space on a plat of the property containing the common open space. The City Council's decision on whether to approve off-site provision of required common open space shall be based on the following criteria: 
i.  Whether the proposed off-site common open space would meet the design standards for required common open space in Subsection 070.040.040(c)(4); 
ii.  Whether the proposed off-site common open space is located sufficiently close to the development site to meet the open space needs of the occupants and users of the development; and 
iii.  Whether the proposed off-site common open space would contribute more to meeting the open space needs of the occupants and users of the development than on-site provision of the common open space or the City's use of in-lieu payments to acquire and develop parks, greenways, and other open space areas in the vicinity of the development. 
b.  Fee in Lieu of Providing Required Common Open Space. 
1.  In lieu of providing required common open space area on a development site in accordance with Subsection 070.040.040(c), the developer may, with the approval of the City Council (for PUD, Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat, Major Site/Architectural Plan, or Special Use) or Director (for Minor Subdivision Plat or Minor Site/Architectural Plan), make a payment to the City in lieu of providing all or a portion of the required common open space or public recreation area. 
2.  The amount of such in-lieu payment shall be the product of the number of acres of required common open space area, as appropriate, that is proposed and approved for the in-lieu payment option multiplied by the pre-development fair market value per acre of land making up the development site. The development application shall include an appraisal or other documentation acceptable to the City as showing the development site's predevelopment fair market value. 
3.  If the City disagrees with the pre-development fair market value submitted by the applicant, such value shall be determined by a special appraisal committee made up of one (1) professional appraiser appointed by the applicant, one (1) professional appraiser appointed by the City Manager, and one (1) professional appraiser appointed by the initial two (2) committee members. The committee shall view the site, hear the contentions of both the applicant and the City, reach a conclusion by majority vote, and submit a written certification of its conclusion to the applicant and City Manager within thirty (30) days after the final member of the committee is appointed. The costs of the committee shall be borne by the applicant. 
4.  The developer shall make the in-lieu fee payment before recordation of any subdivision plat for the development or issuance of any development permit for the development (if no subdivision approval is required)-provided, however, that the payments may be phased in accordance with an approved phasing plan for the development. 
5.  The City shall deposit any in-lieu fee into a special fund that shall be used only for the acquisition or development of parks, greenways, and other open space areas that will serve occupants and users of the development. Such areas may also serve other developments in the immediate area. 
6.  The decision on whether to approve a fee in lieu of providing required common open space shall be based on the following criteria: 
i.  The extent to which the size, shape, topography, geology, soils, and public accessibility of the development site makes it impractical to provide required common open space that complies with Subsection 070.040.040(c)(4), Design Standards for Common Open Space; 
ii.  Whether the in-lieu payment option provides the additional design flexibility needed to accommodate allowable higher-intensity development in the downtown, or allowable higher-intensity development on substantially constrained sites elsewhere in the City; and 
iii.  Whether the City's use of an in-lieu payment would better meet the open space and recreational needs of occupants and users of the development than on-site provision, or any proposed off-site provision, of the required common open space. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019) 
070.040.050 - Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to ensure that landscaping, screening, and fencing is provided to: 
(1)  Protect and enhance the visual appeal of Glenwood Springs; 
(2)  Contribute to high-quality development; 
(3)  Improve air quality; 
(4)  Buffer potentially incompatible neighboring land uses; 
(5)  Mitigate the environmental and visual impacts of surface parking areas; and 
(6)  Protect residential and commercial property values. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  New Development and Redevelopment. These standards shall apply to all new development or redevelopment unless otherwise exempted by Paragraph (2). 
(2)  Exemptions. 
a.  Single- and two-family residential uses except 070.040.050(d), Streetscape Requirements, and 070.040.050(f)(2), Fence Standards. 
b.  Mixed-use or nonresidential uses on a lot that is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be exempt from this Section. 
c.  Expansion of existing structures or uses by less than twenty-five (25) percent gross floor area provided that any existing compliant landscaping remains unaltered. 
(c)  General Landscaping Standards. 
(1)  Minimum Landscaped Site Area. 
a.  The minimum percentage of site area required to be landscaped is established for each zoning district in Section 070.020.020, Summary of Dimensional Standards. 
b.  Except for areas with native vegetation cover, any part of a site not used for building coverage, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, or other site improvements shall be landscaped. 
(2)  Type and Amount of Plant Material. 
a.  Trees and other plant material shall be provided according to Table 040.5: Minimum Plant Material and Standards. 
b.  Existing landscaping may be used to satisfy the landscaping requirements, except that preservation of existing trees shall comply with Subsection 070.040.050(c)(4). 
c.  Artificial trees, shrubs, turf, or plants shall not be used to satisfy any of the requirements of this Section. 
d.  Where fractional number results, the number of trees, shrubs, or perennials shall be rounded to the next highest whole number. 
Table 040.5: Minimum Plant Material and Standards Plant Material Minimum Amount Species and Size Standards Trees One tree per 400 square feet of site area required to be landscaped in addition to those required for parking areas Deciduous: minimum caliper 2.5 inches (understory ornamental trees may be two-inch caliper) Evergreen: 
(a) minimum height of six feet; 
(b) shall not exceed 50 percent of total required trees; 
(c) if provided, 10 percent of evergreen trees shall have a minimum height of 10 feet. Shrub substitution: Up to 50 percent of required trees may be substituted with shrubs (above required amount) at a rate of 10 shrubs = one tree. All such shrubs shall comply with the standards in this table. Shrubs One shrub per 25 square feet of site area required to be landscaped in addition to those required for parking areas (a) at least 20 percent of required shrubs shall be an evergreen species; 
(b) shall be a minimum of five gallons in size and shall grow to a minimum height of one foot at maturity; 
(c) if used for screening requirements in Subsection 070.040.050(f), shall grow to a minimum height of four feet at maturity. Perennials One perennial per 5 square feet of site area required to be landscaped (a) shall be a minimum of one gallon in size; 
(b) shrubs (above required amount) may be substituted for perennials at a rate of one shrub = 5 perennials.  
(3)  Location of Required Plant Material. 
a.  Required trees, shrubs, and perennials shall be planted in required setbacks, parking areas, and along building foundations. 
b.  When planted in required setback areas or along building foundations, trees may be either uniformly spaced or placed in irregular groupings. 
c.  Landscaping or other obstructions within a sight distance triangle shall comply with the height restrictions in Subsection 070.020.190(c)(5), Sight Distance Triangle Requirement. 
d.  Trees shall be planted at least four (4) feet away from overhanging vehicles. (Figure 040-3) 

Figure 040-3: Vehicle Overhang
(4)  Credits for Tree Preservation. 
a.  Amount of Tree Preservation Credit. 
1.  The number of trees preserved can be credited toward the total number of trees required for the development to meet the landscaping requirements of this Section. Credit shall be applied on a one-for-one basis, unless the Director approves an alternate ratio to encourage tree preservation. 
2.  The Director shall determine whether or not credit shall be granted for existing trees. 
3.  Tree species that are not acceptable to receive credit under this standard include, but are not exclusive of Siberian and Chinese Elm, Russian Olive, Tamarisk, and other species that are listed on the Garfield County Vegetation Management Department's most current noxious weed list. 
b.  Procedure for Evaluating Existing Trees. 
1.  Existing trees intended for preservation shall be evaluated by a licensed arborist prior to submitting and application for development, or prior to issuance of a grading or building permit. The arborist's written evaluation shall include an assessment of the likelihood of the survivability of the trees based on proximity to any grading activity on the site and recommendations for tree preservation during grading and construction activities. 
2.  Based on the licensed arborist's evaluation, the development may receive credit for existing trees provided that all of the following criteria are met: 
i.  The trees are each a minimum of four-inch caliper in size; 
ii.  Any grading, digging, and/or site preparation activities shall not be permitted within the drip line (Figure 040-4) of the trees intended for preservation; and 

Figure 040-4: Drip Line
iii.  Trees intended for preservation shall be shown on the landscape plan with caliper size and drip line noted. 
(d)  Streetscape Requirements. 
(1)  Minimum Streetscape Elements. Streetscape elements shall be provided according to Table 040.6: Minimum Streetscape Requirements. 
Table 040.6: Minimum Streetscape Requirements Minimum Amount (Residential) Minimum Amount (In the Downtown Core) Minimum Amount (Other Mixed-Use and Nonresidential) Other Standards Street Trees One tree per 75 feet street frontage Residential: one tree per 35 feet street frontage; 
Mixed-Use: one tree per 50 feet street frontage One tree per 50 feet street frontage (a) trees shall meet City specifications pursuant to Article 090.040, Streets and Sidewalks; 
(b) evergreen trees are prohibited as street trees in the planting strip; 
(c) where overhead utility lines are present, select a variety of tree that, at maturity, grows no higher than the lowest utility line; 
(d) trees shall be spaced 30 feet apart on center unless alternative spacing is approved by the Director. Planting Strip Minimum five feet in width (from back edge of curb) Minimum five feet in width (from back edge of curb); however, the Director may waive this requirement based on existing conditions along the block face provided landscape elements are used to define the edge of the property in the absence of a planting strip. Minimum five feet in width (from back edge of curb) (a) shall include a combination (at least two) of the following: trees, shrubs, grasses, native plants, drought-tolerant or low-water plants, perennials, annuals, or turf; 
(b) in the Downtown Core, grasses or turf may only be used for residential or mixed-use development; 
(c) up to 40 percent of the planting strip may be hard surfaced with concrete, brick, composite pavers, stone, or rock-type mulch. Amenities None Per Director discretion based on the needs for a particular block None Amenities shall be designed and installed pursuant to the streetscape manual.  
(2)  Location of Street Trees. 
a.  Unless otherwise permitted in this Section, street trees shall be located within the designated planting strip. 
b.  Where no planting strip is present or where utilities prevent trees from being planted in the designated planting strip, trees may be planted on the development parcel, in an area ranging from three (3) to seven (7) feet behind the property line nearest to the public right-of-way. 

Figure 040-5: Location of Street Trees
(e)  Parking Area Landscaping. See Subsection 070.040.060(h)(6), Parking Area Landscaping. 
(f)  Screening, Fences, and Walls. 
(1)  Screening Standards. 
a.  Credits Toward Required Landscaping. Any landscaping provided to meet screening standards will be credited towards the overall landscaping requirements enumerated in this Section. 
b.  Screening Loading and Outdoor Storage Areas. Loading and outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view of public rights-of-way and from adjacent residential land uses or districts using any one (1) or a combination of fences, walls, berms, or landscaping that is at least six (6) feet in height and provides a permanent, opaque, year-round screen. 
c.  Screening Refuse Containers. 
1.  Enclosures Required. Refuse containers shall be located within an enclosure. 
2.  Location. Refuse container enclosures shall be located at the rear of the property to the extent practicable and shall be sited to allow for easy vehicular access such that access does not require backing movements onto public rights-of-way, with the exception of alleys. 
3.  Design and Materials. Refuse container enclosures shall be of sufficient height to screen containers, but shall not exceed six (6) feet in height unless screening a refuse container taller than six (6) feet. Such enclosures shall be visually compatible with materials used on the primary building. In no case shall enclosures consist of chain link or corrugated metal. Refuse containers shall comply with the provisions set forth in Article 100.010.060 of the Municipal Code. (Figure 040-6) 

Figure 040-6: Refuse Container Enclosures
4.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be used to soften the appearance of the enclosure where such enclosure is located within a side yard or can be viewed from public rights-of-way. 
d.  Screening Mechanical and Utility Equipment. All mechanical and utility equipment including but not limited to air-conditioning, heating and soft water tanks, television antennas, satellite dishes, security apparatus, transformers, and electric and gas meters shall be integrated into the building design, screened from public view or enclosed in a suitable accessory structure, pursuant to the following standards: 
1.  Location. 
i.  Ground-mounted mechanical and utility equipment shall be located outside of sight distance triangles in order to avoid obscuring vision at intersections. 
ii.  To the extent practicable, ground mounted mechanical and utility equipment shall be located out of view of public rights-of-way, customer entrances, and other public areas. 
2.  Design. 
i.  Materials. Materials used for screening purposes shall be wood or masonry. The use of split face concrete block is prohibited unless otherwise approved by the Director through the alternative compliance procedure. 
ii.  Ground-Mounted Equipment. Ground-mounted mechanical and utility equipment located within view of customer entrances or public rights-of-way shall be integrated into the overall site design, the architectural design of the building, and screened from public view using one (1) or a combination of the following: (Figure 040-7) 
a.  Decorative wall, fence, or enclosure that is constructed of materials that are compatible with the overall architectural design of the development and of a height that is not less than the height of the equipment to be screened; or 
b.  Landscaping that is of sufficient height at maturity and of opacity to effectively soften and screen the equipment, and that is integrated into the overall landscaping plan. 

Figure 040-7: Screening Ground-Mounted Equipment
iii.  Fire Hydrants. 
a.  Ensure that plants and other screening mechanisms do not block access to a fire hydrant. 
b.  Setbacks shall be maintained to each side of all fire hydrants as required in the Engineering Standards. 
iv.  Roof-Mounted Equipment. 
a.  Roof-mounted equipment shall be an integral part of the building's overall architectural design and shall be screened from view to the extent practicable from public rights-of-way, residential land uses, public parking areas, and/or adjacent properties using parapet walls or other means of screening. When reviewing the type and amount of screening, the Director shall consider the following: 
1.  The proximity of the development to surrounding residential land uses and the visual impact that roof-mounted equipment may have upon those surrounding residential land uses. 
2.  The number and size of roof-mounted equipment. The greater the number and/or size, the more screening may be warranted. 
b.  Roof-mounted equipment shall be neutral earth toned colors that have a matte finish and that are compatible with the primary building façade. In no case shall rooftop mechanical equipment be galvanized, shiny, white, off-white, or other light colors that can be observed from a distance. 
(2)  Fence Standards. 
a.  Location and Design. 
1.  Fences other than those used for screening pursuant to Subsection 070.040.050(f)(1), and that are constructed within the front yard setback, along corner side lot lines, or are adjacent to a public right-of-way, shall be at least sixty (60) percent transparent. 
2.  Fences located in a required front yard setback shall be no more than four (4) feet in height. 
3.  Fences located in a required side or rear yard setback shall be no more than six (6) feet in height. 
4.  Fences shall conform to maximum height requirements when located within a sight distance triangle, as defined in Subsection 070.020.190(c)(5), Sight Distance Triangle Requirement. 
b.  Fencing Materials. 
1.  Fencing material shall be compatible with the overall site design, the primary building, and landscaping. Acceptable materials include but are not exclusive of the following: 
i.  Natural stone; 
ii.  Brick; 
iii.  Stucco; 
iv.  Wood; 
v.  Decorative concrete block; 
vi.  Metal, as in wrought iron; 
vii.  Wooden picket fences for residential applications provided the pickets or vertical slats are not more than four (4) inches apart on center; and 
viii.  Chain link provided that the chain link is vinyl coated green, brown, or black, used in conjunction with tightly spaced plant material, and is not otherwise prohibited below. 
2.  The following fencing materials are prohibited: 
i.  Chain link fencing when located in the front yard or in a side yard that is adjacent to a public right-of-way; 
ii.  Corrugated or ribbed metal; 
iii.  Corrugated plastic; 
iv.  Plastic and vinyl; and 
v.  Barbed wire. 
c.  Fencing Color. 
1.  Fencing shall be low reflective, and earth-toned in color. 
2.  Fences constructed of metal, wrought iron, or similar material may be black. 
3.  Galvanized, shiny, white, off-white, or other light colors that can be observed from a distance are prohibited except that white or off-white wooden picket fences shall be permitted for residential applications. 
(3)  Retaining Wall Standards. 
a.  Location and Design. 
1.  Retaining walls shall be designed in accordance with applicable building codes, Engineering Standards, and applicable standards in Section 070.040.020, Sensitive Area Protection. 
2.  Retaining walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, as measured from natural grade to the top of the wall, except for the exceptions to accommodate varying slopes as provided in Subsection 070.040.020(b)(4)g., Retaining Walls and Fencing, or when terracing is provided pursuant to Subsection 070.040.050(f)(3)b., Terracing Required. 
3.  Retaining walls that are over four (4) feet in height shall be designed by a State of Colorado licensed structural engineer. 
4.  Retaining walls that are over thirty (30) feet in length shall incorporate the following elements to minimize the overall mass of the wall: 
i.  Recessions and/or projections that have a minimum wall plane change of twenty-four (24) inches and have the effect of casting shadows. (Figure 040-8) 

Figure 040-8: Retaining Wall Design
ii.  Landscaping at a minimum shall include trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses and/or and perennials and be of sufficient quantity to add visual interest and to minimize the impact of the structure as viewed from neighboring properties or the public right-of-way. The Director may approve alternative designs to soften retaining walls to reduce the amount of water behind such walls provided the intent of this Section is met. Alternative designs shall be processed according to Subsection 070.040.050(g)(2). 
5.  Retaining walls shall be designed such that the structure conforms to the existing natural terrain. 
6.  Retaining walls shall conform to maximum height requirements when located within a sight distance triangle. 
b.  Terracing Required. The Director may allow retaining walls that exceed six (6) feet in height if they are terraced to minimize visual impacts on residents, neighboring properties, and the public realm by: (Figure 040-9) 
1.  Limiting terracing to three (3) tiers; 
2.  Providing a minimum terrace width of four (4) feet between any two (2) six-foot retaining walls with a maximum slope of 3:1 to create pockets for landscaping. The Director may approve reduced terrace depths where site constraints limit the amount of space available to accommodate the minimum required width; 
3.  Access points, such as stairs, shall be incorporated into the retaining wall for the purposes of maintaining landscaping; and 
4.  Permanently landscaping or re-vegetating terraces created between retaining walls to screen walls and provide visual interest unless soil conditions are determined by a licensed engineer to be unsuitable due to geologic hazards. 

Figure 040-9: Retainign Wall Terracing
Annotations correspond with paragraph numbers in the preceding text. 
c.  Materials and Color. 
1.  Retaining walls shall be compatible with the overall site design, the primary building, and landscaping and shall coordinate with rock formations or exposed soil from surrounding hillsides. 
2.  Retaining walls shall be constructed of the following materials: 
i.  Natural stone; 
ii.  Concrete keystone blocks with integral earth-toned color; or 
iii.  Another material that meets the intent of this standard as determined by the Director. 
3.  When located adjacent to a public right-of-way or when visible from adjacent commercial or residential land uses, the use of railroad ties and timber is prohibited. 
d.  Landscape Buffer as an Alternative. 
1.  Where terracing or other mitigation measures are not feasible due to site size or other constraints, a densely landscaped buffer shall be provided as an alternative on the downhill side of the wall. 
2.  Appropriate spacing of vegetation and landscaping shall be determined by the Director, dependent upon the species selected; however, spacing shall be such that trees will form a dense screen within five (5) years of planting. 
3.  The Director may approve alternative landscape buffer configurations and plantings where insufficient space exists to meet the above landscape buffer standards. 
4.  The Director may waive the above standards for alternative landscape buffers if retaining walls will not be visible from neighboring sites, the interior of the proposed structure, and the primary street frontage; and the applicant can demonstrate that views of the retaining wall will be fully screened by the primary structure or a free-standing parking garage structure. 
(g)  Landscaping Evaluation Procedure. 
(1)  Landscape Plan. 
a.  All development except for single-family detached houses and duplexes shall provide a landscape plan demonstrating compliance with the standards in this Section shall be provided in a form established by the Director. 
b.  Review and evaluation of the landscape plan shall be pursuant to the specific application procedure pursuant to Article 070.060: Administration and Procedures. 
(2)  Alternative Compliance. 
a.  For developments with severely hydrocompactive soils, especially those present around building foundations, the Director may approve landscaping and related irrigation design alternatives that meet the overall intent of this Section but that address the special characteristics of these soil types. The Director may require a statement from a licensed geotechnical engineer that specifically addresses the hydrocompactive soil issue as it relates to compliance with the requirements in this Subsection for the City to consider an alternative landscaping design. 
b.  For developments where other exceptional physical limitations of either existing building location or site dimensions result in impractical or impossible application of this Section, then the Director may approve landscaping, screening, fencing, and wall alternatives that meet the intent of this Section. 
(h)  Installation and Maintenance. 
(1)  Timing of Installation. The developer shall install all landscape improvements including operable irrigation systems prior to receiving a Certificate of Occupancy. This requirement may be modified by the Director if security is provided and the developer identifies an alternative timeframe for landscaping and/or irrigation system installation. The amount of security shall be based on itemized cost estimates of all landscaping and irrigation system improvements, as well as related labor costs. Itemizations shall be generated from a qualified landscape architect, irrigation system specialist, and/or a local or regional landscaping nursery or garden center. 
(2)  Irrigation System Design. Irrigation systems shall be professionally designed by a landscape architect or irrigation specialist. When available, raw water shall be utilized for irrigation. Irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent water from spraying on impervious surfaces adjacent to landscape areas, shall utilize drip irrigation where appropriate to minimize run-off from sprinklers, and shall incorporate moisture sensors to reduce water consumption. 
(3)  Maintenance. The owner of the property and his/her successors, heirs, and assigns, are responsible for the proper maintenance of the landscaped area, screening, fencing, and parking lot subject to the approved landscape plan. All landscape and parking areas shall be maintained free of trash. Landscaping shall be continuously maintained, including all necessary watering, weeding, pruning, and pest control. 
(4)  Protection of Existing Vegetation. 
a.  No existing live trees with a caliper size of fourteen (14) inches or greater may be removed without approval of the Director and Parks and Recreation Director. 
b.  Planting strips or areas, walkways, fences, hedges, or walls shall be protected from vehicles and maintenance equipment by curbs, bollards, wheel stops, or other means. 
(5)  Replacement of Dead or Diseased Plant Material. Replacement of dead or diseased plant material shall be of equivalent species or material, as specified in the approved Landscape Plan. Replacement shall occur at the time of removal or, if necessary, the next planting season. In any event, replacement shall occur within one (1) year from the time of removal. 
(6)  Maintenance of Trees in Public Right-of-Way. Trees located within the public right-of-way or on public property shall be maintained in accordance with Section 090.050.030 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019) 
070.040.060 - Off-Street Parking and Loading. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section 070.040.060 is to ensure that safe and convenient parking areas are provided to: 
(1)  Respond to transportation and access demands of various land uses throughout the City; 
(2)  Avoid and mitigate traffic congestion; 
(3)  Avoid and mitigate the adverse visual impact of large concentrations of exposed parking and of separate garage or carport structures; 
(4)  Reduce stormwater runoff, reduce heat island effect from large expanses of pavement, and improve water quality; 
(5)  Provide necessary access for service and emergency vehicles; and 
(6)  Provide for safe and convenient interaction between vehicles and pedestrians. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  New Development. Unless otherwise exempted by Subsection 070.040.060(b)(2), the standards in this Section shall apply to all development and land uses established after the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Exemptions from Parking Requirements. The following shall be exempt from the parking standards in Subsections 070.040.060(c) and 070.040.060(d), but shall comply with parking area design standards if parking is provided: 
a.  Properties within the boundaries of the Glenwood Springs General Improvement District No. 1980, or as amended; 
b.  Nonresidential uses in any zoning district on properties containing less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area; or 
c.  Expansions of existing structures or uses by less than twenty-five (25) percent gross floor area provided that any existing off-street parking remains unaltered. 
(3)  Fee in Lieu of Off-Street Parking. 
a.  Prior to the issuance of the building permit or a change in use of the property, the developer of a property may submit an application to the Director for payment of fee in lieu of off-street parking requirements. The submitted application shall be presented by the Director to City Council for a determination as to whether sufficient public parking to serve the proposed structure or use exists, or can be made available to serve the structure or use. This determination shall be at the sole discretion of the City Council, who may approve or disapprove the application. 
b.  The fee in lieu shall be established by resolution of the City Council in an amount that is calculated to approximate the cost of obtaining, developing, and maintaining a public parking space. 
c.  All fees in lieu paid pursuant to this Subsection shall be deposited in a separate fund, which fund may be used to undertake future projects to accommodate parking demand. These fees may not be used for the general expenses of the City. 
(4)  Change in Use. Unless otherwise stated, off-street parking and loading shall be provided for any change of use that would result in a requirement for more parking or loading spaces than the existing use as defined in this Section. An applicant may pay a fee in lieu of providing required off-street parking pursuant to Subsection 070.040.060(b)(3), Fee in Lieu of Off-Street Parking. 
(5)  Parking as an Accessory Use. Parking is allowed in all zoning districts as an accessory use except that parking lots as a principal use shall only be allowed with approval of a special use permit and limited to zoning districts pursuant to Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses. 
(c)  Calculation of Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
(1)  Area Measurements. 
a.  All parking and loading requirements that are based on square footage shall be calculated on the basis of the floor areas of the subject use. 
b.  Structured parking within a building shall not be counted in the computation of gross floor area as it pertains to the required parking spaces. 
c.  For the purpose of calculating maximum parking spaces, the following shall not be counted in such calculation: 
1.  Accessible parking; 
2.  On-street parking; 
3.  Structured parking; or 
4.  Vanpool and carpool parking. 
(2)  Fractions. When the calculation of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, the required parking shall be rounded to the next highest whole number. 
(3)  Off-Street Parking and Loading for Multiple Uses. Lots containing more than one (1) activity or uses shall provide off-street parking and loading in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all subject activities or uses, unless the Director approves a parking alternative pursuant to Subsection 070.040.060(e). 
(4)  Off-Street Parking and Loading for Unlisted Uses. For uses not expressly listed in Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses, the Director is authorized to: 
a.  Apply the off-street parking and loading requirements specified in Table 03.1 for the listed use most similar to the proposed use based on public parking demand, nature of the use, number of employees, and any other factors deemed appropriate by the Director; or 
b.  Establish the off-street parking and loading requirements based on local or national best practices or by reference to standards or resources such as the Institute of Traffic Engineers, Urban Land Institute, the International Council of Shopping Centers, the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, the American Planning Association; or 
c.  Establish the off-street parking and loading requirements based on a parking and loading demand study prepared by the applicant according to Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5). 
(5)  Discretionary Requirements Based on Demand Study. Uses in Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses, that reference this Paragraph have varied parking and loading demands, making it difficult to specify a single standard for off-street parking or loading requirements. With an application for a use that is subject to this Paragraph, the Director shall apply the off-street parking and loading standards on the basis of a demand study prepared by the applicant. Such study shall estimate the parking and loading demand based on recommendations of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, Urban Land Institute, the International Council of Shopping Centers, the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, the American Planning Association, or other acceptable source of parking demand data for uses and/or combinations of uses of comparable activities, scale, bulk, area, and location. 
(d)  Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required. 
(1)  Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required. The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be pursuant to the corresponding use type in Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses. 
(2)  Accessible Parking. The number and design of accessible parking spaces shall be pursuant to the International Building Code as adopted in the Municipal Code and the American Disabilities Act, as amended. 
(3)  Maximum Parking Spaces Allowed. In nonresidential and mixed-use districts, uses shall not provide off-street parking spaces in an amount more than one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the minimum parking spaces required pursuant to Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses, unless: 
a.  The use is "automotive sales or leasing" or "transit terminal or station;" 
b.  The applicant submits a parking demand study to the Director pursuant to Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5); 
c.  The proposed development has unique or unusual characteristics such as high sales volume per floor area or low parking turnover, that create a demand exceeding the maximum ratio and that typically does not apply to comparable uses, with authorization from the Director; and 
d.  Additional landscaping is provided in an amount equal to the percentage above the maximum parking ratio allowed. 
(e)  Parking Alternatives. The Director may adjust or approve alternatives to the off-street parking spaces required by Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses, pursuant to the following standards: 
(1)  Cumulative Maximum Reduction for Parking Alternatives. The maximum reduction of required off-street parking spaces by any single parking alternative or combination of parking alternatives in this Section shall be thirty (30) percent. 
(2)  Shared or Off-Site Parking. 
a.  The Director may approve reduced parking requirements for mixed-use and shared facilities, or off-site parking, if the applicant demonstrates that the peak parking demands for such uses and facilities occur at different times either daily or seasonally. 
b.  To be eligible for such reduction, the applicant shall prepare a demand study pursuant to Subsection 070.040.060(c)(5). 
c.  For shared parking for mixed-use buildings and/or developments, the total parking provided shall not be less than the required parking for the residential use. 
d.  Shared parking facilities shall be located within fiev hundred (500) feet (measured along a legal pedestrian route) of the entrance to each building for which the shared parking is provided. 
e.  Shared and/or off-site parking areas shall be located on a site with the same or more intensive zoning district than required for the principal uses served by the parking area. 
f.  No off-site parking areas shall be located in a residential zoning district. 
g.  Accessible parking (ADA parking) shall not be permitted off-site. 
h.  Shared parking areas or facilities shall require a shared parking agreement to be recorded prior to issuance of a building permit for new development or a certificate of occupancy for existing buildings. If such agreement is revoked by any party, then the required off-street parking spaces shall be provided pursuant to this Code. 
(3)  Structured Parking. The Director may approve reduced off-street parking requirements up to twenty (20) percent for developments providing structured parking. 
(4)  On-Street Parking. The Director may approve reduced off-street parking requirements on a one-to-one basis for on-street parking spaces adjacent to a proposed development. The on-street parking shall be available for public use. Elimination of on-street parking for any reason may result in a requirement for the applicant to provide additional off-street parking to comply with this Code. 
(5)  Tandem Parking. Tandem parking is allowed for any residential parking area, and for vehicle sales and leasing uses. The Director may also approve tandem parking for employee parking areas for uses nonresidential uses requiring fewer than ten (10) parking spaces pursuant to Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses. 
(6)  Compact Vehicle Parking. 
a.  Up to twenty (20) percent of the total number of required parking spaces may be used for compact vehicle parking, provided that the total number of required off-street parking spaces is provided on site. 
b.  In the case where one (1) or more other parking alternatives in this Section have been approved by the Director, compact vehicle parking may be provided for up to ten (10) percent of the required off-street parking spaces. 
c.  Spaces designated as compact vehicle parking shall be identified as such by means of a permanent sign. 
(7)  Proximity to Transit. The Director may approve reduced parking requirements up to twenty (20) percent for development located within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of an active transit stop. 
(8)  Bus Passes, Carpool, Car Share, or Telecommuting Program. The Director may approve reduced parking requirements up to twenty (20) percent for businesses offering reimbursed transit passes or that have an active carpool, vanpool, car share parking, and/or telecommuter program in place. 
(9)  Bicycle Parking Beyond Required. The Director may approve reduced parking requirements for applicants providing bicycle parking at a higher rate than required by Subsection 070.040.060(f). Such reduction may be approved at a ratio of up to one (1) off-street vehicle space reduction per five (5) short-term bicycle spaces provided beyond the minimum required, and up to one (1) off-street vehicle space reduction per three (3) long-term bicycle spaces provided. 
(f)  Bicycle Parking. 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  Unless exempted by b. below, all multifamily and nonresidential development shall provide bicycle parking according to this Subsection. 
b.  Automobile dealerships, fleet services, and any use classified as "industrial" pursuant to Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses, shall not be subject to these bicycle parking requirements. 
(2)  Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces Required. 
Table 040.7: Required Bicycle Parking Amount of Vehicle Parking Provided Number of Required 
Bicycle Parking Spaces Fewer than 50 spaces 3 51-100 spaces 6 101-150 spaces 9 More than 150 spaces 9, plus 1 space per each 50 vehicle spaces provided after the first 150 spaces  
(3)  Location of Bicycle Parking Spaces. 
a.  Short-Term Users. Bicycle parking for short-term users, intended for use by customers or clients for a period of two (2) hours or less, shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the principal building entrance. 
b.  Long-Term Users. All other bicycle parking shall be located on site, in a well-lit area, and shall be within view of employee offices and building entrances unless such parking is provided inside the building in which case the bicycle parking is not required to be within view of employee offices and building entrances. 
c.  Multiple Building Developments. For developments with multiple buildings, bicycle parking shall be distributed evenly among principal buildings. 
(4)  Design of Bicycle Parking Spaces. 
a.  Bicycle parking areas shall not be used for any other purposes. 
b.  Bicycle parking spaces shall be installed using standard bicycle racks that are effective for storage and are permanently anchored to a hard surface. 
c.  Bicycle parking spaces shall maintain an access aisle of at least five (5) feet and clear of all obstructions. 
d.  Adequate lighting shall be provided for the bicycle parking area for security. 
e.  Bicycle rack structure and placement shall be designed to: 
1.  Enable the entire frame of the bicycle and one (1) or both wheels to be secured (not just one (1) wheel); 
2.  Keep the frame of the bicycle upright while parked; 
3.  Be positioned to allow both front-in and back-in bicycle parking. 
(g)  Loading Requirements. 
(1)  Number and Size of Loading Berths Required. Uses requiring shipping and receiving of materials or goods that do not have access to an adjacent alley shall provide off-street loading according to the following standards: 
Table 040.8: Required Off-Street Loading Berths Gross Floor Area Minimum Number of Berths Required Minimum Size of Each Loading Berth Less than 20,000 square feet None N/A 20,000 to 49,999 square feet 1 10 feet × 25 feet 50,000 to 100,000 square feet 2 10 feet × 25 feet More than 100,000 square feet 2, plus 1 additional berth for every 100,000 square feet beyond the first 100,000 square feet 14 feet × 50 feet  
(2)  Location of Loading Areas. 
a.  Except for properties in the I1 and I2 zoning districts, loading areas shall not be located in the front yard. 
b.  Loading areas shall be separated from pedestrian areas. 
(h)  Parking and Loading Area Use and Design. 
(1)  Use of Parking and Loading Areas. Except for single- and two-family dwellings, no required off-street parking or loading space shall be used for any purpose other than the parking of vehicles. Off-street parking spaces provided in excess of the number required may be used for any legal purpose within the respective zoning district. If a mandatory required off-street parking space is converted to another use or can no longer be used for off-street parking, it shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(2)  Location of Parking and Loading Areas. 
a.  Proximity to Structure and/or Use. For multifamily dwellings and nonresidential uses, off-street parking spaces shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of the development parcel, as measured by pedestrian access from the building entrance or use. Off-site parking may be approved by the Director subject to the requirements in Subsection 070.040.060(e)(2). 
b.  Location on a Site. Parking areas shall be located on a site pursuant to the site design standards in Subsections 070.040.080(d)(3) and 070.040.090(d)(3). 
(3)  Parking Area Layout. 
a.  Parking Stall and Aisle Design. Parking areas shall be designed according to Table 040.9: Parking Space and Drive Aisle Layout, and Figure 040-10: Parking Stall and Aisle Dimension Measurements. 
Table 040.9: Parking Space and Drive Aisle Layout A 
Parking Angle (in degrees) B 
Stall Width C 
Length of Stall to Curb D 
Aisle Width E 
Curb Length per Stall F 
Width of Double Row with Aisle 0° 8 feet 6 inches 22 feet 12 feet 22 feet 29 feet 10° 9 feet 9 feet 12 feet 23 feet 30 feet 20° 9 feet 15 feet 11 feet 26 feet 3 inches 41 feet 30° 9 feet 17 feet 3 inches 11 feet 18 feet 45 feet 6 inches 45° 9 feet 19 feet 8 inches 13 feet 12 feet 7 inches 52 feet 5 inches 60° 9 feet 21 feet 18 feet 10 feet 4 inches 60 feet 70° 9 feet 21 feet 19 feet 9 feet 6 inches 61 feet 80° 9 feet 20 feet 3 inches 24 feet 9 feet 1 inch 64 feet 3 inches 90° 9 feet 19 feet 24 feet 9 feet 62 feet Compact (90°) 8 feet 16 feet 24 feet 9 feet 56 feet  

Figure 040-10: Parking Stall Aisle Dimension Measurements
(4)  Parking and Loading Area Surfacing. All parking and loading areas shall be paved with an impervious surface such as concrete or asphalt unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Permanent surfacing shall be installed prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy unless otherwise approved by the Director. 
(5)  Snow Storage Areas. Snow storage shall be provided on site for all unenclosed parking, circulation, loading, sidewalk and other paved areas, and shall conform to the following: 
a.  Unless otherwise prohibited by this Code, snow may be stored in landscape areas and parking areas provided that accumulated snow does not restrict access and circulation and is not stored in a manner to obscure sight lines at driveways, sidewalks, or other access points to public or private rights-of-way or fire lanes. 
b.  No minimum amount of additional snow storage area is required; however, applicants shall designate on site/architectural plans those paved areas that may be used for snow storage when necessary. Up to ten (10) percent of the required off-street parking spaces and one hundred (100) percent of those parking spaces in excess of those required under this Section may be used as snow storage. 
c.  Parking areas shall be designed to adequately provide for snow storage and removal. 
d.  Public rights-of-way shall not be used for snow storage. 
e.  Snow storage shall not be within thirty (30) feet of the high water mark of a live stream or river or within ten (10) feet of the top of a river or stream bank which slope is steeper than three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical (3:1), unless it is discharged into a filtration system approved by the City Engineer. 
f.  Snowmelt runoff shall be addressed in accordance with the City's Stormwater Drainage and Erosion Control standards pursuant to the City's Engineering Standards. 
g.  A program for off-site snow removal may be approved by the Director following written request by the applicant. 
(6)  Parking Area Landscaping. 
a.  Amount Required. 
1.  Parking area landscaping shall be provided according to Table 040.10: Parking Area Landscaping Requirements. 
2.  Interior parking lot landscaping shall count toward overall site landscaping required by Section 070.040.050, Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing, but shall not be counted to satisfy minimum common open space requirements pursuant to Section 070.040.040, Common Open Space. 
Table 040.10: Parking Area Landscaping Requirements Minimum Amount (Lots with fewer than 20 spaces) Minimum Amount (Lots with 20 or more spaces) Other Standards Total Parking Area Designated for Landscaping 10 percent of total surface parking area 20 percent of total surface parking area Interior Parking Area Designated for Landscaping 10 square feet per parking space Landscaped Islands Single-loaded parking: 
One island per eight parking spaces; minimum nine feet wide (a) for each island or peninsula, one deciduous tree and five low-lying plants; 
(b) no more than 50 percent of any island shall be nonliving ground cover; 
(c) landscaped islands shall be raised and contained within masonry, concrete, or other nonporous curb that is a minimum of six inches in height. Double-loaded parking: 
One island per eight parking spaces; Minimum nine feet wide (a) for each island or peninsula, two deciduous trees and five low-lying plants; 
(b) no more than 50 percent of any island shall be nonliving ground cover; 
(c) landscaped islands shall be raised and contained within masonry, concrete, or other nonporous curb that is a minimum of six inches in height, unless a bioswale or other green infrastructure technique is approved by the City Engineer. Terminus Islands Not required Single-loaded parking: 
50 percent of parking blocks, rows, or groups shall terminate in an island; each island shall be a minimum of 90 square feet (a) terminus islands shall be distributed across parking areas to the extent practicable; 
(b) landscaped islands shall be raised and contained within masonry, concrete, or other nonporous curb that is a minimum of six inches in height. Double-loaded parking: 
50 percent of parking blocks, rows, or groups shall terminate in an island; each island shall be a minimum of 180 square feet Planting Materials Trees, shrubs, ground cover, xeriscaping Except for islands, nonliving ground cover shall not exceed 50 percent of the required landscaping area and shall be enclosed with a containment system to prevent spillage. Planting Strip Pursuant to Subsection 070.040.060(h)(6)c.3., Screening Parking Areas and Drive Aisle Additional parking area screening shall be provided pursuant to Subsection 070.040.060(h)(6)c.3., Screening Parking Areas and Drive Aisle  
b.  Planting Materials. 
1.  Trees and other planting materials in parking areas shall comply with the size and species requirements in Table 040.5: Minimum Plant Material and Standards. 
2.  To the extent possible, sod alternatives such as xeric ground cover plants including native grasses, ornamental ground covers, buffalo grass and fescue shall be used in place of sod. Sod shall not be utilized in the following conditions: 
i.  On slopes steeper than 3:1 rise over run ratio; or 
ii.  Within interior and terminus parking lot landscape islands. 
c.  Parking Area Landscaping Design. 
1.  Breaking up Parking Spaces into Blocks. Parking area interior landscaping shall be distributed to physically break up blocks of parking spaces. No block of parking spaces shall exceed eight (8) in a row, except that vehicle spaces that are designated as display or storage for automobile sales dealerships or automobile rental agencies or other fleet services, and other uses as determined by the Director, shall be allowed to have vehicle spaces in a tandem arrangement provided the minimum interior landscape requirements and all other applicable Code requirements are met. 
2.  Tree Characteristics. 
i.  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the trees selected for planting within parking lot landscaped islands shall be one (1) or more variety of trees having widely branching growth habit and that reach a mature height of at least thirty (30) feet. No tree shall be used that is prohibited in the administrative manual. 
3.  Screening Parking Areas and Drive Aisles. 
i.  Within Front Setback Areas or Along Public Rights-of-Way. 
a.  Where parking areas, including drive aisles are located in front yard setback areas, or border public rights-of-way, a densely landscaped buffer shall be provided that is: 
1.  Located between the parking area and the adjacent public right-of-way it is intended to screen; and 
2.  A minimum of six (6) feet wide and protected by a masonry, concrete, or other nonporous curb that is a minimum of six (6) inches in height; and 
3.  Of a continuous length that is at least equal to the length of the adjacent parking area or drive aisle it is intended to screen; and 
4.  Landscaped with a combination of trees, shrubs, and/or perennials. 
b.  Alternative parking area buffer width may be allowed by the Director for properties in the Downtown Core where parking areas may be better screened using low walls (three (3) to four (4) feet) instead of a six-foot-wide buffer. 
ii.  Within Side or Rear Setback Areas Adjacent to a Residential Use or District. Where parking areas and/or drive aisles are located in required side or rear setback areas, and is adjacent to a residential land use or zoning district, the development shall provide a physical and visual buffer that includes one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  A continuous, raised border that is located between the parking area and/or drive aisle and the property line bordering the residential land use or zoning district, that is densely landscaped with trees, shrubs, and/or perennials, and that is a minimum of six (6) feet wide and protected by a masonry, concrete, or other nonporous curb that is a minimum of six (6) inches in height; 
b.  An earthen berm that is landscaped with trees, shrubs and/or perennials and that is at least ten (10) feet wide and of sufficient height to screen the parking area and/or drive aisle from view of bordering residential land uses or districts; 
c.  A hedge that is not less than three and one-half (31/2) feet or more than six (6) feet in height at maturity and is of sufficient opacity to screen the parking area and/or drive aisle from view of bordering residential land uses or districts; 
d.  A fence that is not less than three and one-half (31/2) feet or more than six (6) feet in height and is of sufficient opacity to screen the parking area and/or drive aisle from view of bordering residential land uses or districts; 
e.  Any combination of the treatments a through d above that meet the intent of this Section as determined by the Director. 
4.  Pedestrian Circulation. Walkways and sidewalks within parking areas shall comply with the standards in Subsection 070.040.070(f), Pedestrian Circulation. 
(7)  Parking Area Lighting. Parking area lighting shall be provided pursuant to Section 070.040.100, Exterior Lighting. 
(8)  Parking Structures. The visual impacts of a parking structure shall be minimized through compliance with the following standards: 
a.  Vehicles in a parking structure shall be screened to minimize visibility from the street. 
b.  Parking structures shall be located in the rear of lots when feasible, reserving the street frontage for commercial uses. 
c.  Parking structures shall blend in with the traditional architectural characteristics of buildings in the surrounding area. 
1.  The façade of the structure shall be brick, stone, or other masonry material compatible with adjacent structures. 
2.  If the parking structure is set back ten (10) feet or less from a public right-of-way, the façade shall be designed to match the height of existing structures. 
3.  Horizontal and vertical elements shall be aligned with those of adjacent buildings. 
d.  Parking structures shall provide adequate space for active uses at the sidewalk. This shall be accomplished by either locating parking below grade, with commercial space above, or by lining the face of the garage with a row of commercial uses. 
e.  Vehicular entrances shall be located to minimize vehicle/pedestrian conflicts. 
1.  Automobile entrances shall be located on secondary streets or alleys, to the maximum extent feasible. 
2.  Pedestrian entrances shall be designed to be welcoming and easily identifiable. 
f.  Parking structures shall be designed to utilize topography. 
1.  On narrow sites, structures shall consider using a lower deck with no internal ramp to avoid cut and fill. 
2.  Parking structures shall be terraced into hillsides to minimize site disturbance. 
g.  Parking structures shall be designed so that quick access exists and clear, separated pedestrian routes are provided to the outside. Signage shall be provided that clearly identifies pedestrian routes both inside and outside the parking structure. 
h.  Where visible from a public right-of-way, structured parking shall be screened or wrapped on upper floors with architectural details and materials to screen vehicles. Screening methods may include but are not exclusive of: 
1.  Architectural screens or panels; 
2.  Landscape plantings; 
3.  Art wall surfaces; 
4.  Articulation; or 
5.  Textured glass. 
(i)  Administration of Parking and Loading Requirements. 
(1)  Development of new parking areas or the expansion of existing parking areas shall be submitted on a parking plan (included with a site/architectural plan) and reviewed pursuant to the applicable procedures in Article 070.060: Administration and Procedures. 
(2)  Construction of or modification to any required parking area shall comply with this Code and shall require plans approved by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019; Ord. No. 15-2019 , § 2, 4-4-2019) 
070.040.070 - Access and Circulation. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to support the creation of a highly connected transportation system within the City in order to: 
(1)  Provide choices for drivers, bicyclists, and pedestrians; 
(2)  Increase effectiveness of local service delivery and reduce emergency service times; 
(3)  Connect neighborhoods to each other and to local destinations such as employment, schools, parks, and shopping centers; 
(4)  Reduce vehicle miles of travel and travel times; 
(5)  Improve air quality; 
(6)  Mitigate the traffic impacts of new development; and 
(7)  Avoid the creation of large, isolated tracts without routes for through traffic or pedestrian and bicycle connections. 
(b)  Applicability. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the standards in this Section apply to all new development. 
(c)  Multimodal Transportation System. Generally, access and circulation systems associated with any development shall provide for multiple travel modes (vehicular, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian), as appropriate to the development's size, character, and relationship to existing and planned community transportation systems. Vehicular, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian access and circulation systems shall be coordinated and integrated as necessary to offer the development's occupants and visitors improved transportation choices while enhancing safe and efficient mobility throughout the development and the community. 
(d)  Developer Responsibility for Access and Circulation Improvements. 
(1)  On-Site Circulation. 
a.  If a street is proposed within a development site, the developer shall provide roadway, bikeway, sidewalk, and other access and circulation improvements in accordance with the standards in this Section and the City's Engineering Standards, and shall dedicate any required rights-of-way or easements as determined necessary by the City. 
b.  If a development site includes the proposed corridor of a street designated on an adopted plan, the development shall incorporate a provision of the street into the design of the development, and shall dedicate right-of-way that meets the right-of-way width standards for the street, as determined by the City. If a transportation impact analysis shows that the development itself is expected to generate sufficient traffic to warrant design of the street as a major or minor thoroughfare, as defined in the City's Engineering Standards, the developer shall be responsible for constructing the street (including any bikeway, sidewalk, and other associated access and circulation improvements) in accordance with this Section's standards for a major or minor thoroughfare, as appropriate; otherwise, the developer shall be responsible for constructing the street (including any bikeway, sidewalk, and other associated access and circulation improvements) to meet at least those standards required for a collector street. 
(2)  Off-Site Circulation. If a development site fronts on and obtains vehicular access from an existing street, the developer shall be required to dedicate additional right-of-way along the street frontage or in the vicinity of the development and to provide roadway, bikeway, sidewalk, and other access and circulation improvements within the street right-of-way that are reasonably necessary to ensure the safe, convenient, efficient, and orderly accommodation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic demands and impacts generated by the proposed development. Such improvements may include, but are not limited to, turn lanes, deceleration and acceleration lanes, widening or paving of substandard roadways, medians, bikeways, sidewalks, sidewalk ramps and crossings, street lights, bus shelters, and the relocation or improvement of utility lines and facilities needed to accommodate street improvements. The extent of required dedications and improvements related to the abutting street shall be as required by the traffic impact analysis for vehicular access. For pedestrian access and bicycle circulation, the dedications and improvements shall be roughly proportional to the traffic demands and impacts generated to and along that street by the proposed development. 
(e)  Streets, Alleys, and Vehicular Circulation. 
(1)  Uniform Street Standards. All streets and related improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the standards in the City's Engineering Standards. 
(2)  Layout and Design. 
a.  The street pattern shall be designed to afford safe and convenient access to all lots. 
b.  The street pattern shall have a logical relationship to topography. 
c.  Streets shall be aligned to afford maximum solar access to each building site. 
d.  Where a proposed development borders a major or minor arterial, street intersections with the arterial street shall be at intervals of one-quarter (1/4) mile or greater. 
(3)  Circulation Plan. 
a.  Applications for Subdivision Preliminary Plat Approval (Subsection 070.060.060(b)), Major Site/Architectural Plan Approval (Subsection 070.060.050(a)(5)), or Minor Site/Architectural Plan Approval (Subsection 070.060.050(a)(4)), shall include a circulation plan that addresses street connectivity, emergency and service vehicle access, parking movements, accommodation of loading operations, turning radii, traffic calming measures where future "cut-through" traffic is likely, and similar issues. 
b.  The Director and/or the City Engineer may waive the requirement for a circulation plan upon determining that a proposed development is expected to have no impact on circulation or proposes no change in existing circulation patterns. This provision shall not be construed to exempt development that includes additional parking, driveways, or substantial modifications to the existing pedestrian network. 
(4)  Public Street Connectivity. 
a.  Purpose. Street and block patterns should include a clear hierarchy of well-connected streets that distribute traffic over multiple streets and avoids traffic congestion on principal routes. Within each development, the access and circulation system should accommodate the safe, efficient, and convenient movement of vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians through the development, and provide ample opportunities for linking adjacent neighborhoods, properties, and land uses. Local neighborhood street systems are intended to provide multiple direct connections to and between local destinations such as parks, schools, and shopping. These connections should knit separate developments together, rather than forming barriers between them. 
b.  Standards. 
1.  The vehicular access and circulation for a development shall incorporate the continuation and connection of public streets and associated rights-of-way that have been extended or connected to the boundary of the development site from existing or approved abutting developments. 
2.  The vehicular access and circulation for a development shall provide for the extension or connection of proposed internal public street roadways and associated rights-of-way to those boundaries of the development site whenever such extensions or connections are or may be necessary to ensure that the development site or the abutting property will have: 
i.  At least two (2) vehicular access points to and from an external through street system, plus one (1) additional vehicular access point for each additional two thousand (2,000) vehicles per day, or fraction thereof, expected to be generated by the proposed development or by the maximum allowable development of the abutting property; 
ii.  Convenient and efficient access by vehicles needed to provide police, fire, and emergency services; and 
iii.  Convenient and efficient access by vehicles needed to provide other public services. 

Figure 040-11: Parking Lot Connectivity
3.  Unobstructed, direct, and convenient access for vehicles to and from a public street shall be provided for all off-street parking spaces. Access from any parking area to a public street shall be designed to allow vehicles to enter and exit in forward drive. 
4.  Roadway extensions and connections to abutting properties shall be spaced at intervals along each principal boundary direction (north, south, east, west) that do not exceed the maximum block length established by City standards. 
5.  An extension or connection of a public street roadway and right-of-way to an abutting property shall also include the extension or connection of associated bikeways or sidewalks. 
6.  The Director and/or the City Engineer may require the provision of a temporary turnaround at the end of a roadway extension on determining that the turnaround is needed to facilitate traffic flow or accommodate emergency vehicles pending the roadway's connection to other roadways. 
7.  The Director and/or the City Engineer may waive or modify the requirements or standards for extension or connection of a public roadway from or to abutting property on determining that such extension is impractical or undesirable because it would: 
i.  Require crossing a significant physical barrier or environmentally sensitive area (e.g., railroads, watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes); 
ii.  Require the extension or connection of a proposed internal public street to an abutting property with existing development whose design makes it unlikely that the street will ever be part of a network of public streets (for example, the abutting existing development has no public streets, or there are no "stubbed-out" street rights-of-way or open corridors between the proposed development site and public streets in the abutting development to accommodate a current or future extension or connection); 
iii.  Require the extension or connection of a proposed internal public street to an abutting property owned by a government or public utility to which vehicular access is restricted, or other property to which vehicular access is restricted by a conservation easement; or 
iv.  Require the extension or connection of a proposed internal public street to an abutting property that is developed or zoned for a use whose level and type of generated traffic would be incompatible with the proposed development-provided, however, that residential, institutional, and commercial uses shall generally be deemed compatible. 
c.  Cross Access between Abutting Development. To facilitate vehicular access between abutting developments, encourage shared parking, and minimize access points along streets, new single-family townhouse, multifamily, nonresidential, and mixed-use development shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The internal vehicular circulation system shall be designed to allow for vehicular cross-access between the development's common vehicle use areas and common vehicle use areas in an abutting single-family townhouse, multifamily, nonresidential, or mixed-use development, or to the boundary of abutting vacant land zoned to allow single-family townhouse, multifamily, nonresidential or mixed-use development. 
2.  Required vehicular cross access between the abutting lots shall be provided through the use of a service street (if the lots front on a major thoroughfare right-of-way), a single two-way driveway or drive aisle, or two (2) one-way driveways or aisles that are sufficiently wide to accommodate traffic by automobiles, service vehicles, loading vehicles, and emergency vehicles. 
3.  The Director, in conjunction with the City Engineer, may waive or modify the requirement for vehicular cross access on determining that such cross access is impractical or undesirable because it would require crossing a significant physical barrier or environmentally sensitive area (for example, railroad, watercourse, floodplain, wetlands, steep slopes), or would create unsafe conditions or impeded the application of other design requirements in this Code. 
4.  Easements allowing cross access to and from properties served by a vehicular cross-access, along with agreements defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners, shall be recorded with the County Clerk and Recorder's Office before issuance of a Building Permit for the development. 
d.  Culs-de-Sac and Dead-End Streets Discouraged. Permanent culs-de-sac and dead-end streets shall generally be used only when topography, the presence of natural features, and/or vehicular safety factors make a vehicular connection impractical. Such culs-de-sac and dead-end streets shall comply with the City's Engineering Standards. 
(5)  Driveways and Access. 
a.  General. 
1.  Every lot shall have access that is sufficient to afford a reasonable means of ingress and egress for emergency vehicles, as well as for those needing access to the property in its intended use. 
2.  All driveway entrances and other openings onto streets shall be constructed so that: 
i.  Vehicles may safely enter and exit from the lot in question; 
ii.  Interference with the free and convenient flow of traffic in abutting or surrounding streets is minimized; and 
iii.  Joint driveways are desirable whenever possible in order to minimize the number of access points to streets and access easements. 
b.  Residential. In addition to the above general requirements, all residential development shall be subject to the following: 
1.  There shall be no direct driveway access (ingress or egress) from any single-family residential lots to any arterial street or highway unless no other legal access alternative is available. 
2.  Multi-family development sites greater than five (5) acres shall include a minimum of two (2) through-access drives. An exception may be made where a site is landlocked by existing development or other physical constraints, or where existing natural features on the site require the use of protective measures that would otherwise make a second access drive infeasible. 
c.  Nonresidential. In addition to the above general requirements, all nonresidential development shall be subject to the following: 
1.  All non-residential buildings, structures, and parking and loading areas shall be physically separated from all non-arterial or collector streets by vertical curbs and other suitable barriers and landscaping to prevent unchanneled motor vehicle access. Each property shall not have more than two (2) access ways to any one (1) street unless approved by the City Engineer. 
2.  Each access shall comply with the City's Engineering Standards. 
d.  Access onto State Highways. As provided by C.R.S. § 43-2-147, as amended, any development requiring access onto a state highway shall obtain a permit for such access from the Colorado Department of Transportation before the issuance of a development permit by the City. Any development with the potential to increase volume on a state highway by twenty (20) percent or more may also be referred to the Colorado Department of Transportation for comment, at the discretion of the City Engineer or Director. 
(f)  Pedestrian Circulation. 
(1)  Sidewalks Required. 
a.  Where Required. 
1.  Sidewalks shall be provided by the developer to allow convenient pedestrian access through or across the development and joining with pedestrian ways of adjacent properties. 
2.  Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all arterials, collector streets, and local streets (including loop streets and culs-de-sac), and within and along the frontage of all new development and redevelopment. 
b.  Fee in Lieu of Sidewalks. Where the existing right-of-way adjacent to a development is substandard or insufficient for providing sidewalk according to the City Engineer, the developer may, with approval by the City, pay a fee in lieu of providing all or a portion of the required sidewalk. The amount of such in-lieu payment shall be determined based on an engineer's estimate of the cost of constructing the sidewalk. 
c.  Exemption. Sidewalks are not required on local streets in districts where the minimum lot size is one (1) acre or greater or in steep-slope areas where sidewalks on one (1) side of the street may be approved to reduce excessive slope disturbance, adverse impacts on natural resources, and potential soil erosion and drainage problems according to the Director and/or City Engineer. 
d.  Design and Materials. 
1.  Sidewalks shall conform to the City's Engineering Standards. 
2.  Sidewalks shall be at least eight (8) feet wide in nonresidential and mixed-use zoning districts, and five (5) feet wide in residential zoning districts. 
3.  Sidewalks shall be separated from the back edge of curb pursuant to the streetscape standards in Subsection 070.040.050(d). 
4.  Alternative paving materials within residential developments may be approved by the Director and/or City Engineer. 
(2)  On-Site Pedestrian Connections. 
a.  All commercial, industrial, and multi-family development shall provide a network of safe, reasonably direct and convenient on-site pedestrian walkways with a minimum width of five (5) feet to and between the following areas: 
1.  Entrances to each commercial and multi-family building on the site (including pad site buildings), parking areas, and open spaces; 
2.  Public sidewalks or walkways on adjacent properties that extend to the boundaries shared with the subject development; and 
3.  Adjacent public transit station areas, transit stops and shelters, public parks, greenways, schools, community centers, and shopping areas. 
b.  On-site pedestrian walkways and crosswalks to motorists and pedestrians shall be identified through the use of one (1) or more of the following methods: 
1.  Changing paving material, patterns, or paving color (does not include the painting of the paving material); 
2.  Changing paving height; 
3.  Decorative bollards; 
4.  Raised median walkways with landscaped buffers; 
5.  Stamped or stained concrete; and/or 
6.  Distinct lighting. 
c.  At least one (1) walkway within the development shall provide a direct link between the primary customer entrance and the sidewalk adjacent to the principal public right-of-way. Additional walkways may be required for developments on sites larger than two (2) acres. 
d.  Walkways shall meet minimum requirements under the Americans with Disability Act: Standards for Accessible Design. 
e.  For the comfort and convenience of pedestrians and customers, when designing walkways internal to the development, the City encourages the inclusion of landscaping treatments such as benches, trash receptacles, shade trees and/or other vegetative cover. A landscaped walkway will count towards general site landscaping requirements set forth in Section 070.040.050, Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing. 
(g)  Bicycle Circulation. 
(1)  Required Bicycle Access. 
a.  All new development, except individual lot development of a single-family detached or two-family dwelling, shall be served by an internal bicycle circulation system (including shared roadway lanes, widened outside roadway lanes, bike lanes, shoulders, and/or separate bike paths) that permits safe, convenient, efficient, and orderly movement of bicyclists among the following origin and destination points within the development: 
1.  Bicycle parking facilities or areas near the primary entrance(s) of principal buildings (or the buildable area of lots, for subdivisions), as well as any adjacent transit station areas, transit stops and shelters, public parks, greenways, schools, community centers, and shopping areas; 
2.  Any designated or planned bus stops and shelters; and 
3.  Recreation facilities and other common use area and amenities. 
b.  The development's internal bicycle circulation system shall also permit safe, convenient, efficient, and orderly movement of vehicles between the development's internal origin and destination points and adjacent parts of an existing or planned external, community-wide bicycle circulation system, as well as any adjacent transit stations, bus stops and shelters, public parks, trails, greenways, schools, community centers, and shopping areas. 
c.  Sidewalks shall not be used to satisfy the bicycle circulation requirement. 
(2)  Bike Lanes Required. 
a.  All new development except individual lot development of a single-family detached or two-family dwelling (including subdivisions for such dwellings) shall provide bike lanes within the development site and along the frontage of the development site with an existing street where bikes lanes are called for by the comprehensive plan or other City-adopted plans addressing transportation (unless an existing bike lane meeting City standards is already in place). The Director and/or the City Engineer may allow alternatives to this requirement where compliance is impractical. 
b.  Required bike lanes shall be provided within the right-of-way of the street unless the City Engineer determines that location within the right-of-way is not practicable or preferable-in which case, alternatives may be allowed by the Director and/or the City Engineer. 
c.  Bike lanes shall conform to the Engineering Standards. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.040.080 - Residential Site and Building Design. 
(a)  Purpose. This Section is intended to: 
(1)  Promote high-quality residential development and construction; 
(2)  Protect the character of Glenwood Springs' established residential neighborhoods; 
(3)  Promote new residential developments that are distinctive, have character, and relate and connect to established neighborhoods; 
(4)  Encourage a variety of housing choices for Glenwood Springs residents; 
(5)  Provide variety and visual interest in the exterior design of residential buildings; 
(6)  Protect and enhance property values; and 
(7)  Enhance the residential streetscape and diminish the prominence of garages and parking areas. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. 
a.  This Section shall apply to: 
1.  Development of any structure that will contain only residential uses, including single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, single-family townhouse dwellings, and multi-family dwellings; 
2.  An addition or renovation to an existing structure that will contain a residential use where the total gross floor area of the proposed addition is fifty (50) percent or more than that of the total gross floor area of the existing structure before addition or renovation; and 
3.  Structures that are exclusively residential and are included as part of a multi-building mixed-use development. 
b.  In cases where building modifications are subject to these standards, only the modification shall be subject to compliance with this Section. For purposes of this standard, "modifications" shall not include routine maintenance and repair of a building, changes to signage, or general repairs to a surface parking area, changes to landscaping, or other features on the parcel. The Director shall determine if a modification shall be subject to these standards. 
c.  All standards in this Section 070.040.080 that apply to "multi-family" shall apply to multi-family dwellings and single-family townhouse dwellings. 
(2)  Exceptions. This Section shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Development of any structure that will contain a mix of nonresidential and residential uses (which are subject instead to Section 070.040.090, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design), including live-work dwellings; 
b.  An addition or renovation project where the total gross floor area of the proposed addition is less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross floor area of the existing structure before addition or renovation; 
c.  Properties subject to the Hillside Development standards; 
d.  Subdivision or condominiumization of existing structures; 
e.  Properties subject to the Glenwood Meadows Annexation and Development Agreement; or 
f.  Accessory dwelling units (which are subject to the standards in Subsection 070.030.040(d)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units). 
(3)  Planned Unit Developments. 
a.  Development of a residential structure within any new Planned Unit Development established after the effective date of this Code shall be subject to this Section 070.040.080, unless alternative residential site and building design standards are adopted as part of the PUD approval that, in the determination of the Director, are at least equal to the standards set forth in this Section. 
b.  Development of a residential structure within an existing Planned Unit Development established prior to the effective date of this Code is exempt from this Section 070.040.080. 
(c)  Administration. 
(1)  Alternative Equivalent Compliance. 
a.  Purpose and Scope. To encourage creative and unique design, "alternative equivalent compliance" allows development to occur in a manner that meets the intent of this Section, yet through an alternative design that does not strictly adhere to the Section's standards. This is not a general waiver of regulations. Rather, this authorizes a site-specific plan that is equal to or better than the strict application of the standard. 
b.  Applicability. The alternative equivalent compliance procedure is available only for the standards in Subsection 070.040.080(e), Residential Building Design and Character, and Subsection 070.040.080(e)(10), Supplemental Architectural Design Standards: Downtown Core. 
c.  Alternative Equivalent Compliance Meeting Required. An applicant proposing alternative equivalent compliance shall request and attend an alternative equivalent compliance meeting prior to submitting application materials for the applicable permit(s), to determine the preliminary response from the Director. Based on the response, the application shall include sufficient explanation and justification, in both written and graphic form, for the requested alternative compliance. The Director may require that the applicant provide additional drawings and/or material samples in order to better understand the need for the proposed alternative. 
d.  Decision-Making Responsibility. Final approval of any proposed alternative compliance shall be the responsibility of the decision-making body responsible for deciding upon the application. Administratively approved projects proposing alternative compliance shall receive written approval of the alternative compliance from the Director. 
e.  Criteria. Alternative equivalent compliance may be approved if the applicant demonstrates that following criteria have been met by the proposed alternative: 
1.  Achieves the intent of the subject standard to the same or better degree than the subject standard; 
2.  Advances the goals and policies of this Code to the same or better degree than the subject standard; 
3.  Results in benefits to the community that are equivalent to or exceed benefits associated with the subject standard; and 
4.  Imposes no greater impacts on adjacent properties than would occur through compliance with the specific requirements of this Code. 
f.  Effect of Approval. Alternative equivalent compliance shall apply only to the specific site for which it is requested and shall not establish a precedent for approval of other requests. 
(2)  Site/Architectural Plan Review Process. 
a.  Review for compliance with these standards shall occur at the time of site/architectural plan review. Where site/architectural plan review is not required, review for compliance with these standards shall occur prior to issuance of a building permit. 
b.  Interpretations as to applicability or design requirements contained within this Section shall be the responsibility of the Director. Appeals of the Director's interpretations shall be heard according to the process set forth in Subsection 070.060.070(c), Appeal of Administrative Decision. 
(d)  Residential Site Design Standards. 
(1)  General Intent. These residential site design standards are generally intended to: 
a.  Encourage the use of creative site planning and design techniques that complement Glenwood Springs' unique topographic features; 
b.  Protect the established character of the City's residential neighborhoods while allowing for the natural evolution of the City's neighborhoods through renovations, infill, and redevelopment; 
c.  Reinforce and continue to allow the variation in streetscape character found in Glenwood Springs' neighborhoods; 
d.  Protect the privacy and solar access of neighboring residents in areas where infill and redevelopment and higher-density development are likely to occur over time; 
e.  Promote a more compact and pedestrian-friendly pattern of residential development, especially in mixed-use areas and along travel corridors that have traditionally been occupied by auto-oriented commercial development; and 
f.  Reduce the visual impacts of surface parking on the City's street frontages. 
(2)  Dimensional Standards. 
a.  Front Yard Setbacks. For all residential development, front yard setbacks are based on the applicable zoning district and are set forth in Article 070.020: Zoning Districts. 
b.  Side Yard Setbacks. 
1.  For all residential development, side yard setbacks for primary structures are based on the applicable zoning district and are set forth in Article 070.020: Zoning Districts. 
2.  Side yard setbacks for garages and other buildings accessory to residential uses shall be a minimum of five (5) feet, provided the garage does not exceed one (1) story in height. A zero-foot side setback may be used to accommodate a common garage that is shared across a side lot line. Garages that exceed one (1) story in height shall comply with the setback applicable to primary structures. 
c.  Rear Yard Setbacks. 
1.  For all residential development, rear yard setbacks are based on the applicable zoning district and are set forth in Article 070.020: Zoning Districts. 
2.  An accessory structure that does not include a living unit may be located in a rear yard, provided that not more than forty (40) percent of the rear yard is covered. Such building shall observe a ten-foot setback from the rear lot line when such line abuts an alley, or a seven-and-one-half-foot setback where there is no alley. 
d.  Lot Coverage. 
1.  Maximum Lot Coverage. For infill residential development, maximum lot coverage shall be fifty (50) percent of the total lot area, or twenty-five (25) percent above the existing lot coverage, whichever is less. (Figure 040-12: Maximum Lot Coverage Example Calculations) 

Figure 040-12: Maximum Lot Coverage Example Calculations
2.  Lot Coverage in Sensitive Areas. In areas subject to Section 070.040.020, Sensitive Area Protection, lot coverage may be further limited by the establishment of limits of disturbance as required by Subsection 070.040.020(a)(4), Limits of Disturbance. 
3.  Lot Coverage Bonus for Accessory Dwelling Unit. When an accessory dwelling unit exists and is preserved, or is to be provided in conjunction with an addition to or development of a new single-family residential structure, maximum lot coverage shall be either the sum of the percentage of existing lot coverage on the site plus an additional thirty-five (35) percent of the total lot area, or sixty (60) percent of the total lot area, whichever is less. These lot coverages shall also apply when a new accessory dwelling unit is developed for an existing single-family dwelling. Refer to Subsection 070.030.040(d)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for additional accessory dwelling unit requirements. 
(3)  Surface Parking Configuration and Location. 
a.  Generally. 
1.  For all residential development, off-street parking within the front yard setback (not including parking within a driveway) is prohibited. 
2.  For multi-building developments, surface parking lots shall be internalized in building groupings and located away from street frontages. 

Figure 040-13: Surface Parking in Multi-Building Developments
3.  No parking space shall be located closer than five (5) feet from a window or door of a habitable structure. 
b.  Additional Standards in the Downtown Core. 
1.  Established parallel or diagonal parking configurations along downtown residential streets, along with associated tree lawns, shall be maintained in new developments to help buffer automobile traffic and provide a safe environment for pedestrians on the sidewalk. 
2.  Off-street parking areas that do not connect to an alley are prohibited within residential neighborhoods, in order to minimize disruption to the single-family character of the neighborhood. 
i.  If providing off-street parking is unavoidable for multi-family residential located in a residential neighborhood, it shall be located behind or to the side of the building. 
ii.  New curb cuts and off-street parking and driveways located in front yard setbacks compromise the residential character of the street frontage and are prohibited. 
3.  Front-loading garages are inconsistent with the historic character of downtown residential neighborhoods and are prohibited. New garages shall be set back from the primary structure and accessed from an alley. 
(4)  Refuse Containers. 
a.  General. Refuse containers shall comply with Article 100.010 of the Municipal Code. 
b.  Design and Materials: Multi-family. Dumpsters and refuse containers shall be located within the footprint of a building, or shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Dumpsters and refuse containers shall be located on a non-porous surface and within a four-sided, opaque enclosure that completely screens the dumpster or container and accumulated trash. 
2.  Enclosures shall be a maximum of six (6) feet in height and shall have gated access for the collection of waste materials. 
3.  Dumpster and refuse container enclosures shall incorporate compatible materials, colors, and architectural details that are compatible with the primary associated residential buildings. 
4.  The use of chain-link fencing as screening is prohibited. 
c.  Location: Multi-family. Enclosures shall be located to minimize visual and impacts and odors on the primary street frontage and neighboring residents to the maximum extent feasible. 
(e)  Residential Building Design and Character. 
(1)  General Intent. These residential building design standards are generally intended to: 
a.  Promote context-sensitive infill and redevelopment that complements, rather than detracts, from the City's small-town character; 
b.  Avoid repetitive patterns of residential development; 
c.  Reinforce the diversity of architectural styles that exists within Glenwood Springs; 
d.  Increase the predictability of infill and redevelopment requirements and resulting development for residents and the development community; 
e.  Maximize the quality, value, and longevity of Glenwood Springs' neighborhoods through the use of durable materials that will minimize maintenance costs and improve the overall appearance of the development; 
f.  Ensure that the massing and height of infill and redevelopment are compatible with neighboring residential development; and 
g.  Reduce the visual impacts of street-oriented garages and promote a more pedestrian-friendly environment in Glenwood Springs' residential neighborhoods. 
(2)  Building Orientation. 
a.  Single-Family and Duplex Residential. 
1.  The orientation of the primary entrance and façade of single-family and duplex residential dwellings shall be consistent with the established pattern along the block face. 
2.  No single-family residential structure shall be sited diagonally or otherwise skewed on the lot. 
b.  Multi-Family Residential. 
1.  All units with frontage along the primary street shall have an entrance that faces the street. Multi-family buildings located with multiple street frontages, as would be typical on a corner lot or with larger developments on corner lots, shall provide entrances to units along each street frontage. 
2.  To the maximum extent feasible, the primary entrance and façade of individual buildings within a multi-family development shall be oriented towards: 
i.  Primary, internal or perimeter streets; or 
ii.  Common open space, such as interior courtyards, parks, or on-site natural areas or features with a clearly defined and easily accessible pedestrian circulation system. (Figure 040-14) 

Figure 040-14: Building Orientation: Multi-Family
(3)  Variety of Housing Types. Development parcels encompassing more than three (3) acres shall incorporate a minimum of two (2) housing types. Development parcels larger than six (6) acres shall incorporate a minimum of three (3) housing types. The following housing types may be used to satisfy these standards: 
a.  Detached single-family dwellings; 
b.  Accessory dwelling units; 
c.  Two-family dwellings; 
d.  Single-family townhouse dwellings; or 
e.  Multi-family dwellings other than two-family or townhouse dwellings. (Figure 040-15) 

Figure 040-15: Variety of Housing Types
(4)  Architectural Variety. A continuous row of identical homes or multi-family buildings along a block is prohibited. Individual structures shall be differentiated through distinctions in the architectural features required in Subsection (5)c. below in combination with requirements for varied garage orientation in Subsection (9) below, Garages. (Figure 040-16) This provision is not intended to prohibit a row of attached townhouses, provided that each individual unit is architecturally distinguished from adjacent units through distinctions in the architectural features required in Subsection (5)c. below. 

Figure 040-16: Architectural Variety
(5)  Four-Sided Design. 
a.  Although the front facade of a building is expected to be the primary focal point in terms of level of architectural character and features, all sides of a residential building shall incorporate architectural detailing that complements the front facade and provides visual interest. Blank walls void of architectural detailing are prohibited except where required by the fire code. (Figure 040-17) 

Figure 040-17: Four-Sided Design
b.  For the purposes of satisfying this standard, a minimum number of the architectural features listed below shall be incorporated into the overall design on each side of the building. 
1.  For each single-family residential structure, a minimum of three (3) different architectural features; and 
2.  For each multi-family residential structure, a minimum of five (5) different architectural features. 
c.  Architectural features appropriate for achieving the standard in Paragraph b. above may include: 
1.  Covered porches; 
2.  Balconies, 
3.  Prominent entry features; 
4.  Windows; 
5.  Door openings, 
6.  Distinct variations in color (not a slight variation of a similar hue, such as beige or pastel); 
7.  Variations in materials; 
8.  Variations in building height; 
9.  Variation in roof form; 
10.  Dormers; 
11.  Projected or recessed building walls; or 
12.  Another architectural feature as approved by the Director. 
(6)  Building Materials. 
a.  Primary Materials. 
1.  Primary building materials shall be selected for their ability to withstand Glenwood Springs' variable mountain climate. Materials with demonstrated durability include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Brick; 
ii.  Stone; 
iii.  Cementitous siding products; 
iv.  Wood and log construction; 
v.  Cast concrete; or 
vi.  Other comparable materials as approved by the Director. 
2.  Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) shall not be utilized in high-traffic areas, such as at primary building entrances, where it may be easily damaged. 
b.  Accent Materials. The creative use of accent building materials to provide variety and visual interest is encouraged. 
(7)  Building Colors (Multi-Family Only). 
a.  The predominant exterior colors on multi-family buildings shall be earth tones to minimize the visual impact of these buildings. 
b.  Darker accent colors shall be utilized on garage door surfaces to minimize their visual prominence. 
c.  White or other highly reflective colors are prohibited. 
d.  The use of bright or highly reflective metal finishes shall be limited to accent materials. 
(8)  Transitions to Existing Residential. Any new residential structure that will be located adjacent to an existing residential dwelling or residential zoning district shall comply with the standards in this Subsection, in addition to complying with all other general residential design standards above. 
a.  Minimization of Use Impacts. New residential development shall be designed to minimize impacts on existing homes and the privacy of residents to the maximum extent feasible by: 
1.  Locating off-street surface parking lots, loading, and service areas away from a shared property line and screening them from neighboring residences; 
2.  Locating sources of audible noise (e.g., heating and air conditioning units) away from building facades that face lower intensity uses; 
3.  Placing windows on the new development so as to maintain privacy by avoiding direct lines of sight into neighboring homes; and 
4.  Orienting porches, balconies, and other outdoor living spaces away from neighboring homes. 
b.  Height Transitions. A new building with a height that exceeds that of an adjacent existing dwelling by one (1) story or more shall provide a transition using at least three (3) of the following techniques: (Figure 040-18) 
1.  "Stepping down" building height and mass along the shared property line to meet the height of the existing neighboring home along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the new building's length. The "stepped-down" portion of the new building shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and depth. This option is available only where the existing residential building is located along the property line adjacent to the new building; 
2.  Providing variations in the side building wall and/or roof form so that new structures have a comparable scale as neighboring homes along the shared property line; 
3.  Utilizing a roof pitch and overhang similar to that of the neighboring structures; and 
4.  Utilizing dormers and sloping roofs to accommodate upper stories. 

Figure 040-18: Height Transitions
c.  Massing and Form: (Multi-Family Only). Multi-family development located on a block face where more than seventy-five (75) percent of existing homes are single family shall employ one (1) or more of the following techniques to help reduce the overall bulk and mass of individual buildings and help maintain a lower-intensity residential character along the street frontage: (Figure 040-19) 
1.  Breaking up the mass of the multi-family building by stepping back the façade (minimum two (2) feet deep and one (1) foot feet wide) for every thirty (30) feet of building frontage, so that the building appears from the street to be separate homes; 
2.  Organizing units around a central courtyard that maintains the impression of the traditional side yard setback between units along the street frontage; or 
3.  Designing the multi-family building so that the massing, arrangement of architectural elements, and use of exterior materials gives the appearance of a large single-family home. 

Figure 040-19: Massing and Form (Multi-Family Only)
(9)  Garages and Accessory Structures. 
a.  Alley-oriented Garages. Where an alley exists, new garages serving new residential development shall be located at the rear of the lot and accessed from the alley. 
b.  Street-oriented Garages. 
1.  For single-family residential dwellings, street-oriented garages shall not comprise more than fifty (50) percent of the front width of the front façade. 
2.  For all residential development, garages that protrude towards the street in front of the primary façade of the structure are prohibited. All street-oriented garages shall be either: (Figure 040-20) 
i.  Recessed a minimum of ten (10) feet behind the front façade of the dwelling portion of the structure (including side-oriented garages) or a front porch or porte-cochere that is a minimum of five (5) feet deep by eight (8) feet long, or 
ii.  Recessed a minimum of two (2) feet beneath a second floor bay or balcony that extends the length of the garage door(s), roof overhang, or decorative roof element. 
3.  Where attached garages are provided for multi-family dwellings, landscaped islands or peninsulas shall be provided between every two (2) units' garage doors unless the soils or geotechnical report does not permit landscaping near the foundation. Such islands or peninsulas shall have minimum dimensions of four (4) feet wide by ten (10) feet in length. 
4.  Other garage configurations may be warranted by site constraints, such as topographic features and/or access limitations, and may be administratively approved as determined by the Director. 

Figure 040-20: Street-Oriented Garages
c.  Additional Garage Standards for Multi-Family. 
1.  Garage Variety and Location. 
i.  Residential developments with five (5) or more units shall incorporate a variety of garage configurations (e.g., street-oriented, side-loaded, alley-loaded, tandem) to minimize the visual impact resulting from long, uninterrupted rows of garages. 
ii.  For multi-building developments, garage entries shall be internalized in building groupings and located away from street frontages or accessed using an alley. 

Figure 040-21: Garage Variety
and Orientation
2.  Tuck-Under Garages. Tuck-under garages for multi-family residential buildings shall be recessed a minimum of one (1) foot beneath a second floor bay or balcony that extends the length of the garage door(s). 
3.  Free-standing Garage Structures. Free-standing garage structures that have four (4) or more two-car garage bays and/or exceed ninety (90) feet in length shall incorporate one (1) or more of the following to break up their appearance and increase their functionality: (Figure 040-22) 
i.  Dwelling units above designated garage spaces; 
ii.  Storage facilities above designated garage spaces; or 
iii.  A 'green' or living roof on sites with varied topography, where: 
a.  Free-standing garage structures may be "tucked" into or are adjacent to a slope; or 
b.  Where roof surfaces are clearly visible from residences or a public right-of-way above. 

Figure 040-22: Free-Standing Garage Structures - Multi-Family
4.  Other Accessory Buildings. For multi-family development, free-standing garages and other accessory structures (including but not limited to grouped mailboxes, storage and maintenance facilities, recreational facilities, picnic shelters, and gazebos) shall incorporate materials, scale, colors, architectural details, and roof slopes that are compatible with the primary multi-family buildings, except that flat and shed roofs are prohibited. 
5.  Storage Space. Multi-family developments shall provide a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of enclosed storage space per unit. Storage may be provided through one (1) or more of the following: 
i.  Increased garage dimensions that allow for storage in front of parked vehicles; 
ii.  Storage units incorporated above detached garage structures or within the multi-family building; 
iii.  Storage closets within units, aside from bedroom closets; or 
iv.  Detached storage buildings or sheds. 
(10)  Supplemental Architectural Design Standards: Downtown Core. In addition to complying with the above standards that are generally applicable to all residential development, development of any residential structure in the Downtown Core shall comply with the following standards. For the purposes of evaluating the surrounding neighborhood context for these standards, consideration shall be given to predominant characteristics of existing structures along the same block face of the subject application. Where any standards in this Subsection conflict with the standards generally applicable to all residential development, the standards in this Subsection shall control. 
a.  Building Height, Scale, Massing, and Form. New structures and additions shall be simple rectangular forms similar to those found historically. A similarity of building forms contributes to the visual continuity of downtown residential neighborhoods. New structures shall maintain a similar lot coverage and width of existing homes along the same block face to respect the traditional single-family scale of downtown neighborhoods. 
b.  Building Additions. 
1.  Additions shall be distinguishable from the original building through subtle changes in material or construction techniques. 
2.  Additions shall appear visually subordinate to the original building. 
3.  When additions taller than the main building are necessary, they shall be set back from the front façade. 
c.  Architectural Details. 
1.  Projects shall incorporate architectural details compatible with the existing historic buildings in the surrounding neighborhoods. 
2.  All elevations on new buildings shall be articulated with windows, insets and other architectural details compatible with the character of surrounding development. 

Figure 040-23: Architectural Details
3.  Solid walls without windows on any side of a structure are prohibited, except where required by the fire code. 
4.  Multi-family dwellings in the Downtown Core shall have the appearance of being a single-family dwelling, with similar structural proportions, window spacing, and decorative elements. Building fronts of new multi-family developments shall include articulations such as bays, insets and porches traditionally found on historic homes in the Downtown Core. For purposes of this Section, "historic homes" includes individual landmarks, contributing properties to designated historic districts, and properties that are eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places. 
5.  Roof forms shall appear similar to those seen traditionally in downtown neighborhoods (Figure 040-24). 
i.  Sloping roofs such as shed, gabled, and hipped roofs with a minimum roof pitch of 6:12 are appropriate roof forms. 
ii.  Flat or mansard rooflines as a primary roof form detract from the neighborhood's visual continuity and shall not be used. The Director may consider exceptions for proposed new structures that will replicate historic styles such as Art Deco or Moderne, which have flat roofs. 

Figure 040-24: Roof Forms
d.  Building Materials. 
1.  Exterior wall finishes for new buildings shall utilize building materials similar in scale, texture, and finish to those found on historic homes within the Downtown Core. New materials of similar scale, texture, and finish are also appropriate. 
2.  Horizontal clapboard siding or brick is appropriate for use in residential infill projects. 
3.  The use of decorative shingles shall be limited to use on dormers or in gables. 
e.  Color. 
1.  White, off-white, fluorescent, metallic, or other high-intensity colors are prohibited. 
2.  The use of bright or highly reflective metal finishes shall be limited to accent materials. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.040.090 - Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design. 
(a)  Purpose. This Section is intended to promote high-quality building design and is intended to: 
(1)  Protect and enhance the visual interest, character, and quality of nonresidential and mixed-use areas; 
(2)  Ensure compatibility between residential neighborhoods and adjacent commercial and mixed-use areas; 
(3)  Mitigate negative impacts created by the scale and bulk of large buildings; 
(4)  Promote an environment that is friendly toward multiple modes of transportation and accommodates varying ages and abilities; and 
(5)  Protect and enhance property values and encourage further investment and reinvestment. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  General Applicability. This Section shall apply to the following: 
a.  Development of any structure that will contain a nonresidential use or a mix of nonresidential and residential uses; and 
b.  An addition or renovation to an existing structure that will contain a nonresidential use where the total gross floor area of the proposed addition is fifty (50) percent or more than that of the total gross floor area of the existing structure before addition or renovation. In cases where modifications are subject to these standards, only the modification shall be subject to compliance with this Section. For purposes of this standard, "modifications" shall not include routine maintenance and repair of a building, changes to signage, or general repairs to a surface parking area, changes to landscaping, or other features on the parcel. The Director shall determine if a modification shall be subject to these standards. 
(2)  Exemptions. This Section shall not apply to the following: 
a.  An addition or renovation project to an existing structure that will contain a nonresidential use where the total gross floor area of the proposed addition is less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross floor area of the existing structure before addition or renovation; and 
b.  Properties subject to the Glenwood Meadows Annexation and Development Agreement. 
(3)  Special Review Uses. All nonresidential special review uses located within the zone districts enumerated in Article 070.030: Use Regulations, shall comply with this Section 070.040.090, in addition to any special review use performance standards of the applicable zone district, and the general special review approval criteria in Subsection 070.060.050(e)(3)e.2. 
(4)  Planned Unit Developments. 
a.  Development of a nonresidential or mixed-use structure within any new Planned Unit Development established after the effective date of this Code shall be subject to this Section, unless alternative nonresidential/mixed-use site and building design standards are adopted as part of the PUD approval that, in the determination of the Director, are at least equal to the standards set forth in this Section. 
b.  Development of a residential structure within an existing Planned Unit Development established prior to the effective date of this Code is exempt from this Section. 
(c)  Administration. 
(1)  Site/Architectural Plan Review Process. 
a.  Review for compliance with these standards shall occur at the time of site/architectural plan review. Where site/architectural plan review is not required, review for compliance with these standards shall occur prior to issuance of a building permit. 
b.  Interpretations as to applicability or design requirements contained within this Section shall be the responsibility of the Director. Appeals of the Director's interpretations shall be heard according to the process set forth in Subsection 070.060.070(c), Appeal of Administrative Decision. 
(2)  Alternative Equivalent Compliance. 
a.  Purpose and Scope. To encourage creative and unique design, "alternative equivalent compliance" allows development to occur in a manner that meets the intent of this Section, yet through an alternative design that does not strictly adhere to the Section's standards. This is not a general waiver of regulations. Rather, this authorizes a site-specific plan that is equal to or better than the strict application of the standard. 
b.  Applicability. The alternative equivalent compliance procedure is available only for the standards in Section 070.040.090, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design. 
c.  Alternative Equivalent Compliance Meeting Required. An applicant proposing alternative equivalent compliance shall request and attend an alternative equivalent compliance meeting prior to submitting application materials for the applicable permit(s), to determine the preliminary response from the Director. Based on the response, the application shall include sufficient explanation and justification, in both written and graphic form, for the requested alternative compliance. The Director may require that the applicant provide additional drawings and/or material samples in order to better understand the need for the proposed alternative. 
d.  Decision-Making Responsibility. Final approval of any proposed alternative compliance shall be the responsibility of the decision-making body responsible for deciding upon the application. Administratively approved projects proposing alternative compliance shall receive written approval of the alternative compliance from the Director. 
e.  Criteria. Alternative equivalent compliance may be approved if the applicant demonstrates that following criteria have been met by the proposed alternative: 
1.  Achieves the intent of the subject standard to the same or better degree than the subject standard; 
2.  Advances the goals and policies of this Code to the same or better degree than the subject standard; 
3.  Results in benefits to the community that are equivalent to or exceed benefits associated with the subject standard; and 
4.  Imposes no greater impacts on adjacent properties than would occur through compliance with the specific requirements of this Code. 
f.  Effect of Approval. Alternative equivalent compliance shall apply only to the specific site for which it is requested and shall not establish a precedent for approval of other requests. 
(d)  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site Design Standards. 
(1)  General Intent. The general intent of these site design standards is to: 
a.  Ensure development relates to the physical characteristics of the site; 
b.  Ensure building scale, orientation, and design relates to the surrounding uses and streets, and creates a cohesive visual identity and an attractive street scene; 
c.  Ensure site design for efficient pedestrian, bicycle, transit, and vehicular circulation patterns, and create a high-quality pedestrian environment; 
d.  Promote design environments built to "human scale," which means that buildings and objects are designed in size and shape to be optimized for pedestrian use; 
e.  Ensure delivery, trash, and loading facilities are located so as not to impede regular vehicular and pedestrian circulation and access routes; and 
f.  Ensure safe and efficient access between buildings and parking areas. 
(2)  Building Organization and Location. 
a.  Building Orientation. Buildings shall be sited parallel to public rights-of-way, to the maximum extent practicable. 
b.  Climatic Conditions. Local climatic conditions shall be considered when designing the orientation of new buildings. For example, north-facing facades are especially susceptible to winter snow and ice accumulation, and entries may require special treatment. Snow shed from roofs and snowpiling zones along streets shall be considered in arranging building elements on the site. Adequate solar access shall be considered when planning outdoor spaces, with shade and relief from glare provided by landscaping and overhead structures. 
c.  Primary Entrance. 
1.  The primary entrances to a building shall be clearly identified. 
2.  Buildings shall be oriented so that the principal building entrance faces the principal street or the street providing main access to the site. 
3.  Where there are multiple buildings on a development parcel, at least one (1) building shall be oriented with an entrance facing the principal street or the street providing main access to the site. 
4.  A corner site may orient its primary entry towards the corner for emphasis. 
d.  Corner Lots. 
1.  Scale and Massing. Structures shall relate to the scale and massing of the buildings on each of the respective streets. 
2.  Building Entries. When a structure is located on a corner lot, prominent entries shall be designed for both façades along the street edge or a single prominent entry shall be turned forty-five (45) degrees to face the corner. The primary entrance shall not be oriented to an interior court. 
3.  Courtyards. When designing interior courtyards for buildings on corner lots, a minimal amount of street frontage shall be utilized. Courtyards shall not extend across the entire front of the property. Instead, a building shall be located flush with the property line on the street side. 
4.  Focal Points. 
i.  To visually and physically anchor street intersections, buildings located on corner lots shall provide a focal point within a box formed from lines extending thirty (30) feet away from intersecting property lines. The focal point shall include one (1) or more of the following elements: 
a.  A primary building. In the case where a primary building includes drive-in and/or drive-through lanes, or gasoline pumping bays, the bays and/or queuing lanes shall not be located within the focal point. 
b.  Decorative architectural wall that is between thirty (30) and thirty-six (36) inches tall and complies with any other sight distance triangle restrictions in Subsection 070.020.190(c)(5), Sight Distance Triangle Requirement. 
c.  An architectural feature that is a minimum of the height of the building and a maximum of the height restriction for the zoning district (for example, a clock tower, spire, or other decorative roof form). These architectural features shall not contain signs or logos in any form. 
d.  Public art or sculpture within a landscaped area. 
e.  Fountains or other water feature within a landscaped area. 
f.  Public plaza or open space with landscaping, a low decorative wall to visually and physically separate the space from nearby traffic lanes, and other pedestrian-oriented amenities such as benches. The low decorative wall shall match or complement the building exterior in materials and colors. 
ii.  Signs may be located within this focal point area provided that they are incorporated with another focal point element enumerated above. Signs shall comply with Section 070.040.110, Signs. 
iii.  For all focal point options, the sufficiency of proposed pedestrian-oriented amenities and landscaping shall be determined by the Director. All such features shall meet all applicable requirements of this Code, including but not limited to the general landscaping, building materials and color, and signage standards. 
iv.  The Alternative Equivalent Compliance process in Subsection 070.040.090(c)(2) may be used to consider alternatives from this requirement where strict compliance would result in unsafe or inadequate access, where the lot has less than fifty (50) linear feet of frontage, and/or where the site has unique topographical characteristics that make it infeasible to locate at least one (1) of the listed focal point elements. (Figure 040-25) 

Figure 040-25: Focal Points
(3)  Surface Parking Configuration and Location. 
a.  In the mixed-use and other nonresidential districts, except in the Downtown Core, no more than thirty (30) percent of the total number of off-street parking spaces provided shall be located between the principal building and the front property line. 
b.  No parking space shall be located closer than five (5) feet from a window or door of a habitable structure. 
c.  No portion of a parking space, loading space, or maneuvering area shall be provided in any required landscape area, sidewalk, or other pedestrian or bicycle path. 
d.  Surface parking shall not be located in a focal point area. 
(4)  Parking Structures. The visual impacts of a parking structure shall be minimized through compliance with the standards in Subsection 070.040.060(h)(8), Parking Structures. 
(5)  Refuse Containers. 
a.  General. Refuse containers shall comply with Article 100.010 of the Municipal Code. 
b.  Design and Materials. Dumpsters and refuse containers shall be located within the footprint of a building, or shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Dumpsters and refuse containers shall be located on a non-porous surface and within a four-sided, opaque enclosure that completely screens the dumpster or container and accumulated trash. 
2.  Enclosures shall be a maximum of six (6) feet in height and shall have gated access for the collection of waste materials. 
3.  Dumpster and refuse container enclosures shall incorporate compatible materials, colors, and architectural details that are compatible with the primary associated residential buildings. 
4.  The use of chain-link fencing as screening is prohibited. 
c.  Location. Enclosures shall be located to minimize visual and impacts and odors on the primary street frontage and neighboring properties and uses to the maximum extent feasible. 
(6)  Supplemental Site Design Standards: Downtown Core. Development of any nonresidential or mixed-use structure in the Downtown Core shall comply with the general site layout and building design standards set forth above, plus the standards of this Subsection. 
a.  Building Edge to Sidewalk. A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the building edge shall be located adjacent to the sidewalk edge (e.g., zero setback). (Figure 040-26) 

Figure 040-26: Zero Setback
b.  Building Entrances. The building entrance shall appear similar in scale and character to those used historically, both in the location of the building entrance and also in how the entrance area is distinguished from the rest of building by materials, size, projections or recessions, and other techniques. 
(e)  Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Building Design Standards. 
(1)  General Intent. 
a.  The general intent of these building design standards is to encourage creative design that: 
1.  Preserves Glenwood Springs' small-town atmosphere; 
2.  Enhances the visual and physical qualities of Glenwood Springs; 
3.  Considers how the building relates to the site, neighboring properties, and the community; 
4.  Provides strong pedestrian orientation by visually connecting the building's interior with the public exterior; 
5.  Creates prominent, well-proportioned customer entrances; 
6.  Uses high quality, long lasting materials with a proven ability to withstand Glenwood Springs' environment; 
7.  Promote building designs and construction practices that are sustainable and adaptable to multiple uses for extended building lifecycles; and 
8.  Incorporates a palette of colors that adds visual interest to the development parcel and that is compatible with the surrounding natural environment. 
b.  The general intent of these building design standards is to discourage: 
1.  Buildings that are out of scale or have little physical or visual connection to the street, neighboring properties, or the community; 
2.  Building elements, materials, and colors that are out of character with the community, that are inherently associated with brand identification, or that are designed to function as signs; 
3.  Minimal or no physical pedestrian connections between the building and public street; and/or 
4.  Large expanses of blank, flat wall surfaces. 
(2)  Building Elevations. 
a.  Horizontal and Vertical Articulation Required. No building elevation, regardless of exterior wall plane setback or the location of interior walls, shall exceed thirty (30) feet in length without incorporating at least three (3) of the following elements: 
1.  Projections, recessions, or reveals such as, but not limited to, columns, pilasters, cornices, and bays, and having a change of wall plane that is a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in depth and that has the effect of casting shadows; 
2.  Glazed windows and doors, if used to comply with this standard shall comprise not less than thirty (30) percent of the elevation of which they are a part. See also Subsection 070.040.090(e)(3), Windows, Doors, and Customer Entrances, for additional requirements; 
3.  Change in texture and/or masonry pattern; 
4.  Change in building, parapet, or roofline height. If used to comply with this standard, the minimum change in roofline shall be two (2) feet; and/or 
5.  Awnings, canopies, or marquees extending at least four (4) feet beyond the building face. 

Figure 040-27: Horizontal and Vertical Articulation
Annotations correspond with paragraph numbers in the preceding text. 
b.  Alternative Designs. An equivalent design that provides pedestrian interest by dividing the façade into horizontal and vertical planes and is in proportion to the height and width of the entire building may be approved through the Alternative Equivalent Compliance process. However, design elements used to fulfill this standard shall not consist solely of color variations. 
c.  Building Design as Signage. Building elevations and/or elements used to comply with these standards shall not function as signs. The incorporation of certain design elements that are unique or symbolic of a particular business shall be unobtrusive and secondary to the overall architectural design. 
d.  Building Elevations Facing Public Rights-of-Way. Building elevations that face public rights-of-way, parking lots, or adjacent residential land uses shall include glazed windows and doors as one (1) of the required elements enumerated in Paragraph a. above. See also Subsection 070.040.090(e)(3), Windows, Doors, and Customer Entrances, for additional requirements. 
e.  False Windows and Doors. Building elevations not adjacent to residential land uses, public rights-of-way, or parking lots, or that do not have a customer entrance, may use false windows and/or doors to fulfill the requirement in Paragraph a. above. The windows and/or doors, whether functional, false, or a combination of functional and false windows and/or doors, shall make up a minimum of thirty (30) percent of the elevation of which they are a part and shall have a minimum six-inch change of wall plane from the primary wall in order to provide shadow or sense of depth. 
(3)  Windows, Doors, and Customer Entrances. 
a.  In order to create a sense of transparency and to visually connect the building's interior with the public exterior, primary and secondary customer entrances shall be clearly defined, highly visible and feature a minimum of two (2) of the following treatments: 
1.  Recessions and/or projections with a minimum change in wall plane of twenty-four (24) inches; 
2.  Display windows that are located immediately adjacent to the customer entrance and that are in proportion to the overall façade of which they are a part; 
3.  Canopies, porticos, overhangs, awnings, or marquees with a minimum projection of four (4) feet and of a width that at minimum spans the customer entrance; 
4.  Raised, corniced parapets located over the customer entrance with a minimum projection of four (4) feet and that span at least the width of the customer entrance door; or 
5.  Outdoor patios with customer seating and landscaping that at a minimum includes perennials, shrub plantings, and/or ornamental trees. Landscaping provided to meet this standard shall be credited towards the general minimum landscaping requirements as set forth in Section 070.040.050, Landscaping, Screening, and Fencing. 
b.  To preserve views and to provide a clear sense of connection into and out of the building, window and door glazing shall be transparent or have a low-reflectivity. Mirror-like windows are prohibited. 
(4)  Roofs. 
a.  To reduce the visual impact of roof mass, no roofline along any building elevation shall exceed fifty (50) feet in length without a visual variation that incorporates: 
1.  Projections, recessions, dormers that alter the vertical or horizontal plane of the roof by at least two (2) feet; or 
2.  Change in roof height of at least two (2) feet; or 
3.  Another architectural feature approved through the Alternative Equivalent Compliance process. 
b.  Mansard roofs, or roofs having a mansard-like appearance, are prohibited. 
c.  Flat roofs shall be concealed by parapets that are in proportion to the overall building design and that are generally of sufficient height to conceal rooftop mechanical systems that are in view from public rights-of-way, residential land uses, public parking areas, and/or adjacent properties. Parapets shall not exceed the maximum building height as established in Article 070.020: Zoning Districts, except where allowed by Subsection 070.020.190(d)(2), Exceptions to Height Requirements. 
(5)  Building Materials. 
a.  Primary Exterior Wall Materials. Building materials shall be high-quality and long-lasting and shall have a proven ability to withstand Glenwood Springs' intense sunlight and temperature extremes. The primary exterior building wall material, consisting of at least seventy (70) percent of the elevation to which it is applied, shall be one (1) or more of the following: 
1.  Brick; 
2.  Natural and cultured stone; 
3.  Wood; 
4.  Stucco, including synthetic stucco; 
5.  Metal, excluding metal with exposed rivets, seams or fasteners, ribs and batons; or 
6.  Concrete, excluding smooth-faced gray concrete block, painted concrete block and pre-cast ribbed concrete panels. 
7.  Another material that meets the intent of this standard if approved through the Alternative Equivalent Compliance process. 
b.  Accent Exterior Wall Materials. Exterior building walls shall consist of one (1) or more of the following materials provided that the sum total of the materials enumerated below comprise no more than thirty (30) percent of the elevation to which it is applied: 
1.  Smooth-faced gray concrete block, painted concrete block, or pre-cast ribbed concrete panels. However, when used in combination with the allowance above for concrete as a primary exterior wall material, the concrete in its entirety may not exceed seventy (70) percent of the elevation to which it is applied. 
2.  Metal with exposed seams, rivets or fasteners, ribs and batons. However, when used in combination with the allowance above for metal as a primary exterior wall material, the metal in its entirety may not exceed seventy (70) percent of the elevation to which it is applied. 
3.  Glass, when used as a curtain wall or when designed to span multiple floors. 
c.  Exterior Wall Materials Generally. 
1.  All sides of the building shall be constructed using materials that are compatible with, or of equal or greater quality, as those used on elevations with customer entrances, facing public rights-of-way, or surface parking areas. 
2.  Highly reflective building materials shall not be used. 
d.  Roofing Materials. 
1.  Acceptable roofing material includes the following: 
i.  Rubber membrane or EPDM (ethylene propylene diene monomer). 
ii.  Built up or modified bitumen roofing systems. 
iii.  Asphalt shingles. 
iv.  Metal, standing seam. 
v.  Clay tile. 
vi.  Another material approved through the Alternative Equivalent Compliance process. 
2.  Roofing materials shall not include corrugated metal panels. 
(6)  Building and Roofing Colors. 
a.  Color and intensity of color proposed for all exterior building and roofing materials, including exposed rooftop mechanical systems such as HVAC equipment, roof vents, air handling/exchange units, shall be warm or dark earth-toned colors with low reflectivity. 
b.  Exterior building and roofing colors shall not include white, off-white, high-intensity primary colors, and/or fluorescent colors. 
(7)  Supplemental Building Design Standards: Downtown Core. Setbacks, orientation, and heights of new buildings in the Downtown Core shall be similar to those found on the same block face and shall comply with the following additional standards: 
a.  Building Scale and Massing. 
1.  Building scale and massing shall respect the scale and massing of existing buildings along the block face. 
2.  The height of new buildings shall vary as follows: 
i.  Variation shall be used in building roof and parapet heights to add visual interest and reduce boxy or monolithic building masses. 
ii.  Upper floors of a large building mass shall be stepped back from the street or an adjacent residential zone to reduce looming effect. 
iii.  Step back distances and proportions shall be varied to avoid monotonous, uniform, tiered "wedding cake" appearance. 
3.  Featureless backs of buildings shall not be located adjacent to the Roaring Fork or Colorado River. To encourage active uses in this area, all design standards applicable to street frontage structures shall also be applicable to the back of a building in this area. 
b.  Building Height. 
1.  Floor heights in new buildings shall be similar to those of existing historic buildings in the downtown commercial core. (Figure 040-28) 
i.  The level of the first floor shall be at or near grade level at the entrance. 
ii.  The first floor shall appear to be a full floor in height. 

Figure 040-28: Building Floor Heights
2.  Structures directly adjacent to residential buildings shall "step-down" in height on the abutting edge to match the height of the adjacent structure. 
c.  Roof Design. 
1.  The alignment of horizontal elements along the block face, including parapets and cornices, shall be maintained along the entire façade to provide a continuous visual line along the block. 
i.  This alignment occurs most successfully when buildings are similar in height. 
ii.  Window sills and moldings are examples of other building elements that shall be aligned. 
2.  The primary roof form shall appear to be flat, as traditionally found on the City's downtown commercial structures. A parapet shall conceal roofs. 
3.  Roof design shall be consistent with those of historic buildings in the commercial Downtown Core. 
4.  Roofs are encouraged to be activated with decks or vegetation. Roof decks are appropriate to take advantage of views. Green roofs, or "living roofs," are appropriate to bring visual interest to highly visible roofs, as well as contribute to sustainability principles. 
5.  Roofs shall be designed to manage snowfall, using methods that appropriately prevent injuries from snow or ice falling from buildings. 
6.  Monolithic roof design is not appropriate. See also requirements under Building Articulation. 
d.  Building Articulation. 
1.  Vertical and horizontal articulation techniques shall be used to establish a sense of scale in the design of a larger building. Articulation techniques include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Wall offsets; 
ii.  Step backs; 
iii.  Base, middle, and cap design; and 
iv.  Variation in material (Figure 040-29). 

Figure 040-29: Building Articulation Techniques
2.  Vertical articulation shall be used to express traditional façade widths were a new larger building is adjacent to existing, smaller-scale buildings. 
3.  To minimize apparent mass, new buildings shall be divided into bays through projections and/or recesses (minimum two (2) feet deep and one (1) foot wide) at a minimum of every twenty-five (25) feet in order to be compatible with the character of historic building frontages. Civic structures may vary in front width and shall be reviewed on an individual basis for compatibility. 
4.  Buildings shall have a clearly articulated architectural distinction between the street level and upper floors, expressed through detailing, changes in materials, and fenestration. One (1) or more belt courses shall be used to help distinguish between floors. 
e.  Floor Distinctions. Buildings shall have a clearly articulated architectural distinction between the street level and upper floors, expressed through detailing, changes in materials, and fenestration. One (1) or more belt courses shall be used to help distinguish between floors. 
f.  Commercial-Oriented Building Design. 
1.  The ground-level street frontage of every nonresidential and mixed-use building in the Downtown Core shall be primarily dedicated to commercial uses. 
2.  New commercial storefront buildings shall incorporate the following character-defining elements: (Figure 040-30) 
i.  Display windows: The main portion of glass on the storefront. 
ii.  Glass transom: The upper portion of the display, separated from the main display window by a frame. 
iii.  Kickplate: Found beneath the display window. Sometimes called a bulk-head panel. 
iv.  Upper-story windows: Windows located above the street level. These usually have a vertical orientation, and appear to be less transparent than the large expanse of glass in the storefront below. 

Figure 040-30: Commercial-Oriented Building Design
Annotations correspond with paragraph numbers in the preceding text. 
g.  Windows and Transparency. 
1.  Windows shall be located and spaced to express the rhythm and visual continuity found in historic buildings in the Downtown Core. 
i.  Horizontal spacing shall be consistent between windows on a floor. 
ii.  Windows shall be vertically aligned on upper and lower floors. 
2.  The size and proportion of windows shall be in the range of heights and width as found in historic buildings in the Downtown Core. 
3.  The first floor of the primary façade shall be sixty-five (65) to eighty (80) percent transparent glass. 
4.  Windows shall be designed windows to create depth and shadow on a façade. 
i.  Upper floors shall be perceived as being more opaque than the lower floor. 
ii.  Highly reflective or darkly tinted glass is prohibited. 
h.  Building Entry. 
1.  The primary building entrance shall be recessed; doors that are flush with the sidewalk are prohibited. 
2.  Doors shall be made of at least forty (40) percent glass. 
3.  Accent colors shall be used on the door(s) to encourage pedestrian activity. 

Figure 040-31: Commercial-Oriented Building Design
Annotations correspond with paragraph numbers in the preceding text. 
i.  Awnings, Canopies, and Marquees. 
1.  Awnings and canopies shall be canvas with a matte finish. Awnings with high gloss finishes are prohibited. Marquees may by constructed in metal but shall be painted or shall have a matte finish. 
2.  Rigid frame awnings and canopies may be used, but shall stop at the top section and shall not be included in the valance. 
3.  Illuminated, plastic awnings and canopies are prohibited. 
4.  Awning and canopy colors shall be compatible with the overall color scheme of the façade. Solid colors or subtle striped patterns shall be used. 
5.  Awnings and canopies for rectangular openings shall be simple shed shapes. Rounded or bull-nose awnings and canopies shall only be allowed over arched openings. 
6.  Marquees shall be located only over the primary public entrance into a building. 
7.  Awnings, canopies, or marquees that span continuously across more than one (1) structural bay or storefront shall not be allowed. 
8.  Poles or posts supporting awnings, canopies, or marquees shall not be allowed. 
9.  Awnings, canopies, or marquees shall not project more than five (5) feet from the building façade to which they are attached. 
10.  Awnings, canopies, or marquees shall maintain an eight-foot height clearance above a public sidewalk, or other publically owned space. Additional height clearance may be required if an awning, canopy, or marquee is located over a public right-of-way, including an alley way. 
j.  Building Materials and Colors. 
1.  Primary materials shall be similar in character to those used traditionally on downtown commercial structures by complying with the following standards: 
i.  Brick and masonry, known for their durability, were traditionally found on historic commercial structures in downtown. New materials shall demonstrate similar durability and compatibility. The use of split face concrete block is prohibited, but may be approved through the Alternative Equivalent Compliance procedure. 
ii.  Diagonal wood siding shall not be used. 
iii.  Cinder block is acceptable for interior walls, but shall not be used as an exposed material on building façades facing streets, alleys, or undeveloped lots. 
2.  Accent materials shall be similar to those used historically. Wood was traditionally used for trim elements on commercial storefronts while stone, painted metal, terra cotta, ceramic tile, and rounded plaster were used in detailing. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.040.100 - Exterior Lighting. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide for exterior lighting that enhances safety, preserves the City's nighttime character, and improves the ability to view the nighttime sky from within the City. This Section is intended to decrease light pollution, increase energy efficiency, and promote high quality lighting design as it relates to the built environment. The lighting regulations are also intended to: 
(1)  Ensure that parking areas, public gathering places, and other public places have adequate outdoor illumination; 
(2)  Ensure that light levels are uniform to enhance night vision and security; 
(3)  Minimize adverse impacts on public safety and neighborhood enjoyment due to excessive glare; 
(4)  Minimize spillover of light onto adjacent or nearby properties; and 
(5)  Minimize the effects of skyglow. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. All exterior lighting devices shall be installed in conformance with this Section 070.040.100, the building code, the electrical code, and other applicable City codes under appropriate permit and inspection. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following types of exterior lighting are exempt from the requirements of this Section 070.040.100, provided they shall not create glare to motorists or result in light trespass onto adjacent properties: 
a.  Holiday lighting; 
b.  Twinkle lighting located on trees, bushes, or landscape features in the commercial zone district; 
c.  Bistro lighting located in a commercial zone district; and 
d.  Special events that have been issued a temporary use permit. 
(c)  Lighting Districts Established. The City is divided into the following three (3) lighting districts within which specific standards and limitations are indicated throughout this Section: 
(1)  Lighting District 1. The standards for this lighting district shall apply to the CO, M1, M3, I1, I2, and IN zoning districts. 
(2)  Lighting District 2. The standards for this lighting district shall apply to the RH, RT, M2, and RE zoning districts. 
(3)  Lighting District 3. The standards for this lighting district shall apply to the RR, RL, RM1, RM2, and HP zoning districts. 
(d)  Demonstration of Compliance. 
(1)  Lighting Plan Required. Unless expressly exempt from the lighting plan requirement in Paragraph (2), all new multifamily, mixed-use, or nonresidential developments shall provide a lighting plan with the applicable land use application and/or building permit. 
(2)  Exempt from Lighting Plan Requirement. Properties in Lighting District 3 are exempt from the lighting plan requirement, provided: 
a.  No more than one (1) freestanding lighting fixture (not attached to a building or structure) shall be installed; and 
b.  Installed lighting meets the remaining standards of this Section. 
(e)  Prohibited Lighting Types. The following types of exterior lighting are prohibited unless allowed elsewhere in this Code: 
(1)  Unshielded lights, lamps, or floodlights that produce glare and light trespass in excess of that allowed in Table 040.11; 
(2)  Lights affixed to the top of a roof, except where required by building code; 
(3)  Lights that flash, move, revolve, blink, flicker, vary in intensity, change color, or use intermittent electrical pulsation, except for holiday lighting pursuant to Subsection 070.040.100(b)(2)a; 
(4)  Mercury vapor and low-pressure sodium lighting; 
(5)  Linear lighting as defined in Article 070.070: Rules of Construction and Definitions; and 
(6)  Upward directed lighting that allows spillage into the sky. 
(f)  General Lighting Requirements for All Lighting Districts. 
(1)  On-Site Lighting Level. Maximum on-site illumination, including spillage from doorways, signs, and windows, shall not exceed ten (10) foot-candles, unless otherwise allowed in this Code. 
(2)  Light Trespass. 
a.  Maximum Allowed. The maximum measured light levels shall not exceed those provided in Table 040.11: 
Table 040.11: Maximum Lighting Trespass Levels Lighting District Point A 
(foot-candles) Point B 
(foot-candles) District 1 5.0 3.0 District 2 0.5 0.2 District 3 0.3 0.1  
b.  Measurement. 
1.  Methodology. 
i.  Light trespass shall be measured at grade level unless otherwise noted. Two (2) measurements shall be taken: one (1) at any point along the property line (point A), and one (1) taken ten (10) feet (measured perpendicular to property line) onto the property being trespassed (point B). Where grade changes or obstructions prohibit measurements at the same grade level, measurements shall be taken on the same horizontal plane. 
ii.  Lighting measurements shall be taken under normal conditions. Measurements to determine compliance shall not be taken when conditions are present that will influence the outcome of measurements including snow, snowpack, rain, fog, or other influences. 
2.  Cumulative Light Readings. Light sources from a property shall be measured as cumulative of all sources on the subject property, except for internally illuminated signs. 
3.  Transitions between Lighting Districts. 
i.  Where properties in District 1 are separated by City streets in District 2, the trespass levels shown in Table 040.11 may be exceeded on streets in the M2 zoning district only. Where M2 zoning is across the street from other zoning or lighting districts, the levels in Table 040.11 shall apply at the center line of the street. 
ii.  The maximum light level for light trespass in any lighting district that borders a different lighting district shall be the lower of the two (2), along that border only. Where separated by a public street or right-of-way, the levels shall apply at the center line of the street adjacent to the light source. 
(3)  Lighting Controls. 
a.  Extinguish Lighting at Night. All exterior lighting, except lighting specifically exempted in Subsection 070.040.100(b)(2), Exemptions, and security lighting as provided for in Subsection 070.040.100(f)(5) below shall be extinguished one (1) hour after close of business, or 10:00 p.m., whichever is later. 
b.  Motion Sensors. Motion sensors may be used where the sensor is triggered by activity within the property lines and shall only be used with incandescent, fluorescent, LED lighting, or halogen lamps. 
c.  Timer/Photocell Combinations. Timer/Photocell combinations that activate the light source at dusk and turn off lighting at a specific time may be used at front entries for nonresidential uses. 
(4)  Surface Parking Area Lighting. 
a.  Fixtures. All lighting for surface parking lots and upper uncovered decks of parking structures shall be full cut-off fixtures. 
b.  Standards. Parking area lighting shall comply with the standards in Table 040.12: Parking Area Lighting Standards: 
Table 040.12: Parking Area Lighting Standards Lighting District Mounting Height Minimum light level at grade 
(foot-candles) Maximum light level at grade 
(foot-candles) District 1 35 feet 0.7 7 District 2 20 feet 0.3 3 District 3 Not allowed. Public or quasi-public facilities shall comply with the district 2 standards.  
1.  Parking Area Lighting in Lighting District 3. Parking area lighting shall be prohibited except for public or quasi-public facilities requiring exterior parking lot illumination. Such facilities shall comply with the parking area lighting standards for district 2 as indicated in Table 040.12: Parking Area Lighting Standards. 
2.  Parking Areas Bordering Districts 2 and 3. Where a parking lot is located on a property in district 1 and shares a common lot line with a property located in districts 2 or 3, parking area lighting shall comply with specifications for light levels and pole heights for district 2 as indicated in Table 040.12: Parking Area Lighting Standards. 
(5)  Security Lighting. 
a.  Applicability. Security lighting shall be allowed in all lighting districts. The need for security lighting shall be demonstrated as part of any development permit application package. 
b.  Standards. 
1.  Examples of Appropriate Security Lighting Techniques. 
i.  Recessed lights under a canopy. 
ii.  Full cut-off fixtures on parking lot poles. 
iii.  Fully shielded wall packs or other fixtures. 
iv.  Floodlights that are down-directed, fully shielded, and are controlled by motion sensors. 
2.  Fixtures. 
i.  Security lighting fixtures shall be fully shielded and directed only to the designated area. 
ii.  Security lighting shall not be directed above a horizontal plane through the top of the lighting fixture. 
iii.  Security lighting fixtures shall include shields that prevent the light source from being visible from adjacent properties and roadways to the maximum extent practicable. 
3.  Light Levels. 
i.  Security lighting may illuminate ingresses and egresses of buildings up to a level eight (8) feet above grade or the bottom of doorways, windows, or entries, whichever is greater. 
ii.  Security lighting on a parcel in district 1 that shares a common lot line with a parcel located in districts 2 or 3 shall comply with specifications for light levels and maximum mounting heights as noted in district 2. 
iii.  Security lighting for entrances, stairways and loading docks shall not exceed five (5) foot-candles at the designated area illuminated. Parking lot lighting used for after-hours security shall not exceed three (3) foot-candles at the designated area illuminated. 
(6)  Building Façade Lighting. 
a.  Applicability. 
1.  Lighting District 1. In lighting district 1, building façades may be illuminated if the illumination is part of the overall design of the building, adds to the visual quality of the surrounding neighborhood, and does not produce glare or illumination of nearby streets or properties. Building façades that face districts 2 and 3 that do not have a primary public entrance shall not be illuminated. 
2.  Lighting Districts 2 and 3. In lighting districts 2 and 3 building façades and roofs shall not be illuminated except for those structures having exceptional symbolic or historic significance in the community or buildings in the M2 zoning district pursuant to Paragraph 3. below. Existing lighting on structures that are listed in the National Register of Historic Places are exempt from this Subsection. 
3.  Building Lighting in the Downtown Core. In the Downtown Core, lighting shall be used as it was used historically in the area as follows: 
i.  Low-scale, decorative lighting may be used to accent architectural details or building entries. 
ii.  Lights shall not be focused upward to light the façade or used to dominate a façade or the street. 
b.  Standards. A design for the illumination of a building shall be submitted with the lighting plan as part of the applicable development application and shall comply with the following: 
1.  Lighting fixtures shall be carefully located, directed, and shielded so that light is directed only onto the building façade. 
2.  Lighting fixtures shall not be directed towards streets or roads, other properties, or the sky. 
(7)  Lighting of Walkways and Common Areas. Lighting for walkways, parks, and other common areas shall be illuminated to a minimum of two-tenths ( 2/10 ) of a foot-candle and a maximum of three (3) foot-candles. Such lighting shall be down-directed. Such lighting shall be included with the lighting plan submitted with an applicable development permit application. 
(8)  Canopy Lighting for Automotive Fuel Sales and Service Station. Canopies shall be illuminated so that the minimum horizontal illuminance at grade level is at least five (5) foot-candles. The maximum horizontal illuminance under canopies shall be twenty-five (25) foot-candles. 
a.  Light fixtures mounted on canopies shall be installed so that the lens cover is recessed or flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the canopy or the fixture. 
b.  Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of the canopy. The sides (fascias) of the canopy shall not be illuminated for any purpose, with the exception of internally illuminated signage which shall comply with Subsection 070.040.110(g)(4)c., Internally Illuminated Signs. 
(9)  Lighting of Outdoor Recreation and Entertainment Facilities. 
a.  Hours of Operation. Exterior lighting of recreation or entertainment event facilities shall be turned off no later than one (1) hour after the end of the event. 
b.  Illumination Standards. Where outdoor recreation and/or entertainment areas are to be illuminated, lighting fixtures shall be mounted and directed no higher than sixty-two (62) degrees up from vertical so that no direct illumination extends off the site. 
(10)  Street Lighting. 
a.  Applicability. 
1.  Street lighting associated with a development application submitted pursuant to Article 070.060: Administration and Procedures, shall be provided by the applicant or developer and approved by the Electric Department Superintendent or the Director of the Public Works Department before installation. 
2.  Street lights on private streets are required to be part of an overall lighting plan that is subject to the approval of the Electric Department Superintendent or the Director of the Public Works Department. If the Superintendent or Director determines that the expertise of a professional lighting consultant/engineer is required to determine compliance with this Subsection, the City shall have the option of hiring a professional lighting consultant, selected by the City, funded by the applicant or developer. 
b.  Standards. 
1.  IES Guidelines. 
i.  Street lighting shall conform to the guidelines as published by the Illuminating Engineering Society (IES), provided that lighting levels do not exceed levels specified in the guidelines by more than two-tenths ( 2/10 ) of a foot-candle. 
ii.  Uniformity ratios shall not exceed that suggested by the IES guidelines. 
iii.  The lighting plan submitted with the applicable development permit shall include a street lighting plan that demonstrates compliance with IES standards for fixtures to be used; the type and wattage of lamps (bulbs); the proposed mounting heights; and spacing. 
iv.  All street lighting fixtures shall be full cut-off fixtures. 
v.  Bistro lighting shall not be allowed as street lighting for purposes of this Subsection. 
2.  Mounting Height. Mounting heights shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet for fixtures that do not protrude over streets and thirty (30) feet for fixtures that do protrude over the street. 
3.  Location. 
i.  Street lights shall be located in the public right-of-way, except for street lights provided along private streets. 
ii.  Streets with a sidewalk along only one (1) side of the street shall have street lights located on the same side of the street with the sidewalk. 
(11)  Installation and Maintenance. 
a.  Compliance with Building Code and other Applicable Codes. Exterior lighting fixtures shall comply with the building code and other applicable codes as adopted by the City. 
b.  Maintenance. Exterior lighting shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times. 
c.  Electrical Service Underground. New electrical service required for exterior lighting shall be located underground unless the fixtures are directly mounted on utility poles. 
(g)  Supplemental Lighting Standards-District 1. The following supplemental standards shall apply to Lighting District 1: 
(1)  Fixtures. 
a.  Shielding. Fixtures shall be full cut-off. 
b.  Decorative Fixtures. Low-wattage landscape lighting, bollards, and other hidden light sources that create hidden effects may be allowed as background lighting and in certain applications pursuant to Subsection 070.040.100(f)(7). 
(2)  Height. Exterior lighting shall not exceed a maximum height of twelve (12) feet unless such lighting is: 
a.  Street lighting provided by the City and/or a public entity; 
b.  Used for parking and vehicle circulation areas, outdoor sales/display areas, security, or other types of lighting addressed elsewhere in this Section; 
c.  Building-mounted lighting directed downward at a sign or building façade; or 
d.  Fully shielded lighting on above-grade decks or balconies. 
(h)  Supplemental Lighting Standards-Districts 2 and 3. The following supplemental standards shall apply to Lighting Districts 2 and 3: 
(1)  Fixture Shielding. 
a.  Freestanding fixtures shall be full cut-off. 
b.  Floodlight fixtures and lamps shall be focused on the task, fully shielded, down-directed, and screened from adjacent properties to prevent glare and trespass pursuant to Table 040.11. Floodlight intensity shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) lumens per bulb and shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) lumens per fixture, with a maximum of two (2) bulbs per fixture. 
c.  All other exterior fixtures shall be fully shielded or shall comply with the following: 
1.  A fixture that allows light to escape above the horizontal (ninety (90) degrees from vertical) shall have frosted lenses or lamps and the total light output shall not exceed five hundred five (505) lumens. 
2.  A fixture that does not allow light to escape above the horizontal shall have frosted lenses or lamps and the total light output shall not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) lumens. 
(2)  Height. Freestanding exterior lighting shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. Parking lot lighting shall comply with Subsection 070.040.100(f)(4). 
(3)  Common Area Entrances. Photocells may be used at entrances to common areas on multifamily residential properties. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019) 
070.040.110 - Signs. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The City Council recognizes that signs are necessary means of visual communication for the public convenience and that uses and activities have the right to identify themselves by using signs that are accessory and incidental to the use on the property where the signs are located. 
(2)  The purpose of this Section is to: 
a.  Minimize incompatibility between signs and their surroundings; 
b.  Recognize distinct geographic districts within the City that possess unique characteristics of physical location, building design, land use patterns, and pedestrian and vehicle circulation; 
c.  Provide for signs within reasonable limitations, consistent with the goals and objectives of the community, to retain the special character and economic advantages that rest largely on the quality of the community's appearance; 
d.  Protect the public from hazardous conditions by prohibiting signs that are structurally unsafe or obscure, distract the vision of motorists, or compete or conflict with necessary traffic signs and warning signals; 
e.  Eliminate hazards caused by the size and placement of signs and reduce the possibility of injuries to those coming near or under signs; 
f.  Promote the health, safety and public welfare of the City, its residents and its visitors; 
g.  Regulate signs in accordance with the City's policies and with the U.S. and Colorado Constitutions; and 
h.  Protect the right to free speech by the display of messages on signs through content-neutral regulations. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  All signs and support structures shall conform to the requirements of this Section and all other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(2)  No sign shall be displayed, installed, constructed, altered, moved, or improved within the City limits until the City has issued a permit, unless the sign or sign activity is designated as not requiring a permit pursuant to Subsection 070.040.110(d). 
(3)  All face changes, except those identified in Subsection 070.040.110(d)(1), require a permit. 
(4)  Developments and/or properties with approved sign plans shall not be subject to these standards, except that the procedures for obtaining a sign permit shall apply. 
(c)  Savings and Severability. 
(1)  Signs containing noncommercial speech are permitted anywhere that advertising or business signs are permitted, subject to the same regulations applicable to such signs. 
(2)  If any clause, subsection, or other part of the application of this Section shall be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, it is the intent of the City that such clause, subsection, or other part of the application of this Section shall be considered eliminated and not affecting the validity of the remaining clauses, sections, or applications remaining in full force and effect. 
(d)  Signs Not Requiring a Sign Permit. 
(1)  Sign Activities Not Requiring a Permit. The following sign activities shall not require a permit: 
a.  The ordinary preventative maintenance of a lawfully existing sign that does not involve a change of placement, size, lighting, or height. 
b.  The repainting of a lawfully existing sign. 
c.  The changing of copy on marquees, reader boards, and similar changeable copy signs on permitted or existing legal nonconforming signs. 
(2)  Balloons. Inflatable balloons shall not require a sign permit. Replica and/or synthetic balloons shall be considered a temporary sign and shall comply with the number, size, and location standards in Subsection 070.040.110(f)(4). 
(3)  Development Site Signs. Development site signs shall be allowed without a sign permit subject to the following: 
a.  Number Allowed. One (1) sign along each lot line frontage on a street, not to exceed a total of two (2) signs per frontage. 
b.  Size. Development site signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign. 
c.  Location and Design. Development site signs: 
1.  Shall not be located within ten (10) feet of any lot line unless attached to a development site barrier or fence; and 
2.  Shall not be illuminated. 
d.  Duration. Development site signs may be erected and maintained for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days prior to commencement of development activities and shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of termination of development activities. 
(4)  Directional Signs. Directional signs shall be allowed without a sign permit pursuant to the following: 
a.  Shall not exceed four (4) signs per property, plus one (1) sign per entryway from a public right-of-way; 
b.  Shall not exceed four (4) square feet of sign area per face; and 
c.  Shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height. 
(5)  Feather Flags. Feather flags shall be allowed without a sign permit pursuant to the following: 
a.  Shall not be located in the public right-of-way; 
b.  Shall not be located in a sight distance triangle; and 
c.  Shall be limited to three (3) per street frontage per property. 
(6)  Flags. Flags, not including feather flags, shall be allowed without a sign permit pursuant to the following: 
a.  Flags shall be affixed to a flagpole or affixed to a building; 
b.  The height of all flagpoles shall not exceed the allowed building height in the applicable zoning district; and 
c.  Flags shall not exceed forty (40) square feet. 
(7)  Gas Pump and External Vending Machine Signs. Signs on gas pump islands and external vending machines shall be allowed without a sign permit provided the total signage on each gas pump island or external vending machine does not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
(8)  Historic Designation Signs. Signs placed on an historic building identifying the structure as a local, state, or federal historic landmark shall be allowed without a sign permit pursuant to the following: 
a.  Shall be affixed to the wall of the historic building or property; and 
b.  Shall not exceed six (6) square feet. 
(9)  Historic Signs. Any sign designated as an historic landmark by the City Council shall be allowed without a sign permit pursuant to the following: 
a.  General. 
1.  Any sign designated as an historic landmark by the City Council pursuant to Article 070.050: Historic Preservation, shall be exempt from the nonconforming signs and dimensional standards of this Subsection. 
2.  Historic signs will be debited against the total allowable signage for the building or use unless it is a ghost sign that does not pertain to the business or building upon which it exists. 
b.  Historic Landmark Criteria. Alterations to signs that are designated historic landmarks shall be reviewed for compliance with the criteria in Subsection 070.050.040(f). 
c.  Ghost Signs. Historic signs may include ghost signs. 
d.  Attributes. An historic sign may be restored to its original condition and location with the exception of animation and flashing components, which are prohibited. 
(10)  Holiday Decorations. Holiday decorations shall be allowed without a sign permit provided such decorations comply with Section 070.040.100, Exterior Lighting. 
(11)  Home Occupation Signs. Home occupation signs shall be allowed without a sign permit but shall not exceed one (1) sign per property and shall not exceed a maximum sign area of six (6) square feet. 
(12)  Incidental Vehicle Signs. Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles or trailers where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer shall be allowed without a sign permit provided they are not placed on or affixed to vehicles or trailers that are parked on a public right-of-way, public property, or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way. 
(13)  Information Signs. Informational signs guiding persons to facilities intended to serve the public, provided as a courtesy to the public, and/or signs providing instruction to persons using a facility or property shall be allowed without a sign permit provided such signs do not exceed three (3) square feet. 
(14)  Integral Signs. Any inscription carved into stone or similar material that is integral to a building, such as those commonly found on cornerstones, stamped into sidewalks, or identified by plaques or tablets, shall be allowed without a sign permit pursuant to the following: 
a.  Shall not exceed four (4) square feet; and 
b.  Shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. 
(15)  Interior Signs. Signs located entirely within the interior of a building shall be allowed without a sign permit pursuant to the following: 
a.  Shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent or eight (8) square feet, whichever is greater, of any window panel; 
b.  Shall not be permanently affixed to any window surface; and 
c.  Shall not contain flashing lights visible from a public street. 
(16)  Public Signs. Signs required or installed by or on behalf of the local and/or state government, or signs erected or required by other government agencies, utilities, or special districts, including address signs, signs for traffic, schools, safety, railroad crossing, wayfinding, historic interpretation signs, civic and special events, seasonal banners, public notices, and other official and legal notices, are exempt from the standards and permit requirements specified in this Section. Public signs shall be consistent with design standards in this Section to the extent practicable, and shall not include any signs prohibited pursuant to Subsection 070.040.110(e). 
(17)  Temporary Off-Premises Directional Signs. Temporary off-premises directional signs shall be allowed without a permit pursuant to the following: 
a.  Shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet of total temporary off-premises directional signage on any property; 
b.  Shall not exceed a height of forty-two (42) inches; 
c.  May be located within the public right-of-way provided such signs: 
1.  Are not displayed for more than one (1) week before an event or more than one (1) week after an event; 
2.  Are located within a planting strip when such planting strip exists; 
3.  Do not obstruct any portion of a sidewalk or walkway; 
4.  Are not located within a sight distance triangle; and 
5.  Are not located in a median, roundabout, or any travel lane of any street or thoroughfare. 
(18)  Wind Signs. Wind signs shall be allowed without a sign permit provided they are not animated or otherwise powered by any source other than the wind. 
(19)  Yard Signs. 
a.  Yard signs, except for temporary yard signs, are allowed without a sign permit pursuant to the following: 
1.  In Residential Zoning Districts. 
i.  Shall not exceed more than four (4) signs per property at any one (1) time; 
ii.  Shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet total yard signage on any property; 
iii.  Shall not exceed a height of forty-two (42) inches; 
iv.  Shall not be located in the public right-of-way; 
v.  Shall be located at least five (5) feet from any property line; and 
vi.  Shall not be displayed for a period of more than ninety (90) days per calendar year. 
2.  In All Other Zoning Districts. 
i.  Shall not exceed more than four (4) signs per property at any one (1) time; 
ii.  Shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet total yard signage on any property; 
iii.  Shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet, or forty-two (42) inches if placed within a sight distance triangle; 
iv.  Shall not be located in the public right-of-way; and 
v.  Shall not be displayed for a period of more than ninety (90) days per calendar year. 
(e)  Prohibited Signs. The following signs are expressly prohibited within all districts unless otherwise stated in this Section: 
(1)  Distracting or Unsafe Signs. Any sign that: 
a.  Is structurally unsafe or constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation; 
b.  Is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come into contact with it; 
c.  In any way obstructs the view of, or may be confused with an official traffic sign, signal or device or any other official government regulatory or informational sign; 
d.  Uses any words, phrases, symbols, or characters implying the existence of danger or the need for stopping or maneuvering of a motor vehicle or creates, in any other way, an unsafe distraction for vehicle operators, bicyclists, or pedestrians, except as provided in Subsection 070.040.110(d)(2), Balloons. 
e.  Obstructs the view of vehicle operators, bicyclists, or pedestrians entering a public roadway from any parking area, service drive, public driveway, alley, or other thoroughfare; 
f.  Is located or painted on trees, rocks, retaining walls, fences, light poles, utility poles, or natural features, except where required by law or allowed by this Code; 
g.  Causes any direct glare into or upon any public right-of-way, adjacent lot, or building other than the building to which the sign may be accessory; 
h.  Create optical illusion of movement by means of a design that presents a pattern capable of reversible perspective, giving the illusion of motion or changing of copy; or 
i.  Obstructs any window or door opening used as a means of egress, prevents free passage from one (1) part of a roof to any other part, interferes with an opening required for legal ventilation, or is attached to or obstructs any standpipe, stairway, ladder, fire escape, or fire hydrant. 
(2)  Abandoned Signs or Sign Structures. Any sign or sign structure on a property that is vacant, unoccupied, or where the use has been discontinued for a period of three (3) months or more, or any sign or sign structure that pertains to an event or purpose that no longer applies, shall be deemed abandoned. 
(3)  Animated or Moving Signs. Signs with visible moving, revolving, or rotating parts (including "air dancer" or "tube man" signs); or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electronic or mechanical means, including automatic electronically controlled copy changes, except for holiday decorations pursuant to Subsection 070.040.110(d)(10), time-temperature-date signs, and rotating cylinder signs. 
(4)  Banners and Inflatable Signs. Except as temporary signs pursuant to Subsection 070.040.110(f). 
(5)  Beacons and Search Lights. Other than for emergency purposes or by permission of the Director. 
(6)  Electronic Message Signs. Except freestanding electronic signs as authorized in Table 040.13. 
(7)  Flashing Signs. Signs with lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in intensity, vary in color or use intermittent electrical pulsations, with the exception of holiday decorations pursuant to Subsection 070.040.110(d)(10). 
(8)  Obscene or Illegal Activity Signs. Signs containing statements, words, or pictures of an obscene, indecent, or immoral character, such as will offend public morals or decency or that includes messages of illegal activity in accordance with state or local laws. 
(9)  Off-Premises Signs. Except for temporary off-premises directional signs pursuant to Subsection 070.040.110(d)(17) or otherwise approved through an off-premises sign permit pursuant to Subsection 070.040.110(k)(2). 
(10)  Portable Signs. Portable signs, except as authorized in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. 
(11)  Signs in Public Right-Of-Way. Any sign placed on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, or other surface located on, over, or across any public street, right-of-way, property, or thoroughfare, shall be prohibited unless authorized by the City Council or the City Manager. Authorized signs in the public right-of-way shall comply with Subsection 070.040.110(g)(5). 
(12)  Signs on Parked Vehicles. Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers that are parked on a public right-of-way, or parked on a private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way. 
(13)  Signs with Auditory Messages. Signs with auditory messages except those related to public safety or otherwise allowed in Subsection 070.040.110(d) or Subsection 070.040.110(h)(4). 
(14)  Signs with Projected Copy. Such as motion pictures, film slides, holographs, or other similar images. 
(15)  Unlawful Signs. Any sign unlawfully erected or maintained. 
(f)  Temporary Sign Standards. Temporary signs may be allowed pursuant to the following: 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  These standards apply to non-permanent signs and other signs with limited duration unless otherwise stated in this Section. 
b.  These standards shall not apply to temporary public signs. 
(2)  Generally. 
a.  Temporary signs, except for temporary yard signs, shall not be displayed for more than forty-five (45) days prior to the start of an event or more than forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of an event; and 
b.  Temporary signs, except for temporary yard signs, shall be limited to three (3) times per calendar year per property for single-tenant properties and three (3) times per calendar year per tenant for multi-tenant properties. 
(3)  Banners. 
a.  Number and Size. 
1.  Only one (1) temporary banner is allowed per use. 
2.  Temporary banners shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet. 
b.  Location. 
1.  Temporary banners may be attached or freestanding. When freestanding, temporary banners shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any property line. 
2.  Temporary banners shall not be located above the roofline of any building. 
3.  Temporary banners shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height when located within a sight distance triangle. 
(4)  Inflatable Signs. 
a.  Number and Size. 
1.  Only one (1) inflatable sign is allowed per property. 
2.  Inflatable signs shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. 
3.  Inflatable signs shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. 
b.  Location. 
1.  Inflatable signs may be attached or freestanding, but shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any property line. 
2.  Inflatable signs shall not be located above the roof line of any building. 
(g)  General Sign Regulations. 
(1)  Sign Area Measurement. 
a.  Single-Faced Signs. Sign area shall be determined by calculating the area inside the outer limits of a sign. The sign area includes the area of the smallest geometric figures having eight (8) or fewer segments that encompass the face of the sign, including copy, border, and nonstructural trim. 

Figure 040-32: Sign Area Measurement
b.  Double-Faced Signs. Signs other than wall signs may be back-to-back with two (2) sign faces, and each face may have an area not to exceed the maximum stated for each respective sign type. 
c.  Three-Dimensional Signs. Three-dimensional figures shall be calculated on the largest possible silhouette cross-section encompassed by the smallest plane geometric figure having eight (8) or fewer segments. (Figure 040-33) 

Figure 040-33: Three-Dimensional Sign Area
(2)  Sign Height Measurement. Sign height shall be determined by calculating the vertical distance between the lowest elevation of the ground abutting the sign and level of the highest point of the sign. 
(3)  Materials and Safety. 
a.  Materials. 
1.  Permanent signs shall be constructed of durable materials and installed to comply with applicable City codes. Permanent signs shall not be made of paper, cloth, canvas (except for awning/canopy/marquee signs), cardboard, wallboard, or other similar nondurable materials. 
2.  No sign shall be erected or painted upon utility poles, light poles, retaining walls, fences, rocks, trees, or natural features except where expressly allowed by this Code. 
b.  Overhangs. The lowest point of a sign that extends over an area intended for pedestrian use shall be at least eight (8) feet above the finished grade below it. The lowest point of a sign that extends over an area intended for vehicular use shall be at least fourteen (14) feet above the finished grade below it. 
c.  Sight Distance Triangles. No sign shall obstruct the view in any direction at the intersection of a street or with an alley or driveway. 
(4)  Illumination. 
a.  Generally. Illuminated signs are allowed pursuant to the following: 
1.  Illumination sources are shielded so as not to shine onto surrounding areas. 
2.  Illumination on the surface of an illuminated sign, measured at the brightest point ten (10) feet from the surface of the sign, shall not exceed five (5) foot-candles. 
3.  No illumination source shall create a traffic hazard or distraction to operators of motor vehicles on public streets. 
4.  Illuminated signs shall be prohibited in residential zoning districts. 
5.  Any illuminated sign visible from and located within three hundred (300) feet of any lot in a residential zoning district shall be turned off no later than 10:00 p.m., or one (1) hour after the close of business, whichever is later. 
6.  Pole signs adjacent to Highways 6 and 82 shall not illuminate any sign face directed away from Highways 6 and 82. 
b.  Externally Illuminated Signs. To the maximum extent practicable, fixtures used to illuminate signs shall be top-mounted and directed downward onto the sign surface and the light source shall not be directly visible from adjacent properties or the public right-of-way. 
c.  Internally Illuminated Signs. 
1.  For internally illuminated signs, dark background colors with light lettering shall be used. 
2.  For internally illuminated awning/canopy/marquee signs, such illumination shall not exceed five (5) foot-candles when measured six (6) inches from the awning/canopy/marquee. 
3.  Internally illuminated awning/canopy/marquee signs shall be prohibited in the Downtown Core. 
d.  Electronic Message Signs. Illumination of electronic message signs shall comply with Subsection 070.040.110(h)(3)b., Electronic Message Signs. 
(5)  Projection Within or Above Public Right-of-Way. Any sign projecting within or above the public right-of-way shall obtain a right-of-way encroachment license pursuant to Subsection 070.060.050(f)(3). 
(h)  Specific Sign Type Standards. 
(1)  Signs for Secondary Entrances or Entrances on an Alley. 
a.  Buildings or businesses with a secondary public entrance on an alley or public walkway shall be allowed an additional attached sign at such secondary entrance at a rate of one-fifth (?) of a square foot of sign area per linear foot of building frontage. The allowance for such secondary signs is per building, not per tenant. 
b.  Buildings that front and have sole access on an alley shall be allowed a total sign area equal to that allowed for a similar sign on a building frontage pursuant to Table 04.14. 
(2)  Attached Signs. 
a.  Wall Signs. Wall signs are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. Wall signs shall comply with the following additional standards: 
1.  Shall be designed to be consistent and compatible with the building to which the signs are attached, including proportional scale and compatible design, materials, and color. 
2.  Shall be located on the side of a building that abuts a street, parking area, or other area open to the general public and that has a public entrance to the building. 
b.  Projecting Signs. Projecting signs are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. Signs projecting over public property shall not project more than five (5) feet from the face of the building. 
c.  Roof Signs. Roof signs are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. 
d.  Awning/Canopy/Marquee Signs. Awning, canopy, and marquee signs are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. Signs displayed on canopies, awnings, and marquees that are located more than twelve (12) inches away from the building façade shall comply with the following additional standards: 
1.  Signs shall not project above or below the face of the canopy, awning, or marquee, except for suspended signs and individual letters or other content on top of a marquee sign. 
2.  Sign content shall not project more than twelve (12) inches from a canopy or marquee that such sign is attached to. 
3.  Signs on awnings shall not project beyond the surface of the awning. 
e.  Suspended Signs. Suspended signs are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. Suspended signs hanging from the underside of an awning, canopy, or marquee shall not extend beyond the edge of such structure. 
f.  Changeable Copy Signs. Changeable copy signs are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. Changeable copy signs that project from the façade of the building by more than fifteen (15) inches shall be considered projecting signs and shall comply with the standards for such in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards, and Subsection 070.040.110(h)(2)b. 
(3)  Freestanding Signs. 
a.  Freestanding Signs, Generally. Freestanding signs, except portable signs, are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. Freestanding signs shall comply with the following additional standards: 
1.  Shall be designed to be consistent and compatible with the building to which the signs are attached, including proportional scale and compatible design, materials, and color. 
2.  Shall be placed within a landscaped area equal in size to the area of the sign face or shall be located within an improved area clearly oriented toward pedestrians such as a seating, dining, or landscaped entry area. 
b.  Electronic Message Signs. Freestanding electronic message signs are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. Electronic message signs shall comply with the following additional standards: 
1.  Minimum Hold Time. The message and/or display on an electronic sign shall not change, dissolve, or fade more than twice in a twenty-four-hour period. 
2.  Illumination. Electronic signs shall have automatic dimmer software or solar sensors to control brightness for nighttime viewing. The intensity of the light source shall not produce glare, the effect of which constitutes a traffic hazard or is otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. Lighting from the message and/or display module shall not exceed three hundred (300) NITs (candelas per square meter) between dusk and dawn as measured ten (10) feet from the sign's face. Applications for sign permits containing an electronic display shall include the manufacturer's specifications and NIT (candela per square meter) rating. 
c.  Monument Signs. Monument signs are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. The height of the monument sign base on which the sign is attached shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of total sign height. 
d.  Pole Signs. 
1.  Pole signs are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. Sign copy on a pole sign shall be contained within a single border; except that one (1) accessory reader board within a sign border may be separate provided the reader board contains less than fifty (50) percent of the allowable sign area. The bottom of the sign area shall be no less than eight (8) feet above the average elevation of the ground, except within the sight triangle. 
2.  Pole signs shall incorporate a single pole as support. 
3.  Pole signs shall be placed within a landscaped area equal in size to the area of the sign face or, with the approval of the Director, shall be located within an improved area clearly oriented toward pedestrians such as a seating, dining, or landscaped entry area. For purposes of this Subsection only, landscaped area shall mean an area designed, constructed, and maintained to include natural materials such as live plant materials and wood, stone, or earth. 
e.  Portable Signs. Portable signs are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. 
(4)  Drive-Through Facility Signs. Drive-through signs are allowed as indicated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. Drive-through facility signs shall: 
a.  Be limited to one (1) face per sign; and 
b.  Shall be of a similar design using similar colors and materials as other freestanding signs associated with the use. 
(i)  Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. 
(1)  Applicability. This Subsection establishes the allowed permanent sign types. Permanent signs shall also comply with other standards within this Section, and other applicable federal, state, and local standards. 
(2)  Summary of Permanent Sign Standards Table. 
a.  Signs shall only be allowed in the areas designated in Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards. 
b.  Sign districts identified in Table 040.13 are described in Subsection 070.040.110(j). 
c.  All signs shall comply with Subsection 070.020.190(c)(5), Sight Distance Triangle Requirement. 
Table 040.13: Summary of Permanent Sign Standards Sign Type Where Allowed Number of Signs, Maximum Sign Area, Maximum Sign Height, Maximum Sign Location Attached Signs Wall Residential applications in all sign districts One per building One square foot per linear foot of building frontage Top of wall Mixed-use and nonresidential applications in all sign districts Single-tenant: Two total wall, projecting, or roof signs; one per building frontage 
Multi-tenant: one wall, projecting, or roof sign per tenant or use of a building Total sign area shall not exceed the greater of 25 square feet or: 
Single-tenant: one square foot per linear foot of building frontage 
Multi-tenant: Two square feet per linear foot of building frontage; no individual sign shall exceed one square foot per linear foot of the largest building frontage for an individual tenant Top of wall Wall signs may be located on walls or parapets 
  
See additional standards for properties in Downtown Core: Subsection 070.040.110(j)(3) Projecting Mixed-use and nonresidential applications in all sign districts Single-tenant: Two total wall, projecting, or roof signs; one per building frontage 
Multi-tenant: one wall, projecting, or roof sign per tenant or use of a building Total sign area shall not exceed the greater of 25 square feet or: 
Single-tenant: one square foot per linear foot of building frontage 
Multi-tenant: Two square feet per linear foot of building frontage; 
no individual sign shall exceed one square foot per linear foot of the largest building frontage for an individual tenant Minimum clearance of eight feet above a sidewalk and 14 feet above an alley; shall not extend above the roof line of a building (except for designated historic signs) Roof Downtown - south sign district Single-tenant: Two total wall, projecting, or roof signs; one per building frontage 
Multi-tenant: one wall, projecting, or roof sign per tenant or use of a building Total sign area shall not exceed the greater of 25 square feet or: 
Single-tenant: one square foot per linear foot of building frontage 
Multi-tenant: Two square feet per linear foot of building frontage Shall not exceed the allowed building height for the applicable zoning district Shall not project into a required yard Awning, canopy, or marquee Mixed-use and nonresidential applications in all sign districts One per awning or canopy per street frontage; one marquee sign per property Shall not exceed 30 percent of the width of the projection multiplied by the vertical height of the projection. ( Example: a 10-foot wide by three-foot tall awning [30 sf] could have a maximum sign area of nine square feet ); letter height shall not exceed one foot. Shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet above a sidewalk and 14 feet above an area intended for vehicular use Sign content is allowed to extend above a canopy or marquee (but not an awning) pursuant to Subsection 070.040.110(h)(2)d. Suspended Mixed-use and nonresidential applications in all sign districts One per building entrance; maximum one per tenant Four square feet Shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet above a sidewalk and 14 feet above an area intended for vehicular use Shall not project beyond the limits of the awning, marquee, or canopy to which they are attached; shall be separated from other suspended signs by 12 feet Freestanding Signs Freestanding monument Residential applications in all sign districts One freestanding sign per street frontage, up to a total of two signs per subdivision or development access 10 square feet Six feet Setback five feet from property lines Mixed-use and nonresidential applications in all sign districts One freestanding monument sign per street frontage per property Hwy 6 and 82 sign districts: 200 square feet 
Downtown districts: 64 square feet 
Others: 120 square feet Eight feet Setback a minimum of 10 feet from back of curb or back of pavement; shall be separated from other permanent detached signs by at least 25 feet Freestanding pole Midtown, West Sixth Street, West Highway 6, South Highway 82, and Red Mountain sign districts One freestanding pole sign per street frontage per property Hwy 6 and 82 sign districts: 200 square feet 
Others: 120 square feet Hwy 6 and 82 sign districts: 20 feet 
Others: 16 feet 
  
The bottom of the sign area shall be at least eight feet above the ground elevation. Setback a minimum of 10 feet from back of curb or back of pavement; shall be separated from other permanent detached signs by at least 25 feet Freestanding changeable copy Only allowed as accessory part of a pole or monument sign Shall not exceed 50 percent of allowable sign area See applicable standards for pole or monument sign Freestanding electronic message Mixed-use and nonresidential applications in the Midtown, West Sixth Street, West Highway 6, South Highway 82, and Red Mountain sign districts Only allowed as part of a pole or monument sign Pursuant to the pole or monument sign standards in this table except that the electronic message portion of the freestanding sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the allowed sign area. See additional standards for electronic signs in Subsection 070.040.110(h)(3)b. Portable All sign districts One per tenant with street frontage 
  
See additional standards for properties in Downtown Core 070.040.110(j)(3). Eight square feet Four feet Shall maintain five feet sidewalk clearance; shall be located directly in front of tenant space and not off-premises; shall be separated from other portable signs by 15 feet. Signs shall not be affixed to street lights, traffic poles, sign posts, or other site or landscape features. 
  
See additional standards for properties in Downtown Core 070.040.110(j)(3). Other Sign Types Transit stop sign Shall be designed as part of the shelter and/or bench design Drive-through facility sign Wherever drive-through uses are allowed, pursuant to Table 030.1 Two additional freestanding signs 48 square feet each Six feet Shall be located adjacent to drive-through lane(s); shall not be located within 50 feet of a residential zoning district Historic signs See Subsection 070.040.110(d)(9)  
(j)  Sign District Standards. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. This Subsection recognizes seven (7) geographic districts within the City with unique characteristics based on physical location, building design, pedestrian and vehicle circulation, and land uses. The intent of this Subsection and district identification is to ensure the appropriate number and design of signs that are compatible with the characteristics of each sign district. 
(2)  Sign Districts. 
a.  Downtown-South. 
1.  Location. This district includes property located between the Colorado River (on the north) and Fourteenth Street (on the south) along Grand Avenue and, to a lesser degree, between the Roaring Fork River (on the west) and Blake Street (on the east) within the Original Town Site. 
2.  Building Types. The predominant building type in this district consists of single- and multi-tenant occupancy, historic storefront-type buildings abutting directly on the sidewalks of Grand, Colorado and Cooper Avenues and Seventh, Eighth and Ninth Streets. Buildings, often multi-tenant, on single lots of twenty-five-foot width are typical. Building heights vary from one (1) to three (3) stories. 
3.  Land Use. Street-level use is dominated by hospitality retail and eating and drinking establishments. Professional services and residential uses occupy upper floors. This district also includes buildings occupied by government administrative offices and services. Primary user orientation is to the pedestrian with secondary orientation to vehicular traffic. 
4.  Other Characteristics. Vehicle speeds throughout this district are less than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
b.  Downtown-North. 
1.  Location. This district includes property located along Sixth Street from the east side of Laurel Street and the Laurel roundabout to its eastern terminus. The district is accessible from I-70 interchange 116; however, visibility from I-70 is limited. Portions of this district are the community's first point of contact for most visitors. 
2.  Building Types. The district is dominated by the historic Hotel Colorado and Hot Springs Pool. The district also includes a mix of single- and multi-story buildings of varying building heights. 
3.  Land Use. Street-level uses are primarily tourist-oriented retail and restaurants. Primary user orientation is to the pedestrian with a secondary orientation to vehicular traffic. 
4.  Other Characteristics. Vehicle speeds throughout this district generally are less than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. To the north of the Sixth Street commercial area is one (1) of the City's oldest residential neighborhoods. 
c.  Midtown. 
1.  Location. This district includes property located along and accessible from Grand Avenue between Fourteenth Street and Twenty-Third Street. 
2.  Building Types. Single-tenant, local retail buildings predominate in this district, with secondary multi-tenant, strip or two-story office buildings. Valley View Hospital, a multi-story, multi-building complex, is two (2) blocks east of Grand Avenue. 
3.  Land Use. In addition to the hospital and other health care-related services, this district also contains a mix of hospitality and restaurants, and regional and local retail uses. Primary user orientation is to vehicular and transit traffic with limited pedestrian attention. 
4.  Other Characteristics. Vehicle speeds throughout this district are twenty-five (25) to thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
d.  West Sixth Street. 
1.  Location. This district includes property located along and accessible from Sixth Street, west of Laurel Street and the Laurel roundabout, to Devereux Road. Although this district is immediately accessible from Interstate 70 interchange 116, visibility from I-70 is limited. The eastern portion of this district is often the community's first point of contact for visitors. 
2.  Building Types. The district includes a mix of single- and multistory buildings with single- and multi-tenant occupancy. Building heights range from one (1) to three (3) stories. 
3.  Land Use. Primary street-level uses are auto-oriented tourist businesses including restaurants and a concentration of hotels and motels. Primary user orientation is vehicular traffic, with secondary pedestrian and transit users. 
4.  Other Characteristics. Vehicle speeds throughout the district are less than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
e.  Highway 82-South. 
1.  Location. This district includes property located south of Twenty-Third Street along the Highway 82 corridor. 
2.  Building Types. The character of development is predominantly single-story, single-tenant buildings, with some strip development. It is dominated by the Roaring Fork Market Place, a large multi-tenant, single-story retail development. Buildings in this district are generally single-story. 
3.  Land Use. This district contains a mix of local and regional retail uses, with limited hospitality uses. Primary user orientation is to vehicular and transit traffic, with very limited pedestrian attention. 
4.  Other Characteristics. Vehicle speeds of thirty-five (35) to forty-five (45) miles per hour and a proliferation of curb cuts contribute to the auto-oriented nature of businesses within this district. 
f.  Highway 6-West. 
1.  Location. This district includes commercially zoned property located north of the railroad right-of-way, west of Devereux Road. The district is immediately accessible from I-70 interchange 114; visibility from I-70 is very high. 
2.  Building Types. The character of development in this district is primarily single-story, single-tenant uses, with some multi-tenant buildings, strip retail, auto dealerships, gasoline stations, fast food establishments, and single-and two-story motels. 
3.  Land Use. Primary uses are regional retail and hospitality. Orientation is to vehicular and transit traffic, with limited pedestrian attention. 
4.  Other Characteristics. Vehicle speeds throughout this district should be less than 40 miles per hour on Highway 6 and less than sixty-five (65) miles per hour on Interstate 70. Commercial uses are very visible from adjacent residential neighborhoods to the north. Length of strip development contributes to lack of definition within district. 
g.  Red Mountain. 
1.  Location. This district includes property located south of the railroad right-of-way, generally west of the Devereux Road bridge. The district is accessible from I-70 interchange 114. Visibility from I-70 is high. 
2.  Building Types. The character of development in this district is primarily single-story, single-tenant uses, strip retail, and multi-story hotels. This district is dominated by the Glenwood Meadows shopping area. 
3.  Land Use. Orientation primarily is to vehicular traffic. Primary uses are retail, light industrial, and hospitality. The district includes the City's community center and a regional bus service maintenance facility and park-and-ride. 
4.  Other Characteristics. The district is highly visible from West Glenwood and from the Oasis Creek and Highlands neighborhoods. Vehicle speeds throughout this district vary from twenty-five (25) to forty-five (45) miles per hour to sixty-five (65) miles per hour on Interstate 70. 
(3)  Additional Standards in the Downtown Core. 
a.  General. 
1.  Signs shall be less prominent than the overall building composition; and 
2.  Signs shall be in character with the material, color, and detail of the historic context of downtown Glenwood. 
b.  Materials. 
1.  Highly reflective materials shall not be used; and 
2.  Unpainted wood and other unfinished materials shall not be used. 
c.  Illumination. 
1.  Internally-illuminated signs including freestanding electronic message signs are prohibited; 
2.  Awnings and canopies shall not be illuminated; 
3.  Non-flashing neon signs shall be allowed; and 
4.  Marquees may be illuminated provided the lights are fully shielded and directed downwards. 
d.  Wall Sign Standards. Wall signs on multi-story buildings shall be located within the traditional sign band area, which is generally between the first- and second-floor windows. 
e.  Portable Sign Standards. 
1.  Number. Ground-floor tenants without street frontage are allowed one (1) sign, pending compliance with the requirements of this Subsection. 
2.  Location. 
i.  Portable signs shall be located not more than four (4) feet from the building face; and 
ii.  Portable signs may be located on the public sidewalk in areas where the sidewalk width is eight (8) feet wide or greater. 
3.  Design. 
i.  Portable signs shall be constructed of materials that present a finished appearance. Portable signs shall have a designed, finished edge of solid wood or metal. Signs shall not be constructed of rough-cut plywood; plastic signs are not allowed. 
ii.  Sign frames shall be painted or stained wood, metal with a matte finish; plastic frames are prohibited. 
iii.  Portable sign bases shall be properly weighted, with the weight elements incorporated into the overall design of the sign. Use of improvised measures such as concrete blocks and sandbags to secure signs is prohibited. 
iv.  Portable signs including frames shall not be white or neon-colored. Black or other dark colors are preferred. 
(k)  Sign Review and Approval Procedures. 
(1)  Standard Sign Permit. 
a.  Applicability. A standard sign permit shall be required pursuant to Subsection 070.040.110(b). 
b.  Procedure. The Director shall evaluate sign permit applications and issue standard sign permits on a form designated by the Director. 
(2)  Off-Premises Sign Permit. 
a.  Applicability. This Subsection shall apply to all off-premises signs except for temporary off-premises directional signs. 
b.  Procedure. Off-premises sign permits shall require a public hearing before the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the off-premises sign permit in accordance with the following approval criteria: 
1.  The off-premises sign will not harm the public or impair the intent or purposes of the Municipal Code or the City's goals or policies; and 
2.  A significant hardship will result without such off-premises sign. 
c.  Additional Standards. 
1.  The off-premises sign shall comply with the applicable size, height, placement, and number of signs permitted on the property where the off-premises sign is to be located. The off-premises sign size shall be counted against the sign size and type allowed on the property on which it is displayed. 
2.  If the off-premises sign is proposed in the public right-of-way, such sign shall require compliance with Subsection 070.060.050(f), Right-of-Way Encroachment License. 
(3)  Master Sign Plan. 
a.  Applicability. A master sign plan shall be required for multi-tenant buildings and commercial developments containing more than one (1) building. 
b.  Procedure. 
1.  Applicants shall submit a master sign plan to the Director for approval upon application for a sign permit. If the master sign plan meets all the conditions of this Subsection, then it may be approved by the Director. 
2.  A master sign plan shall be approved prior to the issuance of a building permit for all new buildings, additions, or renovations and prior to the issuance of any sign permit for an individual business. The master sign plan shall run with a multi-use building property and not with individual tenants. 
(l)  Sign Installation and Maintenance. 
(1)  Compliance to Building Code and other Applicable Codes. Signs and sign structures shall comply with the building code and other applicable codes as adopted by the City. 
(2)  Maintenance. 
a.  Signs shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times. 
b.  The Director shall inspect and may order the painting, repair, alteration, or removal of a sign that constitutes a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or disrepair under the notice to repair or remove procedure in Paragraph c. below. 
c.  The Director shall notify the sign owner or property owner by certified mail of the duty to alter or remove and that such person has thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, or such longer period as the Director finds is reasonably necessary, to complete such alteration or removal. 
(m)  Nonconforming Signs. 
(1)  Continuation of Nonconforming Signs. Any existing individual sign that exceeds the maximum area or height limitations of this Code by no more than ten (10) percent shall be considered a conforming sign. At the time such sign is replaced, altered, or renovated, it shall comply with all requirements of this Code. 
(2)  Termination of Nonconforming Signs. 
a.  The right to maintain a nonconforming sign terminates immediately upon any of the following: 
1.  Abandonment of a sign, including sign copy and/or logos and graphics, for a continuous period of ninety (90) days; 
2.  Any further violation of this Code; 
3.  Destruction or damage of the sign to the extent that the cost of restoration to its condition before the occurrence exceeds fifty (50) percent of the total cost of reconstructing the entire sign; or 
4.  Determination by the Director and Building Official that the sign is an immediate hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare because of disrepair, unsafe mounting, imminent dislodging, or other safety factors. 
b.  Any party wishing to appeal a determination concerning the termination of a nonconforming sign or request a variance from the requirements of this Subsection may appeal the determination to the Director and may appeal the Director's decision to the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019) 
070.040.120 - Affordable and Workforce Housing. 
(a)  In General. Reserved. 
(b)  Voluntary Provisions. 
(1)  Deed-Restricted Development. 
a.  Applicability. Any new development of for-rent residential units in the City may voluntarily with the City enter into an affordable housing deed-restriction agreement consistent with the terms and conditions of this Subsection 070.040.120(b)(1). 
b.  Deed Restriction. The deed restriction provided for in this Subsection shall be recorded by the owner of the property burdened thereby and remain a covenant and restriction running with the property for a period of thirty (30) years unless otherwise terminated. 
c.  Affordability. 
1.  The gross rental price, including utility allowance and non-optional fees, of any deed-restricted unit shall not, at the time of leasing, exceed the maximum rents established according to Colorado Housing and Finance Authority, Colorado County Income and Rent Table, for one hundred twenty (120) percent of the Garfield County Area Median Income. 
2.  The average of all deed-restricted units in a development shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the maximum rents established according to the Colorado Housing and Finance Authority, Colorado County Income and Rent Table, as determined at the time each individual unit was leased. 
d.  Impact Fees. The deed restriction shall provide for a waiver of the following impact and improvement fees required by this Code according to the percentage of new for-rent units restricted thereby: 
1.  Any water or sewer tap fee required under 080.040.010(c) or 080.030.010(c), respectively. 
2.  Any water or sewer system improvement fee required under Article 080.060. 
3.  Any school land dedication required under Subsection 070.040.030(g)(4), School Land Dedication. 
4.  Any fire and emergency service impact fees required under Subsection 070.040.030(g)(5), Fire and Emergency Services Impact Fee. 
Said fees shall be calculated and determined prior to development and remain unpaid, in abeyance, to be depreciated over a period of thirty (30) years from the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the unit(s). Straight line depreciation shall be used. Any restricted party that knowingly fails to adhere to the requirements of the deed restriction or this Subsection 070.040.120(b)(1) for any portion of a year shall be required to immediately pay the remaining un-depreciated impact and improvement fees upon thirty (30) days' written notice from the City. The restricted party's failure to pay such amount upon notice shall result in an automatic lien upon the property plus a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount owed, plus the reasonable costs of fees, including attorney fees, spent in collection. Said lien shall thereafter be collected as provided in Section 080.010.100 of the Code. 
e.  Occupancy Requirement. 
1.  Primary occupants shall sign an affidavit of qualification and be qualified to rent a deed-restricted unit under this Subsection 070.040.120(b)(1) according to any of the following criteria: 
i.  Employed to primarily work at a physical location within the 81601 postal zip code; 
ii.  Directly employed by a company that has its principal office located within the 81601 postal zip code; 
iii.  Enrolled as a full-time student at a local educational institution; 
iv.  Being sixty-five (65) years of age or greater; or 
v.  Receiving social security disability benefits. 
Qualifying occupants may have roommates not employed within the 81601 postal zip code or by a company not having its principal office within the 81601 postal zip code. 
2.  No occupant of a deed-restricted unit shall engage in any business activity on or in the unit, except as allowed under Subsection 070.030.040(d)(3), Home Occupations, of this Code. 
3.  In the rental and occupancy of the units, there shall be no discrimination on the basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, disability, religion, national origin, marital status, gender identity, or affiliation. 
4.  When a unit becomes vacant, the owner shall promptly make it available and actively market said unit for lease to another qualified occupant in accordance with the deed restriction and any rental guidelines adopted by the City. 
5.  Each unit shall only be leased and occupied by residents who will utilize the unit as his or her principal place of residence. A "principal place of residence" shall mean the dwelling in which one's habitation is fixed and to which a person, whenever he or she is absent, has a present intention of returning after a departure or absence there from. 
6.  In the event the employment or student enrollment status of the occupant of any unit is altered so as to no longer meet the qualifications of this Subsection, said occupant shall be permitted to reside in the unit under the same terms and conditions of the unit lease, except that no extension of the lease term shall be granted. 
f.  Market Conversion. The owner of a deed-restricted unit may convert a unit to rent or sale at market rate upon written notice to the City. Upon market conversion, the owner shall record an amendment to the deed restriction for the termination thereof. Upon the first rental or sale of any such converted unit, the owner shall pay to the City the amount of any and all proportional, amortized, and depreciated impact and improvement fees then outstanding. 
g.  Reporting Requirement. The owner of a deed-restricted unit shall annually, between December 1 and December 15, provide a report and proof to the City or its designated representative agency of its compliance with the rental requirements set forth in this Subsection for the prior twelve-month period. Said report shall contain, at a minimum: 
1.  The number of deed-restricted units rented pursuant to this Subsection; 
2.  The period each unit was rented and the status by which the were occupant(s) qualified under the deed restriction; 
3.  The monthly rental price; and 
4.  The taxes, special assessments, and homeowners' association and management fees, and any other fees or charges, including common utilities, assessed to each unit. 
(c)  Housing Units Developed Under Prior Inclusionary Housing Program. All housing units developed under the provisions of the inclusionary housing program repealed by Ordinance 21, Series of 2017, shall remain subject to the terms and conditions of approval previously agreed upon, including the applicability of the Glenwood Springs Community Housing Guidelines as administered by the Garfield County Housing Authority. 
(d)  Repealer. Any ordinance or resolutions or parts thereof in conflict with Ordinance 21, Series of 2017, are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict only. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
ARTICLE 070.050 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

070.050.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to: 
(a)  Designate, preserve, protect, enhance, and perpetuate sites, structures, objects, districts, historic signage, and historic mural art that reflect outstanding elements of the City's historic, architectural, social, archaeological, artistic, economic, political, and cultural heritage; 
(b)  Promote civic pride of the past; 
(c)  Promote the use of outstanding historical or architectural sites, structures, objects and districts for the education, stimulation, pride, and welfare of the people of the City; 
(d)  Enhance or improve the historic and aesthetic vitality of sites, structures, objects and districts; 
(e)  Enhance the visual character of the City by encouraging new design and construction that complements the City's historic buildings, objects, sites and districts; 
(f)  Strengthen the City's economy by protecting and enhancing attractions for visitors; 
(g)  Conserve valuable material and energy resources through the ongoing use and maintenance of the existing built environment; 
(h)  Protect property values within the City by publically recognizing and appreciating historic properties, including those that are not landmarked; and 
(i)  Promote and encourage continued private ownership and utilization of such sites, structures, objects, and districts. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.050.020 - Designation of Local Landmarks and Historic Districts. 
(a)  Authorization. Pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Section, the City Council may: 
(1)  Designate as a landmark an individual structure or other feature or an integrated group of structures and features on a single lot or site having special historical or architectural value. 
(2)  Designate as an historic district an area containing a number of structures having special historical or architectural value. 
(b)  Procedures for Designating Local Landmarks and Historic Districts. 
(1)  Authority to Submit Application. A nomination for designation may be made by the Glenwood Springs Historic Preservation Commission ("GSHPC"), City Council, property owners, or any organization with a recognized interest in historic preservation. 
a.  Landmark nominations for a single property shall be accompanied by written consent of all record owners on a form provided by the Director. 
b.  District nominations shall include a petition supporting the nomination and signed by the owners of at least fifty (50) percent of the land area proposed to be included within the district. 
(2)  Application Content. The application shall be submitted to the Director on a form established by the Director. The applicant bears the burden of demonstrating compliance with application requirements. 
(3)  Application Submittal and Review Schedule. The Director shall establish a submittal and review schedule for landmark and historic district nomination applications and shall include that information in the Administrative Manual. The Director may amend the schedule to ensure effective and efficient review under this Code. 
(4)  Determination of Application Acceptance. 
a.  The Director shall determine whether an application is complete and, if the application is complete or incomplete within five (5) business days of submittal and provide written notification of such determination to the applicant. A complete application shall be processed according to the procedures in this Article. An incomplete application shall not be processed or reviewed. Any deficiencies noted by the Director shall be addressed by the applicant and the representative commissioner, when appropriate, prior to resubmitting the application. 
b.  The Director shall review the application with respect to: 
1.  Its relationship to this Code, goals and policies; the Comprehensive Plan of the City; and the landmark criteria set forth in this Article; and 
2.  The effect of the designation upon the surrounding neighborhood. 
c.  The Director shall prepare a written staff report. The staff report shall state whether the application complies with Code requirements and shall include a recommendation to the GSHPC. 
d.  The Director shall submit a copy of the staff report to the applicant, the GSHPC, and the commissioner who aided in the application, if appropriate, and shall make the staff report and related materials available for public review according to the following timeframes: 
1.  For hearings before the GSHPC, the staff report shall be distributed no later than the Friday prior to the scheduled GSHPC hearing where the application is to be heard. 
2.  For hearings before the City Council, the staff report shall be distributed no later than nine (9) days prior to the scheduled City Council hearing where the application is to be heard. 
(5)  GSHPC Public Hearing. 
a.  Scheduling. The Director shall schedule a public hearing for either a regularly scheduled or special meeting of the GSHPC. Notice of the time, date, place, and subject matter of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(f), Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. 
b.  Action. The GSHPC shall review the application for conformance with the established criteria for designation pursuant to 070.050.020(f), Criteria for Designation, and shall take one (1) of the following actions: 
1.  Recommend that the City Council approve the application for a landmark or historic district designation; or 
2.  Recommend that City Council deny the application for a landmark or historic district designation; or 
3.  Continue the hearing to a future GSHPC meeting with a request for additional information necessary to make a decision to approve or deny. 
(6)  City Council Procedures. 
a.  Notice of Public Hearing. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the landmark application. Notice of the time, date, place, and subject matter of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(f), Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. 
b.  Review and Decision. The City Council shall review the landmark application for conformance with the established criteria set forth in this Article and and shall affirm, reverse, or amend the GSHPC recommendation. 
c.  Notification. When a landmark or historic district has been designated by the City Council, the Community Development Department shall: 
1.  Provide the owner of each property so designated written notification of such decision by the GSHPC and City Council outlining the reasons for such designation, the obligations and restrictions created by such designation and the procedures for appeal. The letter shall also contain a requirement that the owner and his/her successors or assigns notify the GSHPC prior to: 
i.  Preparation of plans for the reconstruction or alteration of the exterior of improvements located on such property; or 
ii.  Preparation of plans for the construction, relocation, or demolition of exterior improvements on such property. 
2.  Record an ordinance designating the property as a landmark or historic district and listing the individual properties included therein. The ordinance shall include a description of the characteristics of the landmark or historic district which justify its designation, a description of the particular features that should be preserved, and a legal description of the property or boundaries of the district. 
(7)  Appeal. A party aggrieved or adversely affected by any decision by the City Council may seek review of the decision in the courts in accordance with state law. 
(c)  Revocation of Landmark Designation. 
(1)  If a designated landmark has been lawfully removed or demolished, the owner may apply to the GSHPC for a revocation of the respective landmark designation. The revocation application shall be reviewed under the same procedures described hereinabove. 
(2)  The revocation of a landmark designation may be approved if there is a determination that, without the demolished building or feature, the site as a whole no longer meets the criteria for designation. The GSHPC shall make a recommendation to the City Council to approve or deny the revocation of the landmark designation. Upon the City Council's decision to revoke a designation, an ordinance that includes the legal description of the affected property and stating reasons for the revocation shall be adopted and duly recorded pursuant to the Charter. 
(d)  Amendment of Designation. Designation of a landmark or historic district may be amended to add features or property to the site or district under the procedures set forth in Subsection 070.050.020, Designation of Local Landmarks and Historic Districts. 
(e)  Limitation on Resubmission and Reconsideration of Proposed Designation. When the City Council denies a historic district or landmark site designation application, no person shall submit an application that is the same or substantially the same for at least six (6) months from the date of the final action on the original proposal. 
(f)  Criteria for Designation. Properties eligible for designation must be at least fifty (50) years old and possess both significance and physical integrity. 
(1)  Significance. Sites, buildings, objects, or properties eligible for local landmark or historic district designation must possess significance in at least one (1) of the following categories: 
a.  Historical Significance. The site, building, object, or property: 
1.  Has character, interest and integrity and reflects the heritage and cultural development of the City, state, or nation; 
2.  Is associated with an important historical event; or 
3.  Is associated with an important individual or group who contributed in a significant way to the political, social, and/or cultural life of the community. 
b.  Architectural Significance. The building, object, or property: 
1.  Embodies distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction; 
2.  Represents the work of a craftsman or architect whose work is distinguishable from others by its characteristic style and quality; 
3.  Possesses high artistic values or design concepts; or 
4.  Represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction. 
c.  Informational Significance. The site, building, object, or property has yielded, or may be likely to yield information important in history or prehistory. 
(2)  Integrity. A property that is eligible for designation must retain physical qualities that date from the period when the property attained its significance. Integrity is based on the degree to which a property retains all or some of seven (7) qualities associated with location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association. All seven (7) qualities need not be present for a property to be eligible as long as the overall sense of past time and place are evident. For archaeological sites, integrity is determined based on the degree to which remaining evidence can provide important information. 
a.  Location. The place where the historic property was constructed or the place where the historic event occurred. 
b.  Design. The combination of elements that create the form, plan, space, structure, and style of a property. 
c.  Setting. The character of the place in which the property is located. Setting refers to the historic property's relationship to surrounding buildings, features, and open space. 
d.  Materials. The physical elements that were combined or deposited during a particular period of time and in a particular pattern or configuration to form a historic property. 
e.  Workmanship. The physical evidence of the crafts of a particular culture or people during any given period in history or prehistory. 
f.  Feeling. A property's expression of the aesthetic or historic sense of a particular period of time. 
g.  Association. The direct link between an important historic event or person and a historic property. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.050.030 - Historic Sites and Districts Inventory. 
(a)  Inventory of Designated Landmark Sites and Districts and Pending Designations. The Community Development Department shall maintain a current record of all designated landmark sites and historic districts and any pending designations. 
(b)  Interim Control Under Pending Designations. No person shall receive a building permit to construct, alter, remove, or demolish any building or object proposed for landmark designation or contributing building or object within a proposed historic district after an application has been filed to initiate the designation of such landmark or district. No such building permit shall be approved while proceedings are pending on such designation, such period time not to exceed sixty (60) days. Penalties for violations of this Section shall be as set forth in Subsection 070.010.080, Enforcement. 
(c)  Structures of Merit. The GSHPC may approve a list of structures of historical or architectural merit that have not been designated as landmarks and are not situated in designated historic districts, but that may be considered for future designation. The GSHPC may add to this list from time to time in order to recognize and encourage the protection, enhancement, and use of such structures. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose any regulations or controls upon, or to provide incentives or awards to, structures of merit solely because they are included on the list. 
(d)  Recognition of Landmarks and Structures of Merit. The GSHPC may recommend, with City Council approval, such steps as it deems desirable to recognize the merit of and to encourage the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of, any listed structure or of any designated landmark or any structure in a designated historic district by, without limitation, issuing certificates of recognition and authorizing plaques to be affixed to the exteriors of such structures. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.050.040 - Landmark Alteration Certificate. 
(a)  Landmark Alteration Certificate Required. Owners intending to reconstruct, improve, demolish, or in any way significantly alter or change the exterior appearance or the exterior characteristics of improvements on real property that is designated as a landmark or proposed landmark, or in a designated or proposed historic district, shall first obtain a landmark alteration certificate for the proposed work under this Section, as well as any other permits required by this Article or the Code. 
(b)  Pre-Application Conference. 
(1)  Purpose. The pre-application conference is intended to provide an opportunity for the owner or applicant to meet with City staff to review applicable submittal requirements, review procedures, and to identify any issues associated with the proposed alteration. 
(2)  Procedure. Pre-application conferences shall follow the following procedures: 
a.  Request. The applicant shall submit a request for a pre-application conference to the Director. 
b.  Scheduling. The Director shall schedule the pre-application conference and notify appropriate staff and the applicant of the time and location of the conference. 
c.  Required Information. At least five (5) days prior to the scheduled pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit: 
1.  A completed planning application; 
2.  Proof of ownership; 
3.  A written description of the proposed project; and 
4.  Conceptual drawings showing the location, layout, and primary elements of the proposal. 
(c)  Application Submittal and Handling. 
(1)  Application for an alteration certificate shall be made by the property owners(s), or with the written consent of the property owner(s) on such form as established by the Director. The applicant bears the burden of demonstrating compliance with application requirements. 
(2)  The Director shall establish a submittal and review schedule for landmark alteration certificates and shall include that information in the Administrative Manual. The Director may amend the schedule to ensure effective and efficient review under this Code. 
(3)  The Director shall determine whether the application is complete or incomplete within five (5) business days of submittal and provide written notification of such determination to the applicant. A complete application shall be processed according to the procedures in this Article. An incomplete application shall not be processed or reviewed. Any deficiencies noted by the Director shall be addressed by the applicant prior to resubmitting the application. 
(d)  Staff Review and Action. The Director shall distribute the complete application to appropriate staff and a subcommittee of the GSHPC consisting of two (2) rotating regular members. Within ten (10) business days after a complete application is filed, staff and the GSHPC subcommittee shall determine whether the proposed work would have a significant impact upon or be potentially detrimental to the landmark or historic district pursuant to the review criteria in Subsection 070.050.040(f), Criteria for Review of a Landmark Alteration Certificate. 
(1)  No Significant Impact. If it is determined that there would be no significant impact or potential detriment, a landmark alteration certificate shall be issued to the applicant and the GSHPC shall be notified of such issuance. 
(2)  GSHPC Referral. If either the staff member or one (1) of the GSHPC's subcommittee members determines that the proposed work would create a significant impact or potential detriment, the application shall be referred to the GSHPC as set forth in Subsection 070.050.040(e), Landmark Alteration Certificate Public Hearing. 
(e)  Landmark Alteration Certificate Public Hearing. The GSHPC shall hold a public hearing to review landmark alteration certificates referred by the GSHPC subcommittee within forty-five (45) days after the completed application is filed. Notice of the time, date, place, and subject matter of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(f), Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The GSHPC shall take one (1) of the following actions at the meeting: 
(1)  Grant the landmark alteration certificate upon a determination that the application meets the established criteria set forth in this Section and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings as set forth in Subsection 070.050.060(d), Adoption of Secretary of the Interior's Standards. 
(2)  Deny the landmark alteration certificate upon a determination that the application does not meet the established criteria set forth in this Section and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings as set forth in Subsection 070.050.060(d), Adoption of Secretary of the Interior's Standards. 
(3)  Continue the hearing to a future GSHPC meeting with a request for additional information necessary to made a decision. 
(f)  Criteria for Review of a Landmark Alteration Certificate. 
(1)  The GSHPC may approve proposed exterior alterations to any landmark or contributing building within a designated historic district upon finding that the proposed alterations would not detrimentally alter, destroy, or adversely affect any significant architectural or landscape feature that contributes to the landmark designation. The GSHPC must find that the proposed alterations are visually compatible with the designated landmark in terms of design, finish, material, scale, mass, and height. When the alteration is to a contributing building in a designated historic district, the GSHPC must also find that the alterations are visually compatible with adjacent contributing properties. 
(2)  The GSHPC shall use the following criteria to determine compatibility: 
a.  The effect upon the general historical and architectural character of the landmark or the landmark district. 
b.  The architectural style, arrangement, texture, and material of existing and proposed improvements and their relation and compatibility to the landmark or the sites, structures, and objects in the landmark district. 
c.  The effect of the proposed work in creating, changing, or destroying the exterior characteristics of the site, structure, or object upon which such work is done. 
d.  The effect of the proposed work upon the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of the landmark or landmark district. 
e.  The extent to which the proposed work meets the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings as set forth in Subsection 070.050.060(d), Adoption of Secretary of the Interior's Standards. 
(g)  Criteria for Reviewing Structure Relocation. In addition to the alterations criteria in Subsection 070.050.040(f) above, the GSHPC shall use the following criteria when considering landmark alteration certificate applications for relocating a landmark or a contributing building or object within a historic district: 
(1)  Documentation showing that the landmark cannot be rehabilitated or reused on its original site for any reasonable beneficial use of the property and relocation is necessary to preserve its character and integrity. 
(2)  The contribution the landmark makes to its present setting. 
(3)  A structural report submitted by a Colorado-licensed structural engineer that adequately demonstrates that the landmark can be moved without significant physical damage. 
(4)  The degree to which orientation, setting, and general environment of the new location are comparable to those of the historic location and are compatible with the landmark's significance. 
(5)  The landmark is the last surviving property most importantly associated with a particular historic event or an important aspect of a historic person's life and where relocation is necessary to preserve the landmark. The phrase "most importantly associated" means that it must be the single surviving property that is most closely associated with the event or with the part of the person's life for which he or she is significant. 
(6)  The degree to which the landmark's design values or historical associations are directly dependent on its location where any move will cause the property to lose its integrity and prevent it from conveying its significance. 
(7)  The landmark is an object that was designed to move or is a property that was frequently moved during its historic use and the new location is a historically-appropriate setting whereby the landmark retains its integrity of setting, design, feeling, and association. Such properties include automobiles, railroad cars, and engines. 
(8)  The moved landmark is not a portion or fragment of a larger resource. Moving only a portion of a landmarked building or object permanently alters integrity of design, setting, materials, workmanship, and location. 
(h)  Criteria for Reviewing Structure Demolition. 
(1)  Review Criteria for Total Demolition. Applicants requesting a landmark alteration certificate for total demolition must provide data to clearly demonstrate that the situation meets the following four (4) criteria: 
a.  The building is structurally unsound. 
b.  The building cannot be rehabilitated or reused on site to provide for any reasonable beneficial use of the property. 
c.  The building cannot be practically moved to another site in the City. 
d.  The applicant demonstrates that the proposal mitigates to the greatest extent practicable the following: 
1.  Any impacts that occur to the visual character of the neighborhood where demolition is proposed to occur; and 
2.  Any impact to the historical or architectural significance importance of other buildings located on the property and to adjacent landmarks or contributing buildings within an historic district. 
e.  In the case of archaeological sites, consideration will be given to whether information can be recovered as part of the demolition. 
(2)  Review Criteria for Partial Demolition. In addition to the alterations criteria in Subsection 070.050.040(f) above, the GSHPC shall use the following criteria when considering alteration certificates for partial demolitions of landmarks or contributing buildings within a designated historic district. 
a.  The partial demolition is required for the renovation, restoration, or rehabilitation of the landmark; and 
b.  The applicant has mitigated, to the greatest extent possible, impacts to the historical or architectural significance of other landmarks on the property; and 
c.  The partial demolition would not destroy the architectural or historical integrity of the landmark such that the property would no longer qualify as a landmark or contributing building in an historic district. 
(i)  Denial of Landmark Alteration Certificate. 
(1)  A denial of a landmark alteration certificate shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for the denial and the procedures for appeal to the City Council. The GSHPC may make recommendations to the applicant concerning changes to the proposal. The applicant may resubmit an amended application, reapply for a building or demolition permit that takes into consideration the recommendations of the GSHPC, or appeal said denial to the City Council. 
(2)  If an application for a landmark alteration certificate is denied, no person may submit a subsequent application for the same construction, alteration, removal, or demolition within six (6) months from the date of the final action upon the earlier application. 
(j)  Issuance of Landmark Alteration Certificate. The Director shall issue a landmark alteration certificate if an application has been approved by the GSHPC subcommittee, GSHPC, or City Council. 
(1)  Time Limit. Upon approval an application for a landmark alteration certificate, the applicant shall apply for a building permit conforming to the certificate within one hundred eighty (180) days thereafter, as applicable. 
(2)  Record of Demolished and Moved Properties. Prior to the issuance of a permit for demolition, moving, or removal, the City may require the applicant to provide information about the building, including current photographs. 
(k)  Exemptions from Landmark Alterations Certificate. If a request for a landmark alteration certificate does not conform to the applicable criteria, an applicant may request an exemption from the certificate requirements from the GSHPC. If a request for a landmark alteration certificate does not conform to the applicable criteria, the applicant must submit adequate documentation and/or testimony to establish qualification for at least one (1) of the listed exemptions below. The data provided by the applicant must be substantiated by either professionals in an applicable field or by providing documentation of how the information was obtained. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to establish hardship. The GSHPC may request additional information from the applicant as necessary to make informed decisions. 
(1)  Economic Hardship Exemption. The following standards that describe factors, evidence, and testimony will be considered by the GSHPC: 
a.  The structural soundness of the landmark and its suitability for rehabilitation. 
b.  The economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing property in the case of a proposed demolition. 
c.  The current level of economic return on the property in relation to the following: 
1.  The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner of record or applicant, and the person from whom the property was purchased. 
2.  A substantial decrease in the fair market value of the property that would result in the event that the landmark alteration certificate was denied. 
3.  The fair market value of the property at the time the application was filed. 
4.  Real estate taxes for the previous three (3) years. 
5.  Annual gross and net income, if any, from the property for the previous three (3) years; itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous three (3) years; and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, for the previous three (3) years. 
6.  Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the property and annual debt service, if any, during the previous three (3) years. 
7.  All appraisals obtained within the previous three (3) years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing, or ownership of the property. 
8.  Any state or federal income tax returns on or relating to the property for the previous three (3) years. 
d.  The marketability of the property for sale or lease, considered in relation to any listing of the property for sale or lease, and the price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous two (2) years. This determination can include testimony and relevant documents regarding: 
1.  Any real estate broker or firm engaged to sell or lease the property; 
2.  Reasonableness of the price or rent sought by the applicant; and 
3.  Any advertisements placed for the sale or rent of the property by the owner or applicant. 
e.  The lack of feasibility of alternative uses that can earn a reasonable economic return for the property as considered in relation to the following: 
1.  A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any buildings/structures on the property and their suitability for rehabilitation. 
2.  At least three (3) estimates indicating the cost of the proposed construction, alteration, relocation, or demolition and estimates of any additional cost that would be incurred to comply with the recommendations of the GSHPC or City Council for changes necessary for the issuance of landmark alteration certificate. 
3.  Testimony from a Colorado-licensed engineer or architect with experience in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of existing building/structures on the property. 
f.  Studies and evaluations conducted at the applicant's expense that shall identify impact of economic incentives and/or funding available to the applicant through federal, state, City, or private programs in relation to a five-year pro forma of projected revenues and expenses of the reasonable uses or revenues that takes into consideration the utilization of incentives programs available. 
g.  Any community organizations, preservation groups, other associations and private citizens that wish to comment on a submission made under the financial hardship provision. 
h.  Conduct to be excluded from review. Demonstration of economic hardship by the owner shall not be based on conditions caused by or resulting from the following: 
1.  Willful or negligent acts by the owner; 
2.  Purchasing the property for substantially more than market value; 
3.  Failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs; 
4.  Failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants; or 
5.  Failure to prescribe a rental amount which is reasonable. 
(2)  Undue Hardship. An applicant requesting an exemption based on undue hardship must show that the application of the criteria creates a situation substantially inadequate to meet the applicant's needs because of specific health and/or safety issues. 
(3)  Inability to Use. One (1) year after denial of a demolition permit, if no feasible use or ownership is found for the structure, the owner may request a waiver of all or a part of the restraint of demolition. The GSHPC will include the following factors in its consideration of the request: 
a.  Documented evidence of applications and written correspondence, including written consultations, illustrating efforts made by the property owner to make necessary repairs, to find an appropriate user or to find a purchaser for the property; and 
b.  The adequacy of the property owner's efforts to locate available assistance for making the property functional without demolition. 
(l)  Appeals. Anyone aggrieved by any decision of the GSHPC may file an appeal pursuant to the procedures set forth in Subsection 070.060.070(c), Appeal of Administrative Decision. 
(m)  Unsafe or Dangerous Conditions Exempted. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent any measures of construction, alteration, removal or demolition necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition of any structure, feature or parts thereof when such condition is declared unsafe or dangerous by the Community Development Department or Fire Department and where the proposed measures have been declared necessary by the City Manager to correct the condition, as long as only such work that is absolutely necessary to correct the condition is performed. Any temporary measures may be taken without first obtaining a landmark alteration certificate under this Article, but a certificate is required for permanent alteration, removal, or demolition. 
(n)  Stop-Work Order. Whenever an action has been initiated for which a landmark alteration certificate is required but has not been approved or issued, the City shall make every reasonable effort to contact the property owner, lessee, and/or occupant to notify them of the application for landmark alteration certificate process. The Community Development Department may issue a stop-work order as necessary to halt an action that requires a landmark alteration certificate. The City may issue the stop-work order by written notice delivered by certified mail, or in person. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.050.050 - Property Maintenance Required. 
(a)  Prevent Deterioration. The City Council intends to preserve from deliberate or inadvertent neglect the exterior portions of designated landmarks and all interior portions thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration of any exterior portion. No owner of any landmark shall fail to prevent significant deterioration of the exterior of the structure or special feature beyond the condition of the structure on the effective date of the designating ordinance. 
(b)  Compliance with City Codes. No owner and/or lessee of any landmark or structure in an historic district shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of this Section and other ordinances of the City regulating property maintenance. 
(c)  Owner Notification. Before the City Attorney files a complaint in Municipal Court for failure to maintain the property on the landmark site or historic district, the City shall notify the property owner of the need to repair, maintain or restore the property, shall assist the owner in determining how to preserve the property, and shall give the owner forty-five (45) days in which to commence the tasks. In the event a building permit is required, work shall commence forty-five (45) days after issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.050.060 - Administration. 
(a)  Economic Incentives. Owners of properties that have been landmarked pursuant to Article 070.050 and that are used for residential purposes may receive a rebate on the City's general operating mill levy, not including fire bonds. The rebate will occur after the property owner presents to the City's Finance Director a receipt from the Garfield County Treasurer's office showing that the property taxes have been paid for the year the rebate is requested. 
(b)  Gifts, Grants and Funding. The GSHPC may, subject to appropriations by the City Council or other income, employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants, may apply for and accept grants, money gifts or gifts of services, and may hold or expend the same for all or any of the purposes of historic preservation in the City. A non-lapsing fund for gifts and grants shall be established by the City. Appropriations from the City Council shall be managed in accordance with City policies and shall lapse each year if unexpended. 
(c)  Limitations. This Article shall not repeal, annul or in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other ordinance, law, or regulation. Where this Article imposes a higher and/or stricter standard, the provisions of this Article shall prevail. The GSHPC shall not review permit applications for alterations to interior spaces, so long as the proposed work neither has an effect on the exterior appearance of the building nor compromises the structural integrity of the building. 
(d)  Adoption of Secretary of the Interior's Standards. The Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (36 CFR Part 67, as amended) shall be hereby adopted as it relates to the rehabilitation and alteration of landmarks and contributing buildings in an historic district. 
(1)  A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining exterior characteristics of the building, its site, and environment. 
(2)  The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided. 
(3)  Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken. 
(4)  Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved. 
(5)  Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved. 
(6)  Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial evidence. 
(7)  Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. 
(8)  Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken. 
(9)  New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment. 
(10)  New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
ARTICLE 070.060 - ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

070.060.010 - Purpose and Organization of this Article. 
(a)  The purpose of this Article is to provide consistent, equitable procedures for the review of development proposals and to ensure that proposed development will be in accordance with the purposes and standards of this Code. 
(b)  This Article describes the review and approval procedures for application for land use and development in the City, and is divided into the following sections: 
(1)  Section 070.060.030, Common Review Procedures, describes the standard procedures that apply to most development application types. 
(2)  Sections 070.060.040 through 070.060.070 contain specific information on each application type within four (4) categories (ordinance amendments, development permits, subdivision procedures, and flexibility and relief procedures), including approval criteria and any additions or modifications to the common review procedures. 
(3)  Section 070.060.080, Review and Decision-Making Bodies, describes the review and decision-making authorities, including the City Council, Planning Commission, Director, Development Review Committee (DRC), and other City officials. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.060.020 - Summary Table of Development Review Procedures. 
    Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures, lists the development applications authorized by this Code. For each type of application, the table indicates whether public notice is required, whether a pre-application conference is required, and the role of City review and decision-making bodies. 
Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures KEY: R= Review and Recommendation  D= Review and Decision  A= Appeal  ? = required Procedure Code 
Reference Notice Pre-App. 
Neigh. 
Meeting Pre- 
Application 
Conference Review and Decision-Making Bodies Published Written Posted Staff DRC Planning Comm. City 
Council ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS Rezoning 070.060.040(a) ? ? ? ? ? R R R D Rezoning to Planned Unit Development (PUD) 070.060.040(b) ? ? ? ? ? R R R D Code Amendment (Text) 070.060.040(c) ? R R R D Annexation 070.060.040(d) Per Colorado statutes DEVELOPMENT PERMITS Site/ Architectural Plan Review Admin. 070.060.050(a)(3) Note [1] ? D R A Minor 070.060.050(a)(4) ? ? ? ? R R D A Major 070.060.050(a)(5) ? ? ? ? ? R R R D Optional Master Plan 070.060.050(b) ? ? ? ? ? R R R D Construction Plans 070.060.050(c) D R [2] A Location and Extent 070.060.050(d) ? ? ? optional R R D Special Use Permit 070.060.050(e) ? ? ? ? R R D [4] A [4] ROW Encroachment License 070.060.050(f) ? optional D [2] R A D [3] Floodplain Development Permit 070.040.020(d) optional D A SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES Minor Subdivision 070.060.060(a) ? D R A Preliminary Plat 070.060.060(b) ? ? ? ? ? R R R D Final Plat 070.060.060(c) ? D R A Condominiumization 070.060.060(d) Procedure depends on number of condominium units. 
See Subsection 070.060.060(d). Vacation of ROW 070.060.060(e) ? ? ? ? R R R D FLEXIBILITY AND RELIEF PROCEDURES Variance 070.060.070(a) ? ? ? ? R R D Administrative Adjustment 070.060.070(b) optional Considered by decision-maker for associated application. Appeal 070.060.070(c) ? ? ? optional R According to previous rows in this table. Notes: 
[1] Administrative Site/Architectural Review involving five or more units is required to follow public noticing procedures in Subsection 070.060.030(f)(3). 
[2] Director has discretion to refer the application to the DRC. 
[3] Director has approval authority for non-permanent right-of-way encroachments. All others require Council approval. 
[4] Special Use Permits involving Medical Marijuana Business, Retail Marijuana Establishment, and Marijuana Cultivation uses require hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission has review and recommending authority and City Council has review and decision making authority.  
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019) 
070.060.030 - Common Review Procedures. 
(a)  General. This Section describes the standard procedures and rules applicable to all development applications unless otherwise stated in this Code. Common review procedures include six (6) steps, as shown below in Figure 060-1, not all of which are applicable to every development application. Application-specific procedures in Section 070.060.040 through 070.060.070 identify additional procedures and rules beyond those in this Section. 

Figure 060 1: Summary of Common Review Procedures
(b)  Pre-Application Conference. 
(1)  Purpose. The pre-application conference is intended to provide an opportunity for the applicant to meet with City staff and the Development Review Committee (DRC) to review applicable submittal requirements, review procedures, and to identify any issues associated with the proposed development concept. 
(2)  When Required. A pre-application conference is required according to Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures. 
(3)  Procedure. Pre-application conferences shall follow the following procedures: 
a.  Request. The applicant shall submit a request for a pre-application conference to the Director. 
b.  Scheduling. The Director shall schedule pre-application conferences and notify appropriate staff and the applicant of the time and location of the conference. 
c.  Required Information. At least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit the following materials at a minimum: 
1.  A draft of a complete application; 
2.  A written description of the proposed project; 
3.  Conceptual drawings showing the location, layout, and primary elements of the proposal; and 
4.  Proposed uses, location of uses, and densities proposed. 
d.  Conference Determinations. City staff attending the pre-application conference shall identify concerns or factors the applicant should consider related to the scope, features, and potential impacts of the project as they relate to this Code, adopted building or engineering standards, or other policies or regulations enforced by the City and/or other public entities. City staff shall also indicate to the extent possible whether additional approval procedures are required for the proposed project, such as a variance or administrative adjustment. 
(4)  Effect. Any information or discussions held at the pre-application conference shall not be binding on the City or the applicant. Discussions of potential conditions to mitigate impacts do not reflect actions by the decision-making body until and unless a decision-making body takes formal action to attach that condition to a development approval. 
(c)  Pre-Application Neighborhood Meeting. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the pre-application neighborhood meeting is to allow residents, businesses, and organizations in the area surrounding a proposed development project an early opportunity to learn about the project details and to provide feedback to the applicants before significant funds have been spent on project design and engineering. 
(2)  Applicability. A pre-application neighborhood meeting shall be required as indicated in Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures. 
(3)  Notification. Notification of the required pre-application neighborhood meeting shall be sent by mail or electronically to those registered neighborhood groups that have boundaries including the proposed project site, and to property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of project site, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting date. 
(4)  Meeting Specifics. 
a.  City staff may attend the meeting, but are not required to attend nor facilitate the meeting. 
b.  The applicant shall present information about the proposed land uses, dimensional standards, location of buildings, and overall site layout and design. Detailed engineering is not required. The material presented shall be adequate to describe the project features without the need for the applicant to have retained architects, engineers, or consultants. 
c.  The applicant shall only be required to hold one (1) meeting if required, but may agree to conduct additional meetings before or after filing an application. 
(5)  Summary Required with Application Submittal. Details of the meeting, including proof of notification, a meeting summary, and a list of meeting attendees, as well as copies of any exhibits used at the meeting shall be provided with the project application. 
(d)  Application Submittal and Handling. 
(1)  Authority to Submit Application. 
a.  Unless expressly stated otherwise in this Code, a development application shall be submitted by: 
1.  The owner, contract purchaser, or any other person having a recognized property interest in the land on which development is proposed; or 
2.  A person authorized to submit the application on behalf of the owner, contract purchaser, or other person having a recognized property interest in the land, as evidenced by a letter or document signed by the owner, contract purchaser, or other person. 
b.  If there are multiple owners, contract purchasers, or other persons authorized to submit the application, all such persons shall sign the application or a letter or document consenting to the application. 
c.  No application shall be submitted prior to attending a pre-application conference, if required per Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures. 
(2)  Application Content. The application shall be submitted to the Director on a form established by the Director. The applicant bears the burden of demonstrating compliance with application requirements. 
(3)  Application Fees. 
a.  Application fees shall be paid at the time of submittal according to the type of application on the development review fee schedule. The fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the City Council and reviewed on an annual basis. 
b.  In the event the Director determines that it is necessary to utilize the services of a consultant not on staff, the Director may impose additional fees associated with such outside consultant. 
(4)  Application Review Timeline. The Director shall establish a review timeline for development applications and shall include that information in the Administrative Manual. The Director may amend the timeline to ensure effective and efficient review under this Code. 
(5)  Determination of Application Completeness. The Director shall determine whether the application is complete or incomplete within five (5) business days of submittal and provide written notification of such determination to the applicant. A complete application shall be processed according to the procedures in this Article. An incomplete application shall not be processed or reviewed. Any deficiencies noted by the Director shall be addressed by the applicant prior to resubmitting the application. 
(6)  Abandoned Applications. If an application has not been resubmitted to address staff-noted deficiencies within six (6) months, such application shall be deemed abandoned. Abandoned applications shall require a new pre-application conference and may be subject to additional fees. 
(7)  Minor Application Revisions. An applicant may revise an application after receiving notice of compliance deficiencies following staff review according to Subsection 070.060.030(e), or on requesting and receiving permission from an advisory or decision-making body after that body has reviewed, but not yet taken action on, the application. Revisions shall be limited to changes that directly respond to specific requests or suggestions made by staff or the advisory or decision-making body, as long as they constitute only minor additions, deletions, or corrections and do not include significant substantive changes to the development proposed in the application, as determined by the Director. All other application revisions shall be processed as a new application. 
(8)  Application Withdrawal. 
a.  After an application has been accepted for review, the applicant may withdraw the application at any time by submitting a letter of withdrawal to the Director. 
b.  An applicant is not entitled to a refund of application fees for withdrawn applications. However, the Director may refund fees not expended during the first round of staff review if the application is withdrawn within ten (10) days of acceptance and prior to preparation or distribution of any official written comments. 
(e)  Staff Review and Action. 
(1)  Referral to Development Review Committee, Staff, and Review Agencies. The Director shall distribute the complete application to appropriate staff, the Development Review Committee (DRC), and appropriate review agencies per the Administrative Manual. 
(2)  Staff Review and Application Revisions. Staff and/or the DRC shall review the application and submit recommendations and comments to the applicant in a form established by the Director. The applicant shall attend a meeting with the appropriate staff as determined by the Director to discuss staff and/or DRC recommendations and comments. The application will not move forward for further review until the Director determines that the applicant has adequately responded to the City's recommendations and comments. 
(3)  Applications Subject to Staff Recommendation. 
a.  Staff Report. If an application is subject to staff review and recommendation to the Planning Commission and/or City Council per Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures, staff shall prepare a written staff report. The staff report shall state whether or not the application complies with requirements of this Code, the Municipal Code, and with applicable Engineering Standards, and shall include a recommendation for consideration by the appropriate decision-making body. 
b.  Distribution and Availability of Application and Staff Report. The Director shall submit a copy of the staff report to the applicant and the advisory and/or decision-making body, and shall make the staff report and related materials available for public review according to the following timeframes: 
1.  For hearings before the Planning Commission, the staff report shall be distributed no later than the Friday prior to the scheduled Planning Commission hearing where the application is to be heard. 
2.  For hearings before the City Council, the staff report shall be distributed prior to the scheduled City Council hearing where the application is to be heard. 
(4)  Applications Subject to Staff Decision. 
a.  Decision. 
1.  If an application is subject to staff review and a final decision by the Director, the Director shall make a decision based on the review standards applicable to the application type. The decision shall be in writing and shall clearly state reasons for a denial or for conditions of approval. 
2.  Finality of Decision. 
i.  For all application types except administrative site/architectural plans, the Director's decision is immediately final. 
ii.  For administrative site/architectural plans, the Director shall regularly make available to the Planning Commission a record of pending applications. The Commission may elect to call up such applications within ten (10) days of providing notice, pursuant to Subsection 070.060.050(a)(2)c., Referral and Call-Up Procedures. The Director shall decide such applications that are not called up following the end of the ten-day period. 
iii.  Within three (3) business days following any decision by the Director, the Director shall provide written notification of such decision to the Planning Commission and City Council. 
b.  Conditions of Approval. Any conditions of approval shall be limited to conditions necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Code and shall relate to the anticipated impacts of the proposed development. 
(f)  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. 
(1)  Scheduling. 
a.  If an application is subject to a public hearing per Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures, the Director shall schedule the public hearing for either a regularly scheduled meeting or special meeting of the appropriate decision-making body. 
b.  The public hearing shall be scheduled to allow sufficient time to prepare a staff report per Subsection 070.060.030(e)(3). 
(2)  Public Hearing Notice. 
a.  General Notice Requirements. All public hearings required by this Code shall be preceded by the notices identified in Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures. 
b.  Responsibility of Party Seeking Hearing. The applicant or other person seeking the public hearing shall be responsible for the accuracy of and proper publication, mailing, and posting of notice of the public hearing, and such persons shall bear all costs incurred in connection with giving notice of the public hearing. 
(3)  Notice Format and Content. 
a.  Published and Mailed Notice. 
1.  Required published or mailed notices shall: 
i.  Identify the application type; 
ii.  Describe the nature and scope of the proposed project; 
iii.  Identify the location subject to the application; 
iv.  Identify the date, time, and location of the hearing being noticed; 
v.  Identify where and when the application and associated materials may be inspected; and 
vi.  Indicate opportunity to appear at the public hearing. 
2.  Published notice shall appear twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The first notice shall appear at least ten (10) days but not more than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled hearing. The second notice shall appear exactly seven (7) days following publication of the first notice. 
3.  Mailed notices shall be sent via first class mail to all property owners as listed in the records of the Garfield County tax assessor's office within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property, as measured from property boundaries. 
b.  Posted Notice. 
1.  Required posted notice shall include at least one (1) sign on the subject property at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. Required sign(s) shall be provided by the City. The applicant shall be responsible for posting the required sign(s). The sign(s) shall be clearly visible from adjacent streets or public rights-of-way and shall remain on the property until after the hearing. 
2.  The Director may require additional signs based on access and configuration of the property. 
3.  Required posted notice shall: 
i.  Identify the application type; 
ii.  Describe the nature and scope of the proposed project; 
iii.  Identify the date, time, and location of the hearing being noticed; and 
iv.  Identify a telephone number for additional information. 
c.  Notice to Mineral Estate Owners and Lessees. The applicant shall provide notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all mineral owners and lessees on the subject property for development applications in accordance with C.R.S. § 24-65.5-103. Such notice shall be provided not less than thirty (30) days prior to the initial public hearing, or not less than thirty (30) days prior to the final decision if the application does not require a public hearing. The burden of determining mineral estate owners and lessees shall be on the applicant. 
d.  Certification of Notice. The applicant shall provide certification that proper notice has been provided, including photographic evidence (for posted notices) and a signed affidavit. The format of such certification shall be established by the Director. The applicant shall submit the certification to the Director prior to the scheduled public hearing. 
(4)  Constructive Notice. 
a.  Minor Defects in Notice Shall Not Invalidate Proceedings. Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice shall be limited to errors in a legal description or typographical or grammatical errors that do not impede communication of the notice to affected parties. In all cases, however, the requirements for the timing of the notice and for specifying the time, date, and place of a hearing shall be strictly construed. 
b.  Failure to Receive Notice Shall Not Invalidate Action. Failure of a party to receive written notice shall not invalidate subsequent action. If questions arise at the public hearing regarding the adequacy of notice, the decision-making body shall make a formal finding as to whether there was substantial compliance with the notice requirements of this Code. 
(g)  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
(1)  Hearing, Review, and Decision. 
a.  The application shall be subject to review, hearings, recommendations, and decisions as indicated in Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures. 
b.  If the application is subject to a public hearing, the applicable review body shall hold a public hearing on the application in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(h), Public Hearing Procedures, and Section 070.060.080, Review and Decision-Making Bodies. 
c.  The applicable review body shall consider the application, relevant support materials, staff report, and any evidence and public comments from the public hearing (if required). 
d.  The applicable review body shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based on the applicable approval criteria listed in the application-specific procedures. The body may also continue the hearing or refer the application to another authority as provided in Subsection 070.060.050(a)(2)c., Referral and Call-Up Procedures. 
e.  If the review involves a quasi-judicial hearing, the recommendation or decision (as applicable) shall be based only on the record of the public hearing; shall be in writing; shall include findings of fact based on competent, material, and substantial evidence presented at the hearing; shall reflect the determination of contested facts; and shall state how the findings support compliance with applicable review standards. 
f.  The applicable review body shall clearly state the factors considered in making its recommendation or decision, as well as the basis or rationale for the recommendation or decision. 
g.  Within three (3) business days following any decision by the Planning Commission, the Director shall provide written notification of such decision to the City Council. 
(2)  Conditions of Approval. 
a.  Where this Code authorizes a review body to approve or deny an application subject to applicable criteria, the review body may approve the application with conditions necessary to bring the proposed development into compliance with this Code or other regulations, or to mitigate the impacts of that development on surrounding properties and streets. 
b.  Conditions of approval shall be reasonably related to the anticipated impacts of the proposed use or development or shall be based upon standards duly adopted by the City. Such conditions may include those necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan, other adopted City plans, and this Code. No conditions of approval shall be less restrictive than the requirements of this Code, except where the Code expressly allows deviations. 
c.  Any condition of approval that requires an applicant to dedicate land or pay money to a public entity in an amount that is not calculated according to a formula applicable to a broad class of applicants shall be roughly proportional both in nature and extent to the anticipated impacts of the proposed development, as shown through an individualized determination of impacts. The City shall bear the burden of determining such impacts. 
d.  During its consideration, the decision-making body may consider alternative potential conditions, and no discussion of potential conditions shall be deemed an attempt or intent to impose any condition that would violate the federal or state constitutions, statutes, or regulations. Discussions of potential conditions to mitigate impacts do not reflect actions by the decision-making body unless and until the decision-making body takes formal action to attach that condition to a development approval. 
e.  City Council may modify conditions recommended by the Planning Commission prior to making a decision. 
f.  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, any representations of the applicant in submittal materials or during public hearings shall be binding as conditions of approval. 
(h)  Public Hearing Procedures. Public hearings required by this Code shall be conducted according to Section 070.060.080, Review and Decision-Making Bodies, the bylaws established by the respective bodies, and in compliance with state law. 
(i)  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. 
(1)  Notice of Decision. 
a.  Within ten (10) days after a final decision on an application, the Director shall provide written notification of the decision via personal delivery, electronic mail, or first-class mail to the applicant and shall make a copy of the decision available to the public in a conspicuous location such as the official meeting notice board in City Hall. 
b.  If the review involves a quasi-judicial hearing, the Director shall, within ten (10) days after a final decision on the application, also provide a written notification of the decision via personal delivery, electronic mail, or first-class mail to the owner(s) of the subject site, and any other person that submitted a written request for a copy of the decision before its effective date. 
(2)  Appeal. 
a.  A party aggrieved or adversely affected by any decision by the City Council may seek review of the decision in the courts in accordance with state law. 
b.  A party aggrieved by other final decisions may appeal the decision in accordance with the procedures in Subsection 070.060.070(c). 
(3)  Expiration of Approval. 
a.  An application approval shall be valid as authorization for the approved activity unless it expires in accordance with expiration time periods provided in this article. 
b.  A change in ownership of the land shall not affect the established expiration time period of an approval. 
c.  The Director may grant extensions of the expiration time period for up to one (1) year, following a written request that explains reasonable cause for such extension, prior to the expiration date. The Director shall determine whether or not there is reasonable cause for the requested extension. Further extensions shall be subject to the approval of the decision-making body for the original application. 
(4)  Modification or Amendment of Approval. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, any modification of an approved plan, permit, or condition of approval shall require a new application that is submitted and reviewed in accordance with the full procedure and fee requirements applicable to the particular type of the original application. 
(5)  Limitation on Subsequent Similar Applications. Following denial of an application, the decision-making body shall not decide on applications that are the same or substantially similar within one (1) year of the previous denial. This waiting period may be waived by the decision-making body provided that: 
a.  There is a substantial change to circumstances, or new information available, relevant to the issues or facts considered during the previous application review; or 
b.  The new application is materially different from the previous application. 
(j)  Vested Rights. 
(1)  Purpose. The vested rights procedure provides the mechanism for approval of vested real property rights pursuant to C.R.S. Tit. 24, Art. 68, as amended. Nothing in this Subsection is intended to create a vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of state law. 
(2)  Applicability. 
a.  Vested property rights may be obtained through approval of the following site-specific development plans: 
1.  Master Plan, Subsection 070.060.050(b); 
2.  Administrative Site/Architectural Plan, Subsection 070.060.050(a)(3); 
3.  Minor Site/Architectural Plan, Subsection 070.060.050(a)(4); 
4.  Major Site/Architectural Plan, Subsection 070.060.050(a)(5); 
5.  Planned Unit Development, Subsection 070.060.040(b); or 
6.  Final Plat, Subsection 070.060.060(c). 
b.  No other plan, plat, or similar document shall be considered a site-specific development plan. 
(3)  Vested Rights Procedure. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures of this Section 070.060.030 are noted below. 
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). The pre-application conference for the applicable site-specific development plan shall be held concurrently with the pre-application conference for vested rights. 
b.  Application Submittal and Handling. 
1.  A vested rights request shall be included with an application for the site-specific development plan, which application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(c). 
2.  If the applicant seeks approval of a site-specific development plan to create vested property rights, such plan shall include a statement that it is being submitted for designation as a site-specific development plan. Failure to include such statement shall result in no vested property rights being created by the approval of the site-specific development plan. 
c.  Staff Review and Action. 
1.  The Director and DRC shall review the vested rights application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). The recommendation for vested rights shall be incorporated into the staff report for the applicable site-specific development plan. 
2.  For applications decided by the Director, vested rights shall be included with the official decision per the applicable site-specific development plan procedure. 
d.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. If required, the applicable site-specific development plan application shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the Planning Commission and/or City Council and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). Hearings on vested rights may occur concurrently with the applicable site-specific development plan. 
e.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
1.  Planning Commission Review, Recommendation, and/or Decision. If required for a site-specific development plan, the Planning Commission shall review the site-specific development plan application and make a recommendation and/or decision in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g). If the Planning Commission is the deciding authority, the Planning commission shall make one (1) of the decisions according to the procedures for that site-specific development plan. 
2.  City Council Review and Decision. If required for a site-specific development plan, the City Council shall review the site-specific development plan application and make a decision in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g). The City Council shall make one (1) of the decisions according to the procedures for that site-specific development plan. 
f.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply with the following modifications: 
1.  Effect of Approval. 
i.  For the purpose of determining the date upon which a vested property right shall be deemed established, a site-specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the date of final action by the City according to the procedures set forth in this Article. 
ii.  Approval of a site-specific development plan shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other standards of this Code pertaining to the development and use of property adopted prior to the approval of a site-specific development plan. 
2.  Amendments to Site-Specific Development Plans. Any subsequent amendment to the site-specific development plan shall not extend or otherwise affect the duration of the vested property right unless the Planning Commission or City Council makes such a finding in its approval of the amendment. 
3.  Notice of Approval. Within fourteen (14) days after the approval of a site-specific development plan, the applicant shall publish in the City's official newspaper a notice describing the type and intensity of use approved and the specific parcels of property affected, and stating that a vested property right has been created according to state law. The applicant shall provide a copy of the notice to the Director. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019) 
070.060.040 - Ordinance Amendments. 
(a)  Rezoning. 
(1)  Purpose. 
a.  The purpose of the rezoning procedure is to make amendments to the Official Zoning Map of the City of Glenwood Springs to reflect changes in public policy, changed conditions, or to advance the welfare of the City. The zoning classification of any parcel in the City may be amended using this procedure. The purpose is neither to relieve particular hardships nor to confer special privileges or rights on any person. Rezonings should not be used when a special use permit, variance, or administrative adjustment could be used to achieve a similar result. 
b.  Changes to the characteristics of zoning districts (such as setback requirements) and development standards (such as parking requirements) shall be processed as Code amendments according to Subsection 070.060.040(c). 
(2)  Applicability. A rezoning may be approved by the City Council following review and recommendation by the Planning Commission. A rezoning to a Planned Unit Development is a distinct type of amendment to the Official Zoning Map and shall follow the procedures in Subsection 070.060.040(b). 
(3)  Rezoning Procedure. Figure 060-2 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Subsection 070.060.030 that apply to the review of rezonings. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-2: Summary of Rezoning Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Pre-Application Neighborhood Meeting. A pre-application neighborhood meeting shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(c). 
c.  Application Submittal and Handling. 
1.  The rezoning application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). The application shall include all required information as indicated in the Administrative Manual and any additional information requested during the pre-application conference. 
2.  In addition to the persons authorized to submit an application listed in Subsection 070.060.030(d)(1), the Planning Commission may initiate a rezoning application following discussion at any Planning Commission meeting. 
3.  When multiple parcels are proposed for rezoning, a separate application for each property shall be submitted unless the Director approves a consolidated application during the pre-application conference. 
d.  Staff Review and Action. The Director and DRC shall review the application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
e.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. 
1.  The rezoning application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
2.  For City-initiated rezonings, affected property owners shall be notified by first class mail of the intended zoning change and public hearing(s) at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing date. 
f.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
1.  Planning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall review the rezoning application and recommend approval or denial in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the criteria in Subsection 3., below. The Planning Commission may also continue the hearing to a regular Planning Commission meeting or a special hearing with a date certain with the requirement that the applicant submit changes or additional information necessary to determine compliance with the approval criteria. Additional continuances may only be granted in extraordinary situations. 
2.  City Council Review and Decision. The City Council shall review the rezoning application and act to approve or deny the rezoning in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the criteria in Paragraph 3. below. The City Council may also continue the hearing to a regular City Council meeting or special hearing scheduled for a date certain with the requirement that the applicant submit changes or additional information necessary to determine compliance with the approval criteria. Additional continuances may only be granted in extraordinary situations. 
3.  Rezoning Approval Criteria. 
i.  In reviewing a proposed rezoning, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider whether: 
a.  The rezoning is consistent with the City's comprehensive plan and the purpose of this Code; 
b.  The rezoning is consistent with the proposed purpose statement of the proposed zoning district; 
c.  Substantial changes in the subject area warrant a zoning change; and/or 
d.  The intensity of development in the new zoning district is not expected to create significantly adverse impacts to surrounding properties or the neighborhood. 
ii.  The approval criteria above shall not apply to legislative rezonings by the City Council. 
4.  Protest Procedure. 
i.  Any owner of property affected by a proposed rezoning may protest the rezoning pursuant to the statutory requirements of C.R.S. § 31-23-305. 
ii.  A protest against a rezoning shall be filed with the municipal clerk at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the City Council decision on the rezoning decision. 
iii.  A protest against a rezoning shall be signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area included in such proposed rezoning, or of the area of those lots within two hundred (200) feet of the property proposed for rezoning. 
iv.  In the case of a protest against a rezoning, approval shall require three-fourths (3/4) vote of the City Council for a rezoning to become effective. 
5.  Concurrent Review. An applicant may request a development permit or subdivision approval concurrent with a rezoning. 
g.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply with the following modifications: 
1.  Following approval of a rezoning by City Council, the Director shall prepare a revision to the Official Zoning Map. 
2.  Following approval of a rezoning, the Director shall record the amendment map and ordinance with the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder as soon as practicable. 
(b)  Rezoning to PUD. 
(1)  Purpose. The zoning classification of any parcel may be changed to a Planned Unit Development (PUD) pursuant to this Subsection. The purpose of a rezoning to a PUD is to achieve greater flexibility than allowed by the strict application of the Code while providing greater benefit to the City and to ensure efficient provision of services and utilities. The PUD procedure shall not be used when a special use permit, variance, administrative adjustment, or rezoning to an existing base zoning district could achieve a similar result. 
(2)  Applicability. An application to rezone to a PUD may be submitted for any contiguous area of two (2) acres or more within any combination of zoning districts. A PUD may be initiated by anyone owning at least fifty (50) percent of the land within the area affected by the proposed PUD. 
(3)  Rezoning to PUD Procedure. Figure 060-3 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of rezoning to PUDs. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-3: Summary of Rezoning to PUD Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). In addition, the applicant shall provide the following conceptual materials related to the proposed PUD to help determine whether or not a PUD is the appropriate procedure for the applicant and the City: 
1.  Proposed uses; 
2.  Number and type of dwelling or commercial units (as applicable); 
3.  Floor area of all buildings; 
4.  Floor area of each use for mixed-use buildings (if applicable); 
5.  Proposed parking capacity and configuration; and 
6.  General site planning layout and phasing. 
b.  Pre-Application Neighborhood Meeting. A pre-application neighborhood meeting shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(c). 
c.  Application Submittal and Handling. 
1.  The PUD application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(c). 
2.  An application for rezoning to a PUD shall include submittal requirements as specified by the Director, which shall include a PUD plan. Approval of the PUD plan is required prior to approval of a development permit in a PUD district. 
3.  Development permit applications may be submitted concurrently with a PUD application. 
i.  Concurrent Subdivision Review. A subdivision application submitted under Section 070.060.060 may be reviewed concurrently with an application for rezoning to PUD. A preliminary plat for a PUD shall only be approved following approval of the rezoning to PUD. 
ii.  Concurrent Vested Rights Review. A vested rights application submitted under Subsection 070.060.030(j) may be reviewed concurrently with an application for rezoning to PUD. Applicants seeking vested rights shall comply with the procedures under Subsection 070.060.030(j). 
d.  Staff Review and Action. The Director and DRC shall review the application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
e.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The rezoning to PUD application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council, and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
f.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
1.  Planning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall review the PUD application and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 3. below. 
2.  City Council Review and Decision. 
i.  The City Council shall review the PUD application and act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the PUD in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 3. below. The City Council may also remand the PUD application back to the Director or the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
ii.  If the City Council remands the application back to the Director or Planning Commission, additional public hearings may be required before final adoption. 
3.  PUD Approval Criteria. In reviewing a proposed PUD, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider whether and to what extent the proposed PUD: 
i.  Meets the approval criteria for rezonings, per Subsection 070.060.040(a)(3)f.3.; 
ii.  Addresses a unique situation, provides substantial benefit to the City, or incorporates innovative design, layout, or configuration resulting in quality over what could have been accomplished through strict application of a base zoning district or other standards of this Code; 
iii.  Meets all applicable standards of this Code not expressly modified by the PUD application; and 
iv.  If the PUD provides residential uses, includes varied types of housing and densities. 
4.  Approval of PUD Plan. The approved PUD zoning and the approved PUD plan along with all exhibits are inseparable, and a PUD shall not be established without the approval of the related PUD plan. 
g.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply with the following modifications: 
1.  Effect of Approval. The regulations in this Code remain applicable to all PUD development unless expressly modified by an approved PUD. 
2.  Expiration of a PUD. A PUD shall remain valid until a PUD is subsequently amended or rezoned to another zoning district in accordance with this Code. 
3.  Reconsideration after Three Years of No Development. If the applicant does not establish vested rights for a PUD pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(j), and no development has occurred on the site in three (3) years following the approval date of the PUD, the Director may initiate a public hearing process to consider whether the property shall be rezoned to its prior zoning classification or another zoning classification. 
4.  Recording Required. Following approval of a PUD, the applicant shall submit final copies of the PUD plans to the Director. The Director shall record the PUD and the zoning amendment map and ordinance with the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder as soon as practicable. 
5.  PUD Plan Amendments. 
i.  Except as provided below for minor amendments, an approved PUD Plan may only be amended by submitting an amended PUD plan pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(i)(4). 
ii.  Minor amendments to an approved PUD Plan may be approved by the Director if the proposed amendment complies with the following criteria: 
a.  The amendment shall not change the ratio of residential units to square feet of non-residential building square footage by more than ten (10) percent. 
b.  The number of residential units shall not be increased by more than ten (10) percent. 
c.  The gross square footage of non-residential building area shall not be increased by more than ten (10) percent. 
d.  The amendment shall not change the allowed uses listed in the approved PUD plan. 
e.  The number or location of vehicular access points shall not be changed in a way that negatively impacts public safety or the flow of traffic onto public streets. 
f.  The numeric standards in the PUD plan shall not be revised by more than would be allowed through the administrative adjustment procedure in Subsection 070.060.070(b). 
(c)  Code Amendment. 
(1)  Purpose. This Subsection describes the review and approval procedures for amending the text of this Code to respond to changed conditions or changes in public policy, or to advance the general welfare of the City. 
(2)  Applicability. An amendment to the text of this Code shall be initiated by the Director, the Planning Commission, or the City Council. 
(3)  Code Amendment Procedure. Figure 060-4 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of Code amendments. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-4: Summary of Code Amendment Procedure
a.  Application Submittal and Handling. An application for an amendment to the Code shall be prepared by the Director. If the amendment is initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council, the Director shall prepare the application at the request of the Planning Commission or City Council. 
b.  Staff Review and Action. The Director and the DRC shall review the application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
c.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The Code amendment application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council in accordance with 070.060.030(f), and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f)(3)a.1 and 2. 
d.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
1.  Planning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall review the Code amendment application and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the amendment in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 3. below. 
2.  City Council Review and Decision. 
i.  The City Council shall review the Code amendment application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the amendment in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 3. below. The City Council may also remand the Code amendment application back to the Director or the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
ii.  If the City Council remands the application back to the Director or Planning Commission, additional public hearings may be required before final adoption. 
3.  Code Amendment Approval Criteria. A Code amendment is a legislative decision by the City Council. Prior to recommending approval or approving a proposed Code amendment, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider whether and to what extent the proposed amendment: 
i.  Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and other City policies; 
ii.  Does not conflict with other provisions of this Code or other provisions in the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code; 
iii.  Is necessary to address a demonstrated community need; 
iv.  Is necessary to respond to substantial changes in conditions and/or policy; and 
v.  Is consistent with the general purpose and intent of this Code. 
e.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply with the following modifications: 
1.  Approval of a Code amendment authorizes the approved revision to the text only. A Code amendment shall not authorize specific development activity. 
2.  A Code amendment shall remain valid until the revised text of the Code is subsequently amended in accordance with this Subsection. 
(d)  Annexation. 
(1)  Purpose. This Section describes the procedure for annexing new land into the City. 
(2)  Applicability. This Section applies to all petitions to annex new land into the City. 
(3)  Annexation Procedure. 
a.  Annexation of land into the City shall comply with the procedures and other provisions of C.R.S. § 31-12-101 et seq. 
b.  The final annexation plan shall conform to applicable state statutes, shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and shall include all information required by the City to evaluate whether and to what extent the annexation impacts the City and the public health, safety, and welfare of the City. 
c.  Annexations may be considered concurrently with zoning and development permits; however, no development permit for land proposed for annexation into the City shall become effective until the related annexation is approved by the City Council. 
(4)  Annexation Policies. Annexation of land into the City is a legislative act of City Council. The City Council shall annually review its policy regarding annexation to inform the public of the City Council's willingness to consider potential annexations. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019) 
070.060.050 - Development Permits. 
(a)  Site/Architectural Plan Review. 
(1)  Purpose. This Subsection describes the process by which proposed development is reviewed for compliance with the development and design standards of this Code. The site/architectural plan review procedure ensures that potential impacts of development are considered before submittal of an application for construction plan approval (pursuant to the City of Glenwood Springs Engineering Standards) or issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  Applicability. 
a.  Exemptions. The following are exempt from the site/architectural plan review procedure, but are subject to the standards of this Code: 
1.  A change in use that does not involve or require other development (such as new or expanded buildings, additional parking, etc.); 
2.  Conversion of non-residential building area into up to five (5) dwelling units, or mixed-use building area into up to five (5) dwelling units, without changing the existing building footprint or increasing the building area; 
3.  Alteration, repairs, or additions to existing buildings that increase the gross floor area by less than twenty-five (25) percent; 
4.  Tenant improvements that do not increase gross floor area or building height, increase the density or intensity of use, or affect other development standards (such as parking or landscaping requirements); 
5.  Construction of a single-family detached or two-family dwelling, additions to such dwellings, and structures accessory to such dwellings; and 
6.  Construction or erection of accessory buildings, fences, hedges, or walls. 
b.  Thresholds for Site/Architectural Plan Review Type. 
1.  Table 060.2 describes the applicable site/architectural plan review type (administrative, minor, and major), unless exempted from the site/architectural plan review procedure under Paragraph a. above. 
2.  Residential thresholds are based on the new dwelling units added, not the total number of dwelling units (existing plus new). 
Table 060.2: Site/Architectural Plan Review Thresholds [1] Type of Development Administrative Site/Architectural Plan (Director) [2] Minor Site/Architectural Plan 
(Planning Commission) Major Site/Architectural Plan 
(City Council) Residential 1 to 8 new dwelling units 9 to 24 new dwelling units Any new development on site larger than 10 acres; 
25 or more new dwelling units Nonresidential Less than 10,000 square feet gross floor area At least 10,000 and no more than 30,000 square feet gross floor area Any new development on site larger than 10 acres; development of greater than 30,000 square feet gross floor area Mixed-Use 1 to 8 new dwelling units and less than 10,000 square feet nonresidential gross floor area 9 to 24 new dwelling units or at least 10,000 and no more than 30,000 square feet nonresidential gross floor area Any new development on site larger than 10 acres; 
25 or more new dwelling units or greater than 30,000 square feet nonresidential gross floor area Parking as a Principal Use, or Parking Structure Up to 25 vehicle spaces 26 or more spaces Parking structure Notes: 
[1] Notwithstanding the thresholds above, any development requiring dedication of land to the City shall be processed as a major site/architectural plan. 
[2] Administrative Site/Architectural Review involving five or more units is required to follow public noticing procedures in Subsection 070.060.030(f)(3).  
c.  Referral and Call-Up Procedures. 
1.  Administrative Site/Architectural Plans. 
i.  Director Referral to Planning Commission. 
a.  The Director may refer administrative site/architectural plans to the Planning Commission for a final decision. 
b.  After reviewing a referred administrative site/architectural plan, the Planning Commission shall vote to make a final decision or to refer the administrative site/architectural plan to the City Council for a final decision. 
ii.  Planning Commission Call-Up. 
a.  The Director shall regularly make available to the Planning Commission a record of pending applications for administrative site/architectural plans. 
b.  Plans to add three (3) or more new residential units may be called up by the Planning Commission for a final decision. If at least three (3) members of the Planning Commission request that the Planning Commission make the final decision on any such application within ten (10) days of receiving such notice, the Director shall inform the applicant of such decision. The Director shall schedule the application to be considered at the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting. 
c.  For plans that are called up by the Commission, the Director shall provide public notice for those proposing five (5) or more new residential units. 
2.  Minor Site/Architectural Plans. 
i.  Planning Commission Referral to City Council. The Planning Commission may refer minor site/architectural plans to the City Council for a final decision. The Director shall inform the applicant of such decision to refer the application and shall provide public notice and schedule the application to be considered at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. 
ii.  City Council Call-Up. The Director shall regularly make available to the City Council a record of pending applications for minor site/architectural plans. If at least three (3) members of the City Council request that the City Council make the final decision on any such application on or before the next regular Council meeting but not less than ten (10) days of the Director providing such notice, the Director shall inform the applicant of such decision. The Director shall provide public notice and schedule the application to be considered at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. 
d.  Concurrent Review. 
1.  Special Use Permit, Administrative Adjustment, or Subdivision Plat. An application for site/architectural plan approval may be submitted and reviewed concurrently with an application for a special use permit, administrative adjustment, or subdivision plat. In such a case, decisions can be made on the concurrent applications at the same public hearing provided that the appropriate approval body shall not decide the site/architectural plan approval application until after an official decision is made on the special use permit, administrative adjustment, or subdivision plat. 
2.  Construction Plans. 
i.  An application for administrative site/architectural plan approval may be submitted and reviewed concurrently with an application for construction plan review. In such a case, the Director shall review the construction plan application concurrently with the site/architectural plan application, but the Director shall not decide the construction plan approval until after the site/architectural plan decision is made by the appropriate approval body. 
ii.  The choice to submit construction plans concurrently with an associated administrative site/architectural plan is at the applicant's discretion, and the applicant shall be responsible for making any necessary changes to the construction plans based on the site/architectural plan approval. 
iii.  Reserved. 
3.  Vested Rights. If the applicant is seeking vested rights with an administrative, minor, or major site/architectural plan, such vested rights may be reviewed concurrently with an application for an administrative, minor, or major site/architectural plan. Applicants seeking vested rights shall comply with the procedures under Subsection 070.060.030(j). 
(3)  Administrative Site/Architectural Plan Review Procedure. Figure 060-5 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of administrative site/architectural plans. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-5: Summary of Administrative Site/Architectural Plan Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Application Submittal and Handling. The administrative site/architectural plan application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). Construction plan applications submitted concurrently with administrative site/architectural plans shall include the required materials per the City's Engineering Standards. 
c.  Staff Review and Action. 
1.  The Director shall review the administrative site/architectural plan application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the administrative site/architectural plan in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e) and the approval criteria in Subsection 070.060.050(a)(4). 
2.  Prior to making a decision, the Director may refer the application to the DRC pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(e)(1), Referral to Development Review Committee, Staff, and Review Agencies. 
3.  The Director may refer the application to the Planning Commission pursuant to Subsection 070.060.050(a)(2)c. 
d.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. 
1.  Filing of Site/Architectural Plan. An approved site/architectural plan shall be filed with the Community Development Department within sixty (60) days of its approval. 
2.  No Building Permit without Approval. No building permit shall be issued until the administrative site/architectural plan and associated construction plans have been approved pursuant to this Subsection. 
3.  Expiration of Approval. Unless vested rights are approved pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(j), administrative site/architectural plan approval shall expire if the authorized use or construction is not substantially underway within three (3) years after the date of the administrative site/architectural plan approval, or an extension is granted pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(i)(3). 
4.  Minor Changes Allowed. Development authorized by an administrative site/architectural plan approval may incorporate minor changes from the approved site/architectural plan without the need for a new application (as required by Subsection 070.060.030(i)(4), provided that the Director determines that the proposed changes: 
i.  Could be approved under the allowable administrative adjustments pursuant to Subsection 070.060.070(b), had they been requested with the original application; 
ii.  Comply with the standards of this Code; 
iii.  Are necessary to meet conditions of approval; and/or 
iv.  Would not significantly alter the function, form, intensity, character, demand on public facilities, or impact on adjacent properties as approved with the administrative site/architectural plan. 
(4)  Minor Site/Architectural Plan Review Procedure. Figure 060-6 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of minor site/architectural plans. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-6: Summary of Minor Site/Architectural Plan Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Application Submittal and Handling. The minor site/architectural plan application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). Construction plan applications submitted concurrently with minor site/architectural plans shall include the required materials per the City of Glenwood Springs Engineering Standards. 
c.  Staff Review and Action. The Director and DRC shall review the minor site/architectural plan application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
d.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The minor site/architectural plan application shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the Planning Commission, and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
e.  Planning Commission Review and Decisions. The Planning Commission shall review the minor site/architectural plan application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the minor site/architectural plan in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Subsection 070.060.050(a)(6). Alternatively, the Commission may refer the application to the City Council pursuant to Subsection 070.060.050(a)(2)c.2.i. 
f.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. 
1.  Filing of Site/Architectural Plan. An approved site/architectural plan shall be filed with the Community Development Department within sixty (60) days of its approval. Failure to meet the filing deadline shall require payment of an additional processing fee prior to issuance of certificates of occupancy pursuant to the Administrative Manual. 
2.  No Building Permit without Approval. No building permit shall be issued until the minor site/architectural plan and associated construction plans have been approved pursuant to this Section. 
3.  Expiration of Approval. Unless vested rights are approved pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(j), minor site/architectural plan approval shall expire if the authorized use or construction is not substantially underway within three (3) years after the date of the minor site/architectural plan approval, or an extension is granted pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(i)(3). 
4.  Minor Changes Allowed. Development application authorized by a minor site/architectural plan approval may incorporate minor changes from the approved site/architectural plan without the need for a new application (as required by Subsection 070.060.030(i)(4), provided that the Director determines that the proposed changes: 
i.  Could be approved under the allowable administrative adjustments pursuant to Subsection 070.060.070(b), had they been requested with the original application; 
ii.  Comply with the standards of this Code; 
iii.  Are necessary to meet conditions of approval; and/or 
iv.  Would not significantly alter the function, form, intensity, character, demand on public facilities, or impact on adjacent properties as approved with the minor site/architectural plan. 
(5)  Major Site/Architectural Plan Review Procedure. Figure 060-7 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of major site/architectural plans. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-7: Summary of Major Site/Architectural Plan Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Pre-Application Neighborhood Meeting. A pre-application neighborhood meeting shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(c). 
c.  Application Submittal and Handling. The major site/architectural plan application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). Construction plan applications submitted concurrently with major site/architectural plans shall include the required materials per the City's Engineering Standards. 
d.  Staff Review and Action. The Director and DRC shall review the major site/architectural plan application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
e.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The major site/architectural plan application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council, and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
f.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
1.  Planning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall review the major site/architectural plan application and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the major site/architectural plan in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Subsection 070.060.050(a)(6). The Planning Commission may also remand the application back to the Director for further consideration. 
2.  City Council Review and Decision. The City Council shall review the major site/architectural plan application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the major site/architectural plan in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Subsection 070.060.050(a)(6). 
g.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply with the following modifications: 
1.  Filing of Site/Architectural Plan. An approved site/architectural plan shall be filed with the Community Development Department within sixty (60) days of its approval. 
2.  No Building Permit without Approval. No building permit shall be issued until the major site/architectural plan and associated construction plans have been approved pursuant to this Section. 
3.  Expiration of Approval. Unless vested rights are approved pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(j), major site/architectural plan approval shall expire if the authorized use or construction is not substantially underway as determined by the Director within three (3) years after the date of the major site/architectural plan approval, or an extension is granted pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(i)(3). 
4.  Minor Changes Allowed. Development authorized by a major site/architectural plan approval may incorporate minor changes from the approved site/architectural plan without the need for a new application (as required by Subsection 070.060.030(i)(4), provided that the Director determines that the proposed changes: 
i.  Could be approved under the allowable administrative adjustments pursuant to Subsection 070.060.070(b), had they been requested with the original application; 
ii.  Comply with the standards of this Code; 
iii.  Are necessary to meet conditions of approval; and/or 
iv.  Would not significantly alter the function, form, intensity, character, demand on public facilities, or impact on adjacent properties as approved with the major site/architectural plan. 
(6)  Approval Criteria for All Site/Architectural Plan Types. In reviewing a proposed site/architectural plan application, the Director, Planning Commission, and/or City Council shall consider whether: 
a.  The site/architectural plan is consistent with the general purpose and intent of this Code; 
b.  The site/architectural plan is consistent with the dimensional, design, development, and all other standards of this Code; 
c.  The site/architectural plan is consistent with any previously approved plat, PUD, or any other precedent land use approval; and 
d.  The site/architectural plan is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and other adopted City policies and plans. 
(b)  Master Plan. 
(1)  Purpose. The master plan procedure provides a mechanism for review of large and/or complex development projects meeting the standards of this Code and not requiring a rezoning or PUD. The master plan procedure is optional, and provides the ability to obtain preliminary approval from City Council of a development concept (including circulation, open spaces, land uses, density and intensity, and project phasing) so that subsequent approvals may be considered administratively. 
(2)  Applicability. 
a.  General. Master Plan approval is not required. An applicant may submit an application for a master plan approval provided the application meets at least one (1) of the following: 
1.  The application site includes a contiguous area of at least five (5) acres; 
2.  The application site is located within the downtown, the hospital complex, or within a secondary center according to the Comprehensive Plan; 
3.  The application proposes development containing at least fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of nonresidential gross floor area; 
4.  The application proposes development containing at least one hundred (100) dwelling units; and/or 
5.  The application proposes to phase the development. 
b.  Concurrent Review. 
1.  Rezoning, Special Use Permit, or Subdivision Plat. A master plan application may be submitted and reviewed concurrently with an application for rezoning, special use permit, or any subdivision plat. 
2.  Vested Rights. If the applicant is seeking vested rights with a master plan, such vested rights may be reviewed concurrently with an application for a master plan. Applicants seeking vested rights shall comply with the procedures under Subsection 070.060.030(j). 
c.  Subsequent Site/Architectural Plan Review. Following approval of a master plan, any subsequent site/architectural plan review shall follow the administrative site/architectural plan procedures according to Subsection 070.060.050(a)(3), regardless of the size of the proposed development. 
(3)  Master Plan Procedure. Figure 060-8 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of master plans. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-8: Summary of Master Plan Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Pre-Application Neighborhood Meeting. A pre-application neighborhood meeting shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(c). 
c.  Application Submittal and Handling. The master plan application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). 
d.  Staff Review and Action. The Director and DRC shall review the master plan application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
e.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The master plan application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
f.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
1.  Planning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall review the master plan application and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the master plan in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 3. below. The Planning Commission may also remand the application back to the Director for further consideration. 
2.  City Council Review and Decision. The City Council shall review the master plan application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the master plan in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 3. below. 
3.  Approval Criteria. In reviewing a master plan application, the Planning Commission and the City Council shall determine whether and to what extent: 
i.  The master plan is consistent with the general purpose and intent of this Code; 
ii.  The proposed land uses, densities, and intensities are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and applicable zoning districts; 
iii.  The proposed development is consistent with the dimensional, design, development, and all other standards of this Code; and 
iv.  The proposed development provides adequate mitigation for anticipated adverse impacts to surrounding neighborhoods and the City. 
g.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply with the following modifications: 
1.  Effect of Approval. Master plan approval authorizes the subsequent submittal of site/architectural plan applications for all development consistent with the approved master plan through the administrative site/architectural plan procedures according to Subsection 070.060.050(a)(3). Master plan approval does not itself authorize specific development activity. If the Director determines, in the consideration of a site/architectural plan application pursuant to this Section, that such development is not consistent with the approved master plan, the shall process the application as a minor or major site/architectural plan, as applicable, based on the type of development proposed. 
2.  Expiration of Approval. Unless vested rights are approved pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(j), master plan approval shall automatically expire if no application for a site/architectural plan has been approved within three (3) years after the date of master plan approval or an extension is granted pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(i)(3). 
3.  Modifications to an Approved Master Plan. 
i.  Subsequent applications may propose development that differs from the approved master plan in minor ways, without first amending the master plan in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(i)(4), if the Director determines that the proposed development: 
a.  Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
b.  Complies with all applicable standards of this Code; 
c.  Complies with all applicable original conditions of approval; and 
d.  Would not result in significant change to the development's general function, form, intensity, character, demand on public facilities, and impact on adjacent properties. 
ii.  The following types of development constitute changes to an approved master plan and shall require approval in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(i)(4): 
a.  A change to an original condition of approval; 
b.  An increase in residential density or nonresidential floor area by more than twenty (20) percent; and 
c.  An increase greater than ten (10) percent in the amount of land devoted to nonresidential uses. 
(c)  Construction Plans. 
(1)  Purpose. The construction plans procedure provides a mechanism for the City to review and approve technical drawings associated with approved development applications and to ensure compliance with this Code and the City's Engineering Standards. 
(2)  Applicability. 
a.  General. Approval of construction plans pursuant to this Section is required for any type of development prior to issuance of a building permit, a grading or excavation permit, or a floodplain development permit. Approval of construction plans pursuant to this Section is also required for any application that includes infrastructure or utility improvements unless such improvements are guaranteed by a separate agreement with the City. 
b.  Concurrent Review. An application for construction plans approval may be submitted concurrently with an application for any site/architectural plan approval. 
(3)  Construction Plan Procedure. Figure 060-9 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of construction plans. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-9: Summary of Construction Plans Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Application Submittal and Handling. Construction plans shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). 
c.  Staff Review and Action. 
1.  Director Review and Decision. The Director shall review the construction plans in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e) and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the construction plan application according to the approval criteria below. 
2.  Construction Plans Approval Criteria. In reviewing and approving construction plans, the Director shall determine that: 
i.  Required infrastructure and utility improvements have been approved by the appropriate agency; 
ii.  The construction plans comply with all applicable standards in this Code; 
iii.  The construction plans comply with the City's Engineering Standards; 
iv.  The construction plans comply with other applicable City standards and policies; and 
v.  The construction plans comply with requirements and conditions of approval for any prior approvals. 
d.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply with the following modifications: 
1.  Effect of Approval. Construction plans approval authorizes the subsequent submittal of a building permit application or permit for other site-disturbance activities, such as a grading or excavation permit or a floodplain development permit. 
2.  Expiration of Approval. Construction plans approval shall automatically expire at the time an associated building permit application expires. Construction plans without an associated building permit application shall not expire. 
3.  Modifications to Approved Construction Plans. A minor modification to an approved construction plan may be approved by the Director, provided that the applicant demonstrates that the proposed modification: 
i.  Does not affect the overall development concept; 
ii.  Does not impede or prevent construction of infrastructure serving the development and/or a larger area; 
iii.  Will not result in substantially greater maintenance costs for the City; 
iv.  Is necessary to accommodate best management practices or to remedy construction difficulties; and 
v.  Is consistent with the approved associated site/architectural plan (if applicable). 
4.  Inspections. City staff may inspect sites authorized by construction plans to determine whether development activities are consistent with approved plans and whether any additional protection measures are necessary to mitigate adverse impacts. 
(d)  Location and Extent Review. 
(1)  Purpose. The location and extent review procedure provides the City an opportunity to review projects proposed by a public or quasi-public entity in relation to the applicable policies and goals of the Comprehensive Plan, and to inform any public or quasi-public entity of the City's reasonable expectations for land use and development. Location and extent review is mandated by state law, C.R.S. §§ 30-28-110 and 22-32-101 et seq. 
(2)  Applicability. A location and extent review is required when projects are proposed by publicly or privately owned utilities or political subdivisions of the state such as charter or public schools, transportation districts, or special districts when funding is provided by taxpayers and considered to be political subdivisions of the state. 
(3)  Location and Extent Procedure. Figure 060-10 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the location and extent review. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-10: Summary of Location and Extent Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. An optional pre-application conference may be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b) at the applicant's discretion. 
b.  Application Submittal and Handling. The location and extent application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). 
c.  Staff Review and Action. The Director and DRC shall review the location and extent application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
d.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The location and extent application shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the Planning Commission and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
e.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
1.  Planning Commission Review and Decision. The Planning Commission shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the location and extent application in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 3. below. The Planning Commission may also remand the application back to the Director for further consideration. 
2.  Board of Education Hearing at Planning Commission's Request. For proposed location and extent applications involving a public or charter school, the Planning Commission may request a public hearing before the Board of Education. 
3.  Location and Extent Approval Criteria. In reviewing a proposed location and extent application, the Planning Commission shall consider whether or not the proposed location and extent: 
i.  Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and other City plans and policies; 
ii.  Is consistent with the general purpose and intent of this Code; and 
iii.  Minimizes adverse impacts to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the surrounding areas and the City. 
f.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply, except that Development authorized by a location and extent approval may incorporate minor changes from the approved location and extent plan without the need for a new application (as required by Subsection 070.060.030(i)(4), provided that the Director determines that the proposed changes: 
1.  Could be approved under the allowable administrative adjustments pursuant to Subsection 070.060.070(b), had they been requested with the original application; 
2.  Are necessary to meet conditions of approval; and/or 
3.  Would not significantly alter the function, form, intensity, character, demand on public facilities, or impact on adjacent properties as approved with the location and extent. 
(e)  Special Use Permit. 
(1)  Purpose. The special use permit procedure provides a mechanism for the City to evaluate proposed development and land uses that have unique or widely varying operating characteristics or unusual features. This procedure is intended to ensure compatibility with surrounding areas and that adequate mitigation is provided for anticipated impacts. 
(2)  Applicability. A special use permit is required for certain land uses as specified in Table 030.1: Table of Allowed Uses. 
(3)  Special Use Permit Procedure. Figure 060-11 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of special use permits. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-11: Summary of Special Use Permit Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Application Submittal and Handling. The special use permit application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). 
c.  Staff Review and Action. The Director and DRC shall review the special use permit application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
d.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The special use permit application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning Commission and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
e.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
1.  Planning Commission Review and Decision. The Planning Commission shall review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the special use permit application in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 2. below. The Planning Commission may also remand the application back to the Director for further consideration. 
2.  Special Use Permit Approval Criteria. In reviewing a proposed special use permit application, the Planning Commission shall consider whether: 
i.  The use will be compatible with the surrounding area; 
ii.  The impacts of the use on surrounding areas have been adequately minimized; 
iii.  The use will be consistent with the general purpose and intent of this Code; 
iv.  The use will comply with all applicable standards of this Code; 
v.  The use is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and other City plans and policies; and 
vi.  The use minimizes adverse impacts to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the surrounding areas and the City. 
f.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply with the following modifications: 
1.  Expiration of a Special Use Permit. A special use permit shall expire if the authorized use or construction is not substantially underway within three (3) years after the date of special use permit approval, or an extension is granted pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(i)(3). 
2.  Expansion or Enlargement. Expansion or enlargement of a special use shall require a new application, unless the Director determines that: 
i.  The expansion or enlargement is not expected to increase potential negative impacts to surrounding property or the City; and 
ii.  The expansion or enlargement will not require adjustments to any standards greater than allowed through the administrative adjustment procedures in Subsection 070.060.070(b). 
3.  Transfer of Special Use Permit. Unless otherwise provided in the conditions of approval for a special use permit, a special use permit may be transferred to another person to operate the same use, in the same building(s), on the same property, and under the same terms of the permit. 
(f)  Right-of-Way Encroachment License. 
(1)  Purpose. The right-of-way encroachment license procedure provides a mechanism for the City to evaluate proposed encroachments of private property or structures into publicly owned rights-of-way, such as streets, sidewalks, and/or other City property. This procedure is intended to ensure that adequate mitigation is provided for anticipated impacts. 
(2)  Applicability. A right-of-way encroachment license is required for any private use or structure proposed to be located within the City's right-of-way or on other City property. 
a.  Administrative Review. Encroachments that are not permanent in nature; are located in the air space above the City's right-of-way; or are less than one (1) foot in projection, including awnings, landscaping, balconies, and sidewalk signs, shall be subject to administrative review by the Director. 
b.  City Council Review. Encroachments into the City's right-of-way not eligible for administrative review shall require City Council review. 
(3)  Right-of-Way Encroachment License Procedure. Figure 060-12 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Subsection 070.060.030 that apply to the review of right-of-way encroachment licenses. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-12: Summary of Right-of-Way Encroachment License Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. An optional pre-application conference may be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b) at the applicant's discretion. 
b.  Application Submittal and Handling. The right-of-way encroachment license application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). Additionally, the application shall be accompanied by a map or plat showing the location and dimensions of the encroachments, and any parcels of land affected by the proposed encroachment. 
c.  Staff Review and Action. 
1.  The Director and DRC shall review the right-of-way encroachment license application. 
2.  If the right-of-way encroachment is determined to require City Council approval, the Director shall prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
3.  If the right-of-way encroachment can be approved administratively, the Director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the right-of-way encroachment license based on the criteria in Subsection e.2. below. 
d.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. If required, the right-of-way encroachment license application shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the City Council, and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
e.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
1.  City Council Review and Decision. The City Council shall review the right-of-way encroachment license application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the right-of-way encroachment license in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 2. below. 
2.  Right-of-Way Encroachment License Approval Criteria. In reviewing the proposed right-of-way encroachment license, the Director and City Council shall consider whether or not the proposed encroachment: 
i.  Furthers the City's land use and utility goals and objectives; 
ii.  Could be reasonably accommodated on the applicant's own property and outside of the City's right-of-way; 
iii.  Compromises public safety, health, and welfare of the community; 
iv.  Compromises access to other public and/or private lands; and 
v.  Is necessary based on a hardship created by the applicant. 
f.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply with the following modifications: 
1.  No license to encroach may be assigned without the prior written consent of the approval body (City Council or the Director), together with an executed indemnity agreement that indemnifies the City from any and all damages to property or persons resulting from the encroachment. 
2.  Upon construction of an approved encroachment, the applicant shall provide the City with as-built drawings of all encroachment structures in the format specified by the Director. 
3.  For those encroachments that are reviewed and approved by City Council, the applicant shall obtain and provide the City with a copy of an umbrella liability policy covering the encroachment area and in limits of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Such policy shall be renewed by the applicant for the life of the encroachment, and a copy of each new policy shall be furnished to the City upon the anniversary date of the license to encroach. Failure to provide the policy as required shall automatically nullify the license to encroach without necessity of further notice and shall require the applicant's removal of the encroachment at the applicant's sole expense. Should the applicant fail to remove the encroachment within a reasonable time, the City may declare the encroachment a public nuisance, undertake removal, and attach a lien to the applicant's property for the costs of the removal. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019) 
070.060.060 - Subdivision Procedures. 
(a)  Minor Subdivision. 
(1)  Purpose. The minor subdivision procedure is used to evaluate proposed subdivisions that will create few lots or involve minimal adjustments to approved final plats. The minor subdivision procedure also provides an administrative process to correct plat errors and adjust property boundaries. 
(2)  Applicability. 
a.  The minor subdivision procedure shall apply to: 
1.  Properties within an approved preliminary plat; 
2.  Subdivisions creating three (3) or fewer lots or ten (10) or fewer condominium units within a single plat; and 
3.  Condominiumizations within an existing building that do not include land dedication. 
b.  The following are eligible to be processed as a minor subdivision, provided that Subparagraph a. is met: 
1.  Consolidation of two (2) or more lots into a single lot on a single previously recorded final plat; or 
2.  Boundary or lot line adjustments to an approved final plat; or 
3.  Correction of errors on an approved final plat. 
c.  Any subdivision requiring dedication of right-of-way, other public tracts, or public improvements to the City shall be submitted to the City Council for acceptance or denial of the dedication. 
(3)  Minor Subdivision Procedure. Figure 060-13 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of minor subdivisions. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-13: Summary of Minor Subdivision Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Application Submittal and Handling. The minor subdivision application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). 
c.  Staff Review and Action. 
1.  Review and Decision. The Director and DRC shall review the minor subdivision application and the Director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the minor subdivision based on the criteria below. 
2.  Minor Subdivision Approval Criteria. In reviewing a minor subdivision application, the Director shall consider whether the minor subdivision: 
i.  Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
ii.  Is consistent with the intent of the underlying zoning district; 
iii.  Complies with applicable dimensional, development, and design standards in this Code; 
iv.  Does not affect a recorded easement without approval from the easement holder; 
v.  Will not result in adverse impacts to surrounding property; and 
vi.  Will not limit the City's ability to effectively provide facilities or services. 
d.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply and the Director shall record the approved minor subdivision with the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder as soon as practicable. 
(b)  Preliminary Plat. 
(1)  Purpose. The preliminary plat procedure provides a mechanism for the City to review an overall plan for a proposed subdivision to ensure compliance with this Code, the Comprehensive Plan, and the adequate provision of facilities and services in the City. 
(2)  Applicability. A preliminary plat is required if the proposed subdivision: 
a.  Is on land that has not been platted; 
b.  Will produce four (4) or more lots; 
c.  Will include the dedication of public right-of-way, other public tracts, or public improvements not determined to be eligible for minor subdivision processing; or 
d.  Is not eligible to be processed as a minor subdivision, pursuant to Subsection 070.060.060(a)(3). 
(3)  Preliminary Plat Procedure. Figure 060-14 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of preliminary plats. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-14: Summary of Preliminary Plat Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Pre-Application Neighborhood Meeting. A pre-application neighborhood meeting shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(c). 
c.  Application Submittal and Handling. The preliminary plat application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). 
d.  Staff Review and Action. The Director and DRC shall review the preliminary plat application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
e.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The preliminary plat application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
f.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
1.  Planning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plat application and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the preliminary plat in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 4. below. The Planning Commission may also remand the application back to the Director for further consideration. 
2.  City Council Review and Decision. The City Council shall review the preliminary plat application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the preliminary plat in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 4. below. 
3.  Conditions of Approval. If the preliminary plat is approved with conditions, those conditions and the standards of this Code shall be met prior to approval of a final plat. 
4.  Preliminary Plat Approval Criteria. In reviewing a preliminary plat application, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider whether the preliminary plat: 
i.  Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
ii.  Will comply with the applicable zoning district standards; 
iii.  Will comply with the use, dimensional, design, and development standards in this Code; 
iv.  Provides a layout of lots, streets, blocks, driveways, utilities, drainage, and other public facilities and services designed to minimize the amount of disturbance to sensitive areas and/or community assets; 
v.  Provides evidence of public water and sewer system connections; 
vi.  Identifies and adequately mitigates known natural hazard areas; and 
vii.  If applicable, proposes reasonable project phasing in terms of infrastructure capacity. 
g.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply with the following modifications: 
1.  Expiration of Approval. Preliminary plat approval shall expire if a final plat has not been recorded within one (1) year after the date of the preliminary plat approval, or an extension is granted pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(i)(3). 
2.  Phased Final Platting. Whenever a preliminary plat is approved for development of the subdivision in phases, the City Council may provide the periods of time allowed for final plat approval of each phase of the development after the first. 
h.  Concurrent Review with Site/Architectural Plan. Preliminary plat applications may be submitted and reviewed concurrently with an application for a site/architectural plan pursuant to Subsection 070.060.050(a)(2)d. 
(c)  Final Plat. 
(1)  Purpose. The final plat procedure completes the subdivision process and ensures compliance with the approved preliminary plat and applicable standards in this Code. 
(2)  Applicability. The final plat procedure applies to all subdivisions in the City unless otherwise stated in this Code. 
(3)  Final Plat Procedure. Figure 060-15 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of final plats. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-15: Summary of Final Plat Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Concurrent Vested Rights Review. If the applicant is seeking vested rights with the final plat, such vested rights may be reviewed concurrently with an application for a final plat. Applicants seeking vested rights shall comply with the procedures under Subsection 070.060.030(j). 
c.  Application Submittal and Handling. The final plat application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d) with the following modifications: 
1.  Unless vested rights are approved pursuant to Subsection 070.060.030(j), the final plat application shall be submitted within three (3) years of preliminary plat approval. 
2.  The final plat may reflect the entire areas covered by a preliminary plat or any part thereof. 
d.  Staff Review and Action. 
1.  Director Review and Decision. The Director and DRC shall review the final plat application and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the final plat based on the criteria below. 
2.  Final Plat Approval Criteria. In reviewing a final plat application, the Director shall consider whether: 
i.  The final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, including any conditions of approval; 
ii.  The development will substantially comply with all requirements of this Code; and 
iii.  The development will comply with the applicable technical standards and specifications adopted by the City. 
e.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply and the Director shall record the approved final plat with the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder as soon as practicable following approval. 
(d)  Condominiumization. 
(1)  Purpose. The condominiumization procedure provides a mechanism to ensure that condominium subdivisions and conversions will comply with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
(2)  Applicability. 
a.  Condominiumization resulting in the creation of ten (10) or fewer condominium units shall follow the procedures for a minor subdivision pursuant to Subsection 070.060.060(a). 
b.  Condominiumization resulting in the creation of eleven (11) or more condominium units shall follow the procedures for a preliminary plat pursuant to Subsection 070.060.060(b)(3). 
c.  Any condominiumization requiring a dedication of right-of-way, other public tracts, or public improvements to the City shall be submitted to the City Council for acceptance or denial of the dedication. If the condominiumization application is processed as a minor subdivision, then the City Council shall only make a decision on the proposed dedication (s). 
(3)  Condominiumization of Existing Structure. When reviewing a proposal to condominiumize an existing structure, the Director, Planning Commission, and/or City Council may require the subject property to come into compliance with this Code and ordinances as necessary to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(e)  Vacation of Right-of-Way. 
(1)  Purpose. The vacation of right-of-way procedure provides a mechanism for vacating rights, interests, or title of the City in and to any right-of-way located in the City. 
(2)  Applicability. 
a.  The vacation of right-of-way procedure applies to any request to vacate rights, interest, or title of right-of-way within the City. Title to vacated roadways shall be in accordance with Colorado law. 
b.  For the purpose of the vacation of right-of-way procedures contained in paragraph (e), utility easements shall not be considered rights-of-way. 
(3)  Vacation of Right-of-Way Procedure. Figure 060-16 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of vacations of right-of-way. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-16: Summary of Vacation of Right-of-Way Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Application Submittal and Handling. The vacation of right-of-way application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). Additionally, the application shall be accompanied by a map or plat showing the location and dimensions of the areas to be vacated, any parcels of land affected by the proposed vacation, and a legal description for the proposed vacation. 
c.  Staff Review and Action. The Director and DRC shall review the vacation of right-of-way application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
d.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The vacation of right-of-way application shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council, and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
e.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission and/or City Council). 
1.  Planning Commission Review and Recommendation. The Planning Commission shall review the vacation of right-of-way application and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the vacation of right-of-way in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 3. below. The Planning Commission may also remand the application back to the Director for further consideration. 
2.  City Council Review and Decision. The City Council shall review the vacation of right-of-way application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the vacation of right-of-way in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the approval criteria in Paragraph 3. below. 
3.  Vacation of Right-of-Way Approval Criteria. In reviewing the proposed vacation of right-of-way, the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the following: 
i.  The vacation of right-of-way is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
ii.  The vacation of right-of-way will comply with the applicable zoning districts standards; 
iii.  The vacation of right-of-way will comply with use, dimensional, design, and other development standards in this Code; 
iv.  The right-of-way has never been formally opened or used as a City street, has never been used for park or governmental purposes, or has been abandoned and removed; 
v.  All portions of the right-of-way to be vacated are within the City; 
vi.  None of the right-of-way to be vacated constitutes a boundary line between two (2) counties or the boundary of the City; and 
vii.  No land adjoining the right-of-way to be vacated shall be left, as a result of the vacation, without an established public road connecting to another established public road. 
f.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply and the Director shall record the approved vacation of right-of-way with the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder as soon as practicable following approval. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018; Ord. No. 3-2019 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-31-2019) 
070.060.070 - Flexibility and Relief Procedures. 
(a)  Variance. 
(1)  Purpose. The variance procedure is intended to provide limited relief from the requirements of this Code where strict application of the Code would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship preventing the use of the land as otherwise allowed by the Code. The variance procedure is not intended to allow a use in a zoning district where it is not currently permitted, or to alleviate inconveniences or financial burdens imposed on landowners. 
(2)  Applicability. Any property owner seeking relief from this Code may request a variance when the strict application of the Code would result in an undue hardship. The following two (2) options are available for seeking a variance: 
a.  Concurrent Variance Application. An applicant may request a variance concurrently with an associated development permit application by submitting a request for variance as part of the overall application package. 
b.  Independent Request for Variance. An applicant may request a variance independent of any other development application through the process in Subsection 070.060.070(a)(3) below. 
(3)  Variance Procedure. Figure 060-17 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of variances made independently from an associated development application. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060 17: Summary of Variance Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b). 
b.  Application Submittal and Handling. The variance application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d). 
c.  Staff Review and Action. The Director and DRC shall review the variance application and prepare a staff report and recommendation in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e). 
d.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The variance application shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the Planning Commission and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
e.  Planning Commission Review and Decision. 
1.  Review and Decision. 
i.  The Planning Commission shall review the variance application and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the variance in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(g) and the criteria in Paragraph 2. below. The Planning Commission may also remand the application back to the Director for further consideration. 
ii.  The Planning Commission's decision shall be based only on the record of the public hearing and shall be reduced to writing, include findings of fact based on competent, material, and substantial evidence presented at the hearing, reflect the determination of contested facts, and state how the findings support compliance with applicable review standards. 
iii.  The Planning Commission shall clearly state the factors considered in making its decision, as well as the basis or rationale for the decision. 
2.  Variance Approval Criteria. In reviewing a variance application, the Planning Commission shall find that all of the following exist: 
i.  The subject property has an exceptional shape, topography, building configuration or other exceptional site condition that is not a general condition throughout the zone district; 
ii.  The strict application of the Code standards for which a variance is sought would produce undue hardship; 
iii.  The applicant did not create the hardship by his/her own actions; 
iv.  The variance requested does not harm the public and does not impair the intent or purposes of this Code, goals, and policies, including the specific regulation for which the variance is sought; 
v.  The variance request demonstrates exceptional hardship not related to purposes of convenience or financial burden; 
vi.  The variance request will not violate building or fire code requirements; and 
vii.  The variance is the minimum variance that will afford relief of the subject standards of the Code. 
f.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. 
1.  Notice of Decision. Within five (5) business days following any decision by the Planning Commission, the Director shall provide written notification of such decision to the City Council. 
2.  Recording Required. Following approval of a variance, the Director shall record the variance with the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder as soon as practicable. 
3.  Expiration of Variance. If the property owner has not commenced development or obtained the required permits to carry out the approved variance within three (3) years of the variance approval, the variance shall automatically expire unless an additional extension of up to three (3) years is granted upon request by the Planning Commission. 
4.  Non-Transferable. An approved variance shall apply only to the property or structure described in the approval and shall not be transferable to any other property or structure. 
(b)  Administrative Adjustment. 
(1)  Purpose. The administrative adjustment procedure is intended to allow minor modifications or deviations from the dimensional or numeric standards of this Code with approval by the Director. Administrative adjustments are intended to provide greater flexibility when necessary, without requiring a formal zoning amendment or variance. The administrative adjustment procedure is not a waiver of current standards of this Code and shall not be used to circumvent the variance procedure. 
(2)  Applicability. 
a.  Table of Allowable Administrative Adjustments. An application for an administrative adjustment that is not related to a request for "reasonable accommodation" under the Federal Fair Housing Act or the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act may request only the types of adjustments shown in Table 060.3, Allowable Administrative Adjustments. 
Table 060.3: Allowable Administrative Adjustments Code Standard Allowable Administrative Adjustment 
(maximum 
percentage) Site Standards Lot area, minimum 15 Lot coverage, maximum 15 Block length, maximum 15 Lot Dimensional Standards Front setback, minimum 15 Side setback, minimum 15 Rear setback, minimum 15 Encroachment into setback pursuant to Table 020.20, Authorized Exceptions to Setback Standards, maximum 15 Building Standards Building height, maximum (excludes wireless communication facilities) 15 Accessory building height, maximum (excludes wireless communication facilities) 15 Separation between buildings, minimum 15 Projection into height requirement pursuant to Table 020.21, Authorized Exceptions to Maximum Height Standards, maximum 15 Development Standards Number of required parking spaces, maximum or minimum 15 Lighting height, maximum 15 Sign height, maximum 15 Fence or wall height, maximum 15 (one foot maximum) Minimum landscaping requirements 15  
b.  Reasonable Accommodations Under the FFHA. 
1.  In response to a written application identifying the type of housing being provided and the portions of the Federal Fair Housing Act that require that reasonable accommodations be made for such housing, the Director is authorized to take any of the following actions in order to provide reasonable accommodations without the need for a rezoning or variance: 
i.  Modify any facility spacing, building setback, height, lot coverage, or landscaping requirement by no more than ten (10) percent; or 
ii.  Reduce any off-street parking requirement by no more than one (1) space. 
2.  The Director may approve a type of reasonable accommodation different from that requested by the applicant if the Director concludes that a different form of accommodation would satisfy the requirements of the Federal Fair Housing Act with fewer impacts on adjacent areas. The decision of the Director shall be accompanied by written findings of fact as to the applicability of the Fair Housing Act, the need for reasonable accommodations, and the authority for any reasonable accommodations approved. Requests for types of accommodation that are not listed above may only be approved through a variance or rezoning process. 
c.  Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000 (RLUIPA). The Director may grant administrative adjustments in order to eliminate a substantial burden on religious exercise as guaranteed by the Federal Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000, as amended. In no circumstance shall the Director approve an adjustment that allows a religious assembly use, or any uses, structures, or activities accessory to it, in a zoning district where this Code prohibits such use or accessory use, structure, or activity. 
(3)  Limitations on Administrative Adjustments. 
a.  Except when requested as a reasonable accommodation for Federal Fair Housing Act ("FFHA") purposes, a request for an Administrative Adjustment shall not be used to further modify a development standard that, as applied to the subject property, already qualifies as an exception to, or modification of, a generally applicable development standard required under Article 070.040: Development Standards. 
b.  The administrative adjustment procedure shall not apply to any proposed modification or deviation that results in: 
1.  An increase in the overall project density; 
2.  A change in permitted uses or mix of uses; 
3.  A deviation from the standards in Section 070.030.030, Use-Specific Standards; 
4.  A deviation from the standards in Section 070.040.020, Sensitive Area Protection; 
5.  A deviation from building or fire codes; 
6.  A deviation from the City's Engineering Standards; 
7.  Requirements for public roadways, utilities, or other public infrastructure or facilities; or 
8.  A change to a development standard where that same standard was already modified through a separate administrative adjustment or variance. 
(4)  Administrative Adjustment Procedure. 
a.  Application Submittal and Handling. 
1.  An application for an administrative adjustment shall only be submitted and reviewed concurrently with an application for a special use permit, temporary use permit, site/architectural plan approval (administrative, minor, or major), or plat approval (minor, preliminary, final, or condominium). 
2.  Each code standard in Table 060.3 shall be considered a separate administrative adjustment request as it relates to the approval criteria in Subsection 070.060.070(b)(5), but multiple adjustments may be considered in one (1) administrative adjustment application. 
b.  Review and Decision. 
1.  Where the concurrently reviewed application requires review and approval by the Director, the Director shall review the application and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the adjustment based on the criteria in Subsection 070.060.070(b)(5). The Director may refer the administrative adjustment to the DRC prior to making a decision. 
2.  Where the concurrently reviewed application requires review and approval by the Planning Commission or City Council, the Commission or Council, as applicable, shall review and decide the administrative adjustment application based on the criteria in in Subsection 070.060.070(b)(5). 
c.  Effect of Approval. Approval of an administrative adjustment authorizes only the particular adjustment of standards approved, and only to the subject property of the application. 
d.  Expiration of Administrative Adjustment. An administrative adjustment shall automatically expire if the associated development application is denied or if approval of the concurrently reviewed application expires, is revoked, or otherwise deemed invalid. 
(5)  Administrative Adjustment Approval Criteria. In reviewing a proposed administrative adjustment, the decision-making body shall consider whether and to what extent the adjustment: 
a.  Will not result in incompatible development; 
b.  Will not result in adverse impacts unless adequately mitigated; and 
c.  Is of a technical nature and is required to: 
1.  Compensate for an unusual site condition; 
2.  Eliminate a minor inadvertent failure to comply with a Code standard; or 
3.  Protect a sensitive resource, natural feature, or community asset. 
(c)  Appeal of Administrative Decision. 
(1)  Purpose. The appeal procedure establishes an administrative mechanism for persons claiming to have been aggrieved by a decision of the Director or other administrative official in administering this Code to appeal that decision. 
(2)  Applicability. Any person may appeal a decision of an administrative office or agency made in the administration or enforcement of this Code. Appeals shall be made to the appropriate body as indicated in Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures, except that appeals of decisions by the City Council shall be made to the District Court in accordance with state law. 
(3)  Appeal Procedure. Figure 060-18 identifies the applicable steps from the common review procedures in Section 070.060.030 that apply to the review of appeals. Additions or modifications to the common review procedures are noted below. 

Figure 060-18: Summary of Appeal Procedure
a.  Pre-Application Conference. An optional pre-application conference may be held in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(b) at the applicant's discretion. 
b.  Application Submittal and Handling. The appeal application shall be submitted, accepted, and revised, and may be withdrawn, in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(d), with the following modifications: 
1.  Burden of Proof on Appellant. The person or group or persons making the appeal (the appellant) shall have the burden of proving the necessary facts to warrant approval of an appeal by the appropriate decision-making body. Such proof shall include applicable specific section references within this Code, and shall be provided at the time of application. 
2.  Time Limit. Appeals shall be made in writing and filed with the Director within seven (7) days of the decision being appealed. 
3.  Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings from further action on the subject decision unless the Planning Commission determines that a stay would create adverse impacts to the health, safety, or welfare of the City or would cause imminent peril to life and property. Such determination shall be made only after written request to the Director and a public hearing by the Planning Commission. The public hearing shall be held within two (2) business days of receipt of the request. Notice for such a hearing shall be provided on the City's website and shall be posted at City Hall. 
c.  Staff Review and Action. The Director shall review the appeal application and prepare a staff report in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(e), with the following modifications: 
1.  Staff review of the appeal shall only confirm that the application is complete and that the appeal is heard by the appropriate authority. 
2.  The staff report shall not make a formal recommendation and shall only include the necessary facts to warrant an appeal, which shall be provided by the applicant. 
d.  Scheduling and Notice of Public Hearings. The appeal shall be scheduled for public hearings before the Planning Commission or City Council and noticed in accordance with Subsection 070.060.030(f). 
e.  Review and Decision (Planning Commission, and/or City Council). 
1.  The appropriate decision-making body shall consider the following in determining whether to affirm, reverse, or amend a decision or interpretation made by another decision-making body: 
i.  The facts stated in the application, as presented by the appellant and/or the Director; 
ii.  The requirements and intent of the applicable standards from this Code compared to the written decision that is being appealed; 
iii.  Evidence related to how the applicable standards from this Code have been administered or interpreted in the past; and 
iv.  Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  The appeal decision-making authority may reverse a previous decision in whole or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from. 
3.  The appeal decision-making authority may attach conditions of approval on any appeal to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the City. 
f.  Post-Decision Actions and Limitations. Post-decision actions and limitations in Subsection 070.060.030(i) shall apply. Any further appeals from the appropriate appeal decision-making authority shall be made to the courts in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.060.080 - Review and Decision-Making Bodies. 
(a)  City Council. The City Council shall have all powers granted it by the Municipal Charter. Where not limited by the Charter or the Constitution of the State of Colorado, the City Council shall have such additional powers granted to cities of the same class by the statutes of the State of Colorado. In the administration and enforcement of this Code, the City Council has the review and decision authority as shown in Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures. 
(b)  Planning Commission. 
(1)  Duties and Authority. The Planning Commission shall have the review and decision authority as shown in Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures, pursuant to the application-specific procedures outlined in this Code. The Planning Commission also has the powers and duties permitted under Colorado law, C.R.S. § 31-23-201 et seq. 
(2)  Members and Terms of Office. 
a.  The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, whom shall be citizens of the City. 
b.  The terms of office shall be in accordance with 020.020.040 of the Municipal Code. 
(3)  Staff Participation on the Planning Commission. The City Manager may appoint a member of staff to assist the Planning Commission as necessary to fulfill their duties as provided for in 020.020.030. 
(c)  City Administration. 
(1)  City Manager. The City Manager shall have the responsibility for administering this Code and shall be responsible for appointing the Director, establishing the duties and responsibilities of the Director, and overseeing the actions of the Director. 
(2)  Development Review Committee. The Development Review Committee (DRC) shall have the review and decision-making authorities listed in Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures. 
(3)  Director. The Director shall have the review and decision-making responsibilities listed in Table 060.1: Summary of Development Review Procedures, and elsewhere in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
ARTICLE 070.070 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 

070.070.010 - Rules of Construction. 
    The rules of construction from the Municipal Code, 010.010.020, shall apply with the following modifications: 
(a)  Meanings and Intent. All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions in this Code shall be construed according to the general purpose set forth in Section 070.010.030, Purpose and Intent, and the specific purpose statements elsewhere in this Code. If a specific section provides a different meaning of a term defined for general purposes in this Article, the specific section's meaning and application shall control. 
(b)  Headings, Illustrations, and Text. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Code and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control. 
(c)  Lists and Examples. Unless otherwise indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms such as "for example," "including," and "such as," or similar are intended to provide examples and are not exhaustive lists of all possibilities. 
(d)  Mandatory and Discretionary Terms. The words "shall," "must," and "will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation to comply. The words "may" and "should" are permissive in nature. 
(e)  Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests otherwise, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all connected items apply; and 
(2)  "Or" indicates that one (1) or more of the connected items apply. 
(f)  Tenses and Plurals. Words used in one (1) tense (past, present, or future) include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
(g)  Computation of Time. References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated. The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday observed by the City, that day shall be excluded. 
(h)  Delegation of Authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or another officer or employee of the City to perform an act or duty, that provision shall be construed as authorizing the department head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others. 
(i)  Technical and Non-Technical Terms. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
(j)  References to Other Regulations, Publications, and Documents. Whenever reference is made to this Code or any other resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of this Code or any other such regulation (as amended), resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
(k)  Term Not Defined. In the event there is a term used in this Code that is not defined in this chapter, the Director shall have the authority to provide a definition based upon the definitions used in accepted sources. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.070.020 - Definitions of Use Categories and Specific Use Types. 
(a)  Residential Uses. 
(1)  Household Living. Uses in this category are characterized by residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis. Common accessory uses include recreational activities, gardens, personal storage buildings, and residential parking. 
a.  Dwelling, Live-Work. A dwelling unit combining both a residential living space and also an integrated work space principally used by one (1) or more of the residents. The unit typically has a storefront, workspace or studio, and public display area on the ground floor, with residential located either on the upper floor or in the back of the workspace. 
b.  Dwelling, Multifamily. A building located on a single lot containing three (3) or more dwelling units, each of which is designed for one (1) family, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. Multifamily dwellings are often stacked vertically, sharing both common vertical and horizontal walls and ceilings. Multifamily dwellings do not include those uses meeting the definition of single-family townhouse dwelling. 
c.  Dwelling, Townhouse. A building that contains three (3) or more dwelling units, each having primary ground floor access to the outside and are attached to each other by common party walls without openings. 
d.  Dwelling, Single-Family Detached. One (1) building on one (1) lot designed to be occupied by not more than one (1) family. 
e.  Dwelling, Two-Family. One (1) building on one (1) lot designed as a single structure that contains two (2) separate dwelling units, each of which is designed to be occupied as a separate residence by one (1) family or household. 
f.  Mobile Home Park. Any plat of ground upon which two (2) or more mobile homes are located and occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
g.  Accessory Dwelling Unit. A separate, complete, dwelling unit containing separate facilities for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation that is contained within or attached to a detached single-family dwelling, or detached from it on the same property. 
(2)  Group Living. Uses in this category are characterized by residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of "household living." Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis and the size of the group may be larger than a family. Group living usually includes common eating areas for residents, and residents may receive care, training, or treatment. Caregivers often reside at the site. Accessory uses commonly include recreational facilities, personal storage buildings, gardens, and parking. 
a.  Convalescent or Nursing Home. An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals whom are unable to care for themselves. 
b.  Personal Care Boarding Home. An assisted living residence that provides room and board to not less than three (3) and not more than six (6) adults eighteen (18) years of age or older and who, because of impaired capacity for independent living, elect protective oversight, personal services, and social care but do not require twenty-four-hour nursing or medical care. Personal care boarding homes shall not serve clients requiring a secured environment as defined by 6 C.C.R. 1011-1, Section 1.102, and shall not include residential facilities for those living together as a result of prior criminal offenses. 
(b)  Public, Institutional, and Civic Uses. 
(1)  Community and Cultural Facilities. Uses in this category include buildings and facilities owned, operated, or occupied by a governmental or non-profit entity providing a service to the public. 
a.  Assembly. A facility intended primarily for organized services, meetings, events, or programs to benefit, educate, entertain, or promote discourse, with membership not required for participation. Examples include community centers, places of workshop, meeting or lecture halls, or exhibition rooms. If an assembly use is ancillary to another principal use, and has a gross floor area of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, it is considered part of that use and is not considered a separate principal use. 
b.  Civic Building. Any noncommercial public building housing uses for the purpose of promoting the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Glenwood Springs. Some civic buildings are also considered government offices. 
c.  Club or Lodge. An organization and its premises operating on a membership basis for the promotion of interests of the members including facilities for business organizations; facilities or spaces for physical exercise and recreational activities; civic, social, and fraternal organizations, and other similar organizations, but which shall not include a club for the smoking or other consumption of medical or retail marijuana or marijuana products. 
d.  Community-Centered Board Facility. An administrative facility maintained or operated by a Community Centered Board as authorized in C.R.S. § 27-10.5-101 et seq. as amended, where the Community Centered Board provides case management services to persons with developmental disabilities, determines eligibility of those persons within a specified geographical areas, serves as the single point of entry for persons to receive services and support, and provides authorized services and support to those persons either directly or by purchasing services and supports from service agencies. 
(2)  Adult and Child Care Facilities. Uses in this category include temporary care facilities on a less than twenty-four-hour basis for adults and children of varying ages. Activities include supervision, education, and recreation for care facility participants. Accessory uses commonly include recreation, personal storage buildings, and parking. 
a.  Adult Day Care. A facility, whether in a private home or institutional setting, providing temporary care and supervision for persons eighteen (18) years of age or older. Care is provided for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day and does not include overnight care. 
b.  Child Care Center. A facility that is maintained for the whole or part of a day for the care of five (5) or more children who are eighteen (18) years of age or younger and who are not related to the owner, operator, or manager of the facility, whether such facility is operated with or without compensation for such care and with or without stated educational purposes. The term includes facilities commonly known as day care centers, school-age child care centers, before and after school programs, nursery schools, kindergartens, preschools, day camps, summer camps, and centers for developmentally disabled children and those facilities that give twenty-four-hour care for children and includes those facilities for children under the age of six (6) years with stated educational purposes operated in conjunction with a public, private or parochial college or a private or parochial school; except that the term shall not apply to any kindergarten maintained in connection with a public, private or parochial elementary school system of at least six (6) grades or operated as a component of a school district's preschool program operated pursuant to the Colorado Preschool and Kindergarten Program Act, 22-28-101, et seq. of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended. The term shall not include any facility licensed as a family child care home or foster care home. 
c.  Child Day Care Home, Large. A family child care home that provides care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children. Child care may be provided to children from twenty-four (24) months to thirteen (13) years of age. This does not prohibit the care of children ages thirteen (13) to eighteen (18). Care may be provided to no more than two (2) children under the age of two (2) whether or not older siblings are in care. 
d.  Child Day Care Home, Small. A type of family care home that provides less than twenty-four-hour care for two (2) or more children on a regular basis in a place of residence. Children in care are from different family households and are not related to the caregiver. Care may be provided for six (6) children from birth to thirteen (13) years of age with no more than two (2) children under two (2) years of age. This does not prohibit the care of children ages thirteen (13) to 18. Care also may be provided for no more than two (2) additional children of school age attending full-day school. School-age children are children enrolled in a kindergarten program a year before they enter the first grade and children six (6) years of age and older. Residents of the home under twelve (12) years of age who are on the premises and all children on the premises for supervision are counted against the approved capacity, except where specifically indicated otherwise. A family child care licensee may be approved to care for three (3) children under two (2) years of age with no more than two (2) children under twelve (12) months, including the caregiver's own children per the state's requirements. 
(3)  Educational Facilities. Uses in this category include public, private, and parochial institutions at the primary, elementary, middle, high school, or post-secondary level, including colleges and college campuses. Accessory uses commonly include play areas, cafeterias, recreation areas, auditoriums, and day care facilities. 
a.  School. Any public or private school meeting all requirements of the compulsory education laws of the state and providing instruction to students in kindergarten through grade 12 and that are licensed through the State of Colorado. This does not include home-schooling facilities that are located within residential structures or other structures on a part-time basis. 
(4)  Health Care Facilities. Uses in this category are characterized by activities focusing on medical services, particularly licensed public or private institutions that provide primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons suffering from illness, disease, injury, or other physical or mental conditions. Accessory uses may include laboratories, outpatient, or training facilities, and parking or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the firm or building. 
a.  Hospital. A state-licensed facility providing accommodation and medical care of sick and injured persons, not including group-care institutions or medical and dental clinics. 
b.  Medical or Dental Clinic. A facility for the examination and treatment of human outpatients provided that patients are not kept overnight. 
(5)  Parks and Open Space. Uses in this category focus on natural areas, large areas consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping or outdoor recreation, community gardens, or public squares. Lands tend to have few structures. Accessory uses may include clubhouses, playgrounds, maintenance facilities, concessions, caretaker's quarters, and parking. 
a.  Park, Playground, and Open Space. Land designated for parks and recreation uses or to be left in a generally natural state, regardless of whether it is owned by a public entity or whether it is open to the general public. 
(6)  Transit Uses. Uses in this category are primarily associated with the operation of public transportation services and facilities. Accessory uses may include limited convenience retail, cafeterias, parking, and personal storage. 
a.  Transit Stop. An area posted as a place where transit passengers board or exit. 
b.  Transit Terminal or Station. A passenger terminal or loading facility for a private or public transit system, including a private shuttle service. 
(c)  Commercial Uses. 
(1)  Agriculture and Animal-Related Services. This category includes agricultural and farming activities, including nurseries and facilities for processing and selling agricultural products. Agricultural uses involve farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal husbandry. Animal-related uses include the boarding and care of animals on a commercial basis. Accessory uses may include confinement facilities for animals, parking, and storage areas. 
a.  Commercial Farming, Animal Husbandry, and Plant Husbandry. The land use of animal husbandry, farming, cultivation of crops, dairying, pasturage, floriculture, horticulture, viticulture, aquaculture, hydroponics, together with necessary accompanying accessory uses, buildings, or structures for housing, packing, treating, or storing said products. This definition includes associated dwellings for those involved in agricultural uses. 
b.  Community Garden. A public or not-for-profit area for cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one (1) person or family. Incidental sales are permitted. 
c.  Kennel. A facility where the training, grooming, or boarding of dogs, cats, or other animals is conducted as a business. 
d.  Sale of Produce or Plants Raised on Premises. A sales table or kiosk of locally grown food crops and goods or non-food ornamental crops such as flowers, that is located at the site of a community garden or agricultural property and operates during the time of year coinciding with the growing season. Does not include any marijuana-related use. 
e.  Veterinarian Hospital or Clinic. An establishment for licensed practitioners engaged in practicing veterinary medicine, dentistry, or surgery. 
(2)  Adult Entertainment Establishments. Uses in this category include entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
a.  Adult Entertainment Establishment. An adult bookstore, adult mini motion picture theatre, adult motion picture theatre, adult motion picture arcade, adult cabaret, adult drive-in theatre, adult live entertainment arcade, or adult services establishment. 
(3)  Food and Beverage Establishments. Uses in this category include establishments that serve prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises. Accessory uses may include food preparation areas, offices, and parking. 
a.  Bar, Lounge, or Tavern. An eating and drinking establishment providing or dispensing by the drink for on-site consumption fermented malt beverages, and/or malt, special malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors, and in which the sale of food products is secondary. A bar, lounge, or tavern may include the provision of live entertainment and/or dancing; however, shall not include any adult entertainment. 
b.  Microbrewery, Distillery, or Winery. A small brewery, cidery, distillery, or winery serving beer, wine, or other alcohol for consumption onsite or sale of the same for consumption off the premises, but is not sold to other drinking establishments or restaurants. A limited quantity, up to twenty-five (25) percent of total annual production, may be sold to wholesalers. Such uses may operate in conjunction with a bar, lounge, or tavern and/or a restaurant. 
c.  Restaurant. A commercial establishment where food and beverages are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building. 
d.  Restaurant, with Drive-Through. A commercial establishment where food and beverages are prepared, served, and consumed either within the principal building, or ordered by customers at a walk-up or drive-up counter to be consumed on or offsite. 
(4)  Funeral and Interment Services. Uses in this category include establishments for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and rituals connected with, and conducted before, burial or cremation. 
a.  Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of human remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes. Cemetery purposes include columbaria, crematoriums, mausoleums, and mortuaries operated in conjunction with the cemetery. 
b.  Funeral Home, Columbarium, Crematorium, or Mortuary. An establishment for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and rituals connected with, and conducted before, burial or cremation. This definition includes other undertaking establishments such as columbaria, crematoria, and may include a facility for the permanent storage of cremated remains of the dead. This use type does not include cemeteries. 
(5)  Lodging Facilities. Uses in this category include facilities where lodging, meals, and other services are provided to transient visitors and guests for a fee for a defined period of time less than thirty (30) days per instance. Accessory uses may include storage, cafeterias, limited retail, health and recreation facilities, and parking or other amenities. 
a.  Accessory Tourist Rental. The rental for monetary compensation of not more than one (1) bedroom for transient lodging to guests in those residential dwelling units that contain a minimum of two (2) bedrooms and are owner-occupied or occupied by a resident manager. 
b.  Bed and Breakfast. A detached single-family dwelling, that is owner-occupied or occupied by a resident manager, where individual bedrooms are offered as single accommodations to guests for transient lodging and which facility includes incidental eating and drinking service from a single kitchen serving only residents and guests and is not operated in the manner of a commercial restaurant, or as a facility for commercial activities such as for-profit private parties or receptions, retail sales or similar activities. Bed and breakfasts shall have a minimum of two (2) bedrooms available for lodging and one (1) bedroom available for the owner or manager residing on site. 
c.  Boarding House. A building or portion of a building, other than a hotel, motel, or multifamily dwelling wherein non-transient lodging and/or meals are provided in bedrooms, sleeping units, or efficiency dwelling units, for six (6) or more persons for compensation. Such compensation may include money, services, or other things of value. 
d.  Hotel, Motel, Hostel, or Lodge. A building or group of buildings where transient lodging is offered in bedrooms, sleeping rooms, and dwelling units. The building or buildings may include accessory facilities such as parking, restaurants, meeting rooms, on-site check in lobbies, recreation areas or similar facilities commonly associated with lodging. The term hotel/motel does not include Bed and Breakfast, Short-Term Rental or an Accessory Tourist Rental. 
e.  Short-Term Rental. The rental of an entire dwelling unit for monetary consideration for a period of time less than thirty (30) consecutive days, not including a bed and breakfast, residency unit, boarding or rooming house, or hotel, motel, hostel, or lodge. This definition does not include offering the use of one's property where no fee is charged or collected. 
(6)  Maintenance and Repair Services. Uses in this category include those engaged in repair or maintenance of equipment, home appliances, and building components. Accessory uses may include fleet and employee parking and storage yards. 
a.  Repair Facility, Major. Repair, rebuilding, and painting of agricultural, industrial, implements, and equipment not customarily used in the home but excluding automobile and vehicular repair. 
b.  Repair Facility, Minor. The maintenance and rehabilitation of appliances customarily used in the home including washing and drying machines, refrigerators, dishwashers, trash compactors, ovens and ranges, countertop kitchen appliances, vacuum cleaners, and hair dryers. 
(7)  Marijuana Establishments. Uses in this category are primarily engaged in cultivating, manufacturing, testing, and sales of medical and/or retail marijuana. 
a.  Medical Marijuana Business, Excluding Cultivation. Marijuana that is grown, produced, manufactured, sold, transmitted, or dispensed for medical use to the extent permitted by Article IVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, Article 43.3 of Title 122 C.R.S., and any other applicable state or City law or regulation. The term "medical marijuana business" shall not include the private possession, distribution, and medical use of marijuana and cultivation of up to six (6) plants by an individual patient or caregiver for one (1) patient in the residence of the patient to the extent permitted by Article XVIII, Sec. 14 of the Colorado Constitution, Article 43.3 of Title 12 C.R.S. and any other applicable state or City law or regulation. The presence of more than six (6) marijuana plants on a property shall constitute a "medical marijuana business" regardless of the number of patients residing on the property. 
b.  Retail Marijuana Establishment, Excluding Cultivation. The retail sale, storage, product manufacturing or testing of marijuana to the extent permitted by Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution and in various provisions of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, Article 43.4 of Title 12, C.R.S., and any other applicable state or City law or regulation. 
(8)  Office, Business, and Professional Services. Uses in this category provide executive, management, administrative, governmental, or professional services, but do not sell merchandise except as incidental to a permitted use. Typical uses include real estate, insurance, property management, investment, employment, travel, advertising, law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting, call centers, and similar offices. Accessory uses may include cafeterias, health facilities, parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the firm or building. 
a.  Administrative, Professional, or Government Office. A building in which services are performed including administrative, professional, governmental, or clerical operations. This use includes accessory uses such as restaurants, coffee shops, and limited retail sales. 
b.  Bank or Financial Institution. An establishment that provides retail banking, mortgage lending, and financial services to individuals and businesses, and including check-cashing facilities. Accessory uses may include automatic teller machines, offices, and parking. 
c.  Printing and Copying Establishment. An establishment that reproduces, in printed form, individual orders from an individual, business, profession, service, industry, or government organization. 
(9)  Personal Services. Uses in this category provide individual services related to personal needs directly to customers at the site of the business, or that receive goods from or return goods to the customer, which have been treated or processed at that location or another location. 
a.  Commercial Laundry and Dry Cleaning. An establishment engaged in dry-cleaning, laundry, and linen services for the public or for businesses or institutions. This use includes pressing, repair, and dry-cleaning primarily for pick-up from and distribution to customers located off-site. 
b.  Personal Service, General. An establishment that provides repair, care, maintenance or customizing of wearing apparel or other personal articles or human grooming services and includes such uses as beauty/barber shops, dry cleaning pickup, shoe repair, alterations, spas, and tanning salons. 
c.  Self-Service Laundry. An establishment providing washing, drying, or dry-cleaning machines on the premises for rental use to the general public. This definition includes automatic, self-service only, or hand laundries. 
(10)  Recreation and Entertainment, Indoor. Uses in this category provide recreation and entertainment activities entirely within a building. Accessory uses may include limited retail, concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities. 
a.  Indoor Recreation Facility. A commercial recreational use conducted entirely within a building, including arcade, arena, art gallery and studio, art center, assembly hall, athletic and health clubs, auditorium, bowling alley, community center, conference center, exhibit hall, gymnasium, library, movie theater, museum, performance theater, pool or billiard hall, skating rink, swimming pool, and tennis court. 
(11)  Recreation and Entertainment, Outdoor. Uses in this category provide recreation and entertainment activities mostly outdoors or partially within a building. Accessory uses may include limited retail, concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities. 
a.  Commercial Outdoor Recreation Use. A commercial recreational use conducted entirely or partially outside of a building, characterized by potentially moderate impacts on traffic, the natural environment and the surrounding neighborhood, including athletic field; miniature golf; skateboard park; swimming, bathing, wading and other therapeutic facilities; tennis, handball and basketball courts; batting cages; and trampoline facilities. 
b.  Commercial Outdoor Recreation Use - Concentrated. [reserved] 
c.  Golf Course or Country Club. A club organized and operated for social and outdoor recreation purposes including golf courses, hunting and fishing, or other similar uses. This definition includes incidental accessory uses and structures. 
d.  Recreational Vehicle Park. An outdoor facility designed for overnight accommodation of human beings in motorized vehicles, rustic cabins and shelters, or trailers for recreation, education, naturalist, or vacation purposes. Office, retail, and other commercial uses commonly established in such facilities and related parking structures shall be allowed as accessory appurtenances. 
(12)  Retail Sales. Uses in this category are involved in the sale, lease, or rent of new or used products directly to the general public, but not specifically or exclusively for the purpose of resale. Accessory uses may include offices, parking, storage of goods, and assembly, repackaging, or repair of goods for on-site sale. 
a.  Building Materials and Supply Store. An establishment engaged in the storage, distribution, and sale of building materials such as brick, tile, cement, insulation, floor covering, lighting, plumbing supplies, electrical supplies, cabinetry and roofing materials. Accessory uses may include repair or delivery services and outside sale of plants and gardening supplies. 
b.  Convenience Store. A small retail establishment designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers for offsite use or consumption. 
c.  Flea Market or Swap Meet. An indoor or outdoor premises where the primary use is the sale of new or used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities, in broken stalls, lots or parcels, not in bulk, for the use or consumption by the immediate purchaser in a building, open air, or partly enclosed booths or stalls not within a wholly enclosed building. This definition shall not include wholesale sales establishments or rental services establishments, but shall include personal service establishments, food services establishments, and auction establishments. This definition does not pertain to retail sidewalk sales or garage sales. 
d.  Grocery Store. A retail establishment that primarily sells food, but may also sell convenience and household goods for offsite use or consumption. 
e.  Liquor Store. A retail establishment operating under a valid retail liquor store license that sells sealed alcoholic beverages for offsite consumption. A liquor store may sell other items allowed under the Colorado Liquor Code, C.R.S. § 12-47-101 et seq. 
f.  Lumber Yard. An establishment for the sale of lumber and other materials customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures, which includes facilities for outdoor storage. 
g.  Pawn Shop. An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the keeping of the owners (pawnbroker). Retail sales also take place of primarily used items. 
h.  Retail, General. A facility or area for the retail sale of general merchandise or food to the general public for direct use and not for wholesale. This use includes but is not limited to sale of general merchandise, appliances, clothing and other apparel, convenience and specialty foods, dry goods, flowers and household plants, hardware and similar consumer goods. 
i.  Retail, Shopping Center. A development that includes more than one (1) multiple-tenant or single-tenant retail facility, or other retail use located on a development site or on a combination of development sites. 
(13)  Vehicles and Equipment. Uses in this category include a broad range of uses for the maintenance, sale, or rental of motor vehicles and related equipment. Accessory uses may include incidental repair and storage and offices. 
a.  Automotive Fuel Sales and Service Station. An establishment primarily engaged in selling gasoline and lubricating oils and which may sell other convenience merchandise or perform minor repair work. 
b.  Automotive Parts and Accessories Sales. An establishment that sells primarily new parts, tires, and other accessories for automobiles, light trucks, motorcycles, and similar vehicles. This definition does not include establishments dealing primarily in used parts, including junk or salvage operations. 
c.  Automotive Repair Shop. The servicing of automobiles, including mechanical work, body work, and painting, entirely within a building. 
d.  Automotive Sales or Leasing. The sale, display, lease, rental, or storage of light motor vehicles, including automobiles, vans, light trucks, light trailers, boats, ATVs, snowmobiles, and recreational vehicles. This definition shall not include salvage operations, scrap operations, vehicle impound yards, or commercial parking lots available for short-term use. 
e.  Automobile Wash. A facility for the cleaning of automobiles or other motor vehicles, operated by the public or by on-site employees, whether or not in conjunction with other goods or services provided to customers. 
f.  Parking as a Principal Use. The ownership, lease, operation, or management of a commercial surface parking lot, above-ground structure, or below-ground structure in which fees are charged. 
g.  Equipment Sales and Rental. The sales and rental of supplies and equipment primarily intended for homeowner use and minor residential gardening and construction projects, but not including car or truck rentals. All maintenance of equipment shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
h.  Mobile Home Sales. The sale, display, lease, rental, or storage of mobile homes. 
(d)  Industrial Uses. 
(1)  Industrial Services. Uses in this category include the repair or servicing of agricultural, industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products. Contractors and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers come to the site. Accessory activities may include sales, offices, parking, and storage. 
a.  Airport/Aviation-Related Business. Any area of land that is used or intended for use for the landing or take-off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas that are used or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, including taxi-ways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangers, helipads, and other related buildings and open spaces. Aviation-related businesses utilize aircraft and require close proximity to the airport to function, including, but not limited to: aircraft servicing, fueling, or leasing; private aviation clubs or associations; and tours or transportation companies. 
b.  Asphalt or Concrete Batch Plant. A facility that manufactures or prepares bituminous paving materials, aggregate concrete, or bulk cement. 
c.  Motor or Rail Freight Terminal. A facility in which goods shipped by truck or rail are loaded, unloaded, or transferred between trucks and trains for shipping or distribution, together with incidental storage, maintenance, and administrative offices. 
d.  Natural Resource Extraction or Processing. The extraction and processing of minerals, sand, gravel, and ores, from their natural occurrences and the distribution of extracted materials. 
e.  Printing or Publishing Facility. A commercial facility that reproduces a large quantity of copies or books and other printed material including newspapers and magazines, including the storage and transshipment of such goods. 
f.  Research and Development Facility. A facility including research, synthesis, analysis, development and testing laboratories, including the fabrication, assembly, mixing, and preparation of equipment and components necessary to the conduct of such activities. 
(2)  Manufacturing and Production. Uses in this category include all transformative processes, regardless of whether or not the new product is finished or semi-finished. This use category includes firms involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, constructed, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or consumers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, such activity is a subordinate part of sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site. Accessory uses may include retail sales, offices, storage, cafeterias, employee amenities, parking, warehousing, and repair facilities. 
a.  Brewery or Bottling Plant. A facility in which processing and production of beverages occurs, including canning, bottling, and packaging for sale and/or distribution to retailers, drinking establishments, restaurants, or wholesalers. This use may include on-site consumption (a tasting room) as an accessory use. 
b.  Fabrication, Manufacturing, and Testing Facility. Uses and facilities involving assembling, distributing, fabricating, manufacturing, packaging, printing, processing, publishing, recycling, repairing, servicing, storing, or wholesaling of goods or products. 
c.  Food Processing and Packing Plant. The sorting, treatment, or preparation of food products for sale or as inputs to further processing. Examples include bakeries and baking plants; cold storage establishments; creamery operations, and frozen food lockers. This use does not include commercial feedlots, meatpacking, poultry dressing, stockyards, fat rendering, or the tanning, cutting, curing, cleaning or storing of green hides or skins. 
(3)  Marijuana Establishments. Uses in this category are primarily engaged in cultivating, manufacturing, testing, and sales of medical and/or retail marijuana. 
a.  Marijuana Cultivation, with or without Retail Business or Medical Establishment. The retail sale, cultivation, storage, product manufacturing or testing of marijuana to the extent permitted by Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution and in various provisions of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, Article 43.4 of Title 12, C.R.S., and any other applicable state or City law or regulation. 
(4)  Storage and Warehousing. Uses in this category are engaged in the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other businesses. Goods are generally delivered to other businesses or the final consumer, except for some will-call pickups. There are typically few customers present. Accessory uses may include offices, truck fleet parking, and maintenance areas. 
a.  Bulk Materials or Machinery Storage. An establishment engaged in the storage of oils, lubricants, grains, mineral products, machinery, or other goods or commodities not defined elsewhere in this Code as a specific type of warehousing or storage. 
b.  Contractor Offices and Equipment Storage Yards. A building and related outdoor areas used to store and maintain construction equipment and other materials and facilities customarily required in the building trade by a construction contractor. This use may include showrooms and shops for the display and sale of electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, sheet metal, and other material in connection with contracting services. 
c.  Mini-Warehouse or Storage. A building or group of buildings that are rented and designed, through individual compartments or controlled stalls for self-service storage purposes. 
d.  Storage of Hazardous Liquids and Gasses. A facility or site engaged in the storage and handling of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials, liquids, waste, or gasses. 
e.  Warehousing. A building used primarily for the storage and distribution of goods and materials. This use shall include incidental accessory uses including offices, showrooms, and limited retail sales. 
(5)  Waste and Salvage. Uses in this category receive solid or liquid wastes from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location. The category includes uses that collect sanitary wastes, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material or processing of scrap or waste material. Waste and salvage uses also include uses that receive hazardous wastes from others. Accessory uses may include recycling of materials, offices, and repackaging and shipment of by-products. 
a.  Salvage Yard. A lot, parcel, development site, structure, or business operation that is primarily used for sales of, processing, or dismantling junk or similar material. 
(6)  Utilities. Uses in this category includes all lines, buildings, easements, passageways, or structures used or intended to be used by any public or private utility related to the provision, distribution, collection, transmission, or disposal of power, oil, gas, water, sanitary sewage, communication signals, or other similar services at a local level. 
a.  Commercial Television, Radio, or Microwave Tower. A structure for the transmission of broadcasting of radio, TV, microwave, or radar signals. 
b.  Geothermal Heat Exchange. Equipment for the collection of geothermal energy and its conversion to electrical energy for use on the same property or for incidental sale to a public utility. 
c.  Wastewater Treatment Facility. A facility used to collect and treat wastewater for a defined services area that typically has employees on site. 
d.  Wind Power Generation Tower. A wind energy conversion system which is elevated by means of a monopole tower and is not located on another supporting structure. Guyed, lattice, or other non-monopole style towers shall not meet this definition. 
(e)  Accessory Uses and Structures. 
(1)  Backyard Chickens. The non-commercial keeping, raising, and/or housing of chicken hens as an accessory use of property. 
(2)  Home Occupation. A business, occupation, or activity undertaken for compensation within a residence in a residential zoning district and that is incidental to the use of that structure as a dwelling unit. A home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the following uses: kennels, veterinary clinics, pet animal breeding operations; medical clinics, dental clinics, hospitals; restaurants, clubs, drinking establishments; motor or recreational vehicle repair, storage, rental, painting, or wrecking; adult entertainment establishments; undertaking or funeral parlors; medical marijuana business; on-site retail sales of items made or produced off-site; or retail marijuana establishments. 
(3)  Outdoor Storage, Accessory. The incidental keeping of goods, materials, or equipment in a location not enclosed by walls and a roof. 
(4)  Parking Structure. A structure below and/or above grade, constructed and used for the temporary parking or motor vehicles. 
(f)  Temporary Uses and Structures. 
(1)  Temporary Sales and Structures. An impermanent structure or land area intended for temporary and/or seasonal sales, with the intent to discontinue the use and structure upon the expiration of a set time period. 
(2)  Temporary Special Event. A temporary use of land for the purposes of a public or private event including circuses, carnivals, parties, fairs, or other celebrations that may reasonably attract large crowds. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
070.070.030 - All Other Terms Defined. 
    Abandoned sign. A sign that depicts or refers to a product, use, service, activity, condition, or person that has changed in such a fashion that the sign is no longer a correct identification or description that no longer exists at the location referred to in the sign or that no longer exists in any way or at any place. Signs in good repair of licensed seasonal uses shall not be classified as abandoned signs. 
    Accent material. Material covering thirty (30) percent or less of the exterior wall elevations. 
    Access way. A driveway of any length of which the purpose is to provide vehicular access between the public right-of-way and parking areas located on a lot. 
    Accessory structure. A detached subordinate structure located on the same lot as the principal building, the use of which is incidental to the principal building or use of the lot. Unless approved as an accessory dwelling unit that meets the standards of Subsection 070.030.040(d)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, such structure shall not be used for living or sleeping quarters in a residential zoning district. 
    Active transit stop. A transit stop with current regularly scheduled service. 
    Addition. An extension or increase in floor area or height of an existing building or structure. 
    Adjacent. The condition where two (2) or more parcels share common property lines or where two (2) parcels are separated only by an alley, easement, or street. 
    Administrative adjustment. A development approval authorizing limited deviations from certain provisions of this Code's dimensional or numerical development standards that is reviewed by the Director under Subsection 070.060.070(b). 
    Administrative manual. A manual containing details regarding the development review procedures, information for potential applicants, and development review forms. 
    Alley. A minor or secondary right-of-way that provides only a secondary means of access to abutting property and that is used primarily for vehicular service to the back or side of properties that otherwise front on a street. 
    Alteration. Any construction or renovation to an existing structure other than a repair or addition. 
    Animated or moving sign. A sign or any portion of a sign that has any moving, rotating, or otherwise physically animated sign or that gives the illusion of a change of position. 
    Applicant. A person whom submits a development application requesting a development permit or approval authorized by this Code. 
    Architectural feature. A part, portion, or projection of a building or structure that contributes to its character or style, exclusive of signs, that is not necessary for the structural integrity of the building or to make a building habitable. 
    Attached sign. Any sign painted, incorporated in, or fixed to the building and any sign consisting of cutout letters or devices affixed to the building with no background design on the building and extending no more than twelve (12) inches. 
    Average elevation of ground. The average elevation between two (2) points, twenty (20) feet either side of the centerline of the sign parallel to the sign face. 
    Awning. A movable shelter or shading device supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of non-rigid materials except for the supporting framework. 
    Awning/canopy/marquee sign. A sign displayed on the surface of an awning, canopy, or marquee. 
    Balcony. An unenclosed platform structure supported by and projecting from or inset into the exterior of a building gaining sole access from said building, and designed and intended for either decorative purposes or lounging, dining, and similar activities. 
    Banner sign. A temporary sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no enclosing framework. 
    Bistro lighting. Any ornamental lighting of low voltage (twelve (12) volts or less per bulb) located primarily for the benefit of business patrons and employees or in common gathering spaces. 
    Block. A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and parks or open space, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any barrier to the continuity of development. 
    Block face. Individual or collection of properties abutting one (1) side of a street or public right-of-way and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets or rights-of-way, or intersecting right-of-way and railroad right-of-way, un-subdivided land, water course, or City boundary. Corner properties may be considered to be located on more than one (1) block face. 
    Buffer. Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls or any combination of the same, used to physically separate or screen one (1) use or property from another to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
    Building. Any permanent structure built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, materials, or personal property of any kind, not including a porch, deck, fence, retaining wall, or similar non-enclosed structure. All buildings shall be considered "structures"; however, not all structures shall be considered buildings. See definition for "structure." 
    Building envelope. Lines enclosing a horizontal and vertical space where a building is to be constructed, which lines indicate the maximum exterior dimensions of the proposed building but do not necessarily depict the shape of the exterior walls of the building. 
    Building form. The shape and structure of a building as distinguished from its substance or material. 
    Building height. The vertical distance above finished grade measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the midpoint of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. See Subsection 070.020.190(d), Building Height, for additional details and exceptions. 
    Building mass. The three-dimensional bulk of a building height, width, and depth. 
    Building official. The Building Inspector for the City or his/her designee. 
    Building scale. The size and proportion of a building as distinguished from its substance or material. 
    Building, accessory. A building or structure that is subordinate or incidental to, and on the same lot or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership, as the principal building or use on the property. 
    Building, principal. A building from which the principal use of the lot is conducted and/or located. 
    Canopy. A permanent, flat-roof shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway, or other similar area, that may be wholly supported by a building or may be wholly or partially supported by columns, poles, or braces extended from the ground. 
    Capital improvements. 
(a)  Fire protection or emergency medical, rescue and ambulance service planning, preliminary architectural and engineering services, architectural and engineering design studies, land surveys, land acquisition, site improvements and off-site improvements associated with new or expanded facilities used for fire protection or emergency medical, rescue and ambulance service; 
(b)  Construction of buildings and facilities used for fire protection or emergency medical, rescue and ambulance services; and 
(c)  Purchase of fire suppression or emergency medical, rescue and ambulance apparatus and equipment, including communications equipment, with an average useful life of at least five (5) years, necessary to adequately protect and defend new development and its inhabitants. 
    Certificate of Occupancy. A document issued by the Building Official pursuant to the Building Code that allows the occupancy and use of buildings and structures, certifying that such buildings, structures, and uses have been constructed and will be used in compliance with the Municipal Code. 
    Character. Those attributes, qualities, and features that make up and distinguish a development or neighborhood and give such development or neighborhood a sense of purpose, function, definition, and uniqueness. 
    Chicken coop. An enclosed and secured facility for housing chicken hens. 
    City. The City of Glenwood Springs, in the County of Garfield and State of Colorado. 
    City Code. The City of Glenwood Springs Municipal Code, as amended. 
    Civic use. Any use intended to be conducted in a facility or upon land that is owned and operated for public use by school districts, a place of worship, or by a city, county, state, or the federal government. 
    Code. This Development Code, Title 070 of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code, as amended. 
    Commercial development. Any development activity except development activity intended solely for residential or civic use. 
    Compact vehicle parking. A vehicle parking space whose dimensions are smaller than a standard vehicle parking space, and that is intended to be occupied by smaller vehicles. 
    Compatibility. The characteristics of different uses, activities, or designs that allow such uses, activities, or designs to be located near or adjacent to each other without adverse impacts. Some elements affecting compatibility include height, scale, mass, and bulk of structures, pedestrian or vehicular traffic, circulation, access and parking impacts, landscaping, lighting, noise, odor, and architecture. Compatibility does not mean "the same as." 
    Compatible or compatibility. Consistent with, harmonious with and/or enhancing the mixture of complementary architectural styles either of the architecture of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures. The delicate historic character and scale of districts may be overwhelmed and disrupted by buildings out of proportion to those surrounding structures or styles which do not respect the existing historic neighborhood. 
    Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan for the City, stating the goals, recommendations, and policies as adopted by the Planning Commission and City Council. 
    Condominium. A common interest community in which portions of the real estate are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate ownership portions. A common interest community is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit owners. 
    Condominium unit. A physical portion of the common interest community which is designated for separate ownership or occupancy and the boundaries of which are described in or determined from the declaration. If a unit in a cooperative is owned by a unit owner or is sold, conveyed, voluntarily or involuntarily encumbered, or otherwise transferred by a unit owner, the interest in that unit which is owned, sold, conveyed, encumbered, or otherwise transferred is the right to possession of that unit under a proprietary lease, coupled with the allocated interests of that unit, and the association's interest in that unit is not thereby affected. 
    Condominiumization. The division of a building or buildings and land into separate interests, normally called condominium units for the purpose of sale. Condominiumization shall comply with the standards and procedures in Subsection 070.060.060(d). 
    Construction or construct. The act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property. 
    Construction plans. Technical engineered drawings demonstrating compliance with this Code, the Building Code, and the City of Glenwood Springs Engineering Standards. Review and approval of construction plans shall be pursuant to Subsection 070.060.050(c). 
    Contiguous. In contact with or sharing a common border, boundary, or property line. 
    Contributing. A "contributing" property adds to the historic architectural qualities, historic associations, or archaeological values for which the district is significant because: a) it was present during a period of significance and possesses historic integrity reflected in its character at that time or it is capable of yielding important information about the period; b) it independently meets the National Register criteria; and c) it meets the Glenwood Springs Historic Preservation criteria. 
    Contributing building structure, site/area, or object. A building, structure, site/area, or object that reflects the historical or architectural character of an historic district, as defined by GSHPC designation pursuant to Section 070.050.020, Designation of Local Landmarks and Historic Districts. 
    Copy. Any words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, or colors, or motion, illumination, or projected images. 
    Cornice. A horizontal molding projecting along the top of a wall. 
    Crosswalk. A pedestrian pathway that cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties. 
    Deciduous. A plant that drops all leaves once per year. 
    Deck. A roofless outdoor space built as an above ground platform, freestanding or attached, projecting from the wall of a structure and supported by posts or pillars. 
    Demolition by neglect. Neglect in the maintenance of any building resulting in any one (1) or more of the following: 
a)  The deterioration of a building to the extent that it creates or permits a hazardous or unsafe condition as determined by the Building Department. 
b)  The deterioration of a building characterized by one (1) or more of the following: 
1.  Those buildings which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
2.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundation. 
3.  Defective or deteriorated floor supports or floor supports insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety. 
4.  Members of walls or other vertical supports that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety. 
5.  Members of ceiling, roof, ceilings, and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
6.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration. 
7.  Any fault, defect, or condition in the building which renders the same structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
    Demolition or Demolish. Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a landmark or a structure within a historic district. 
    Density. A ratio of dwelling units to gross land area. 
    Design standard. A requirement for a minimum level of site and/or building quality, as set forth in Section 070.040.080, Residential Site and Building Design, and Section 070.040.090, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Site and Building Design. 
    Developer. Any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, association, or corporation who participates as owner, promoter, developer, or sales agent in the planning, platting, development, promotion, sale, or lease of a subdivision or development. 
    Development. The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, logging, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; or any use or extension of use that alters the character of the property. 
    Development Code. Title 070 of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code, as amended. 
    Development permit. Any of the approvals authorized by Section 070.060.050, Development Permits, including site/architectural plan review, master plan, construction plans, location and extent review, and special use permit. 
    Development review committee. The Development Review Committee (DRC) of the City of Glenwood Springs. 
    Development site sign. An on-premises sign in connection with a development in progress. 
    Development, mixed-use. A building or group of buildings, planned as a unified and complimentary whole, and containing both residential and nonresidential uses. 
    Directional sign. Any on-site sign that directs the necessary movement of pedestrians or vehicular traffic without reference to the name of the business, products sold or services offered. This definition includes signs locating public facilities such as rest rooms and emergency facilities. 
    Director. The Director of the Department of Community Development charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code, or the duly authorized representative of the Director. 
    Disturbed area. Any grading, scraping, excavating, trenching, filling of land, dumping of fill materials (including but not limited to dumping of soil, concrete, and construction debris), bulk outdoor storage, clearing of trees or vegetation, and any construction in preparation for development, reconstruction, or significant alteration of a structure. 
    Dormer. A window set upright in a sloping roof. Also used to refer to the roofed projection in which such window is set. 
    Downtown core. Area of land located south of the Colorado River, north of 13th Street, east of School Street, and west of Cleveland Avenue, and including North Glenwood, generally east of Laurel Avenue. The area includes Block 1-67, Glenwood Springs Original Town Site as platted in 1913, excluding outlots 1 through 33; and includes the South Addition as platted in 1936. 
    Driveway. A private access way providing access between a street and destinations points within an adjacent property. 
    Dwelling or dwelling unit. A building or portion of a building designed and intended to be used by a person or family for private residential occupancy. A dwelling has its own separate entrance, permanent plumbing, and is equipped with facilities for sleeping, bathing, and cooking. 
    Easement. A grant by a property for use of land for designated private or public purposes by another agency or the public. 
    Electronic message sign. A sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures, or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means, including animated graphics and video. 
    Elevation. The external faces of a building; also a mechanically accurate "head-on" drawing of any one (1) face of a building or object, without any allowance for the effect of the laws of perspective. 
    Eligible. A property that has been determined by the State Historic Preservation Officer or the National Parks Service, Department of the Interior, to meet the National Register of Historic Places Criteria for Evaluation. 
    Emergency service provider. A governmental entity providing fire protection, emergency medical, rescue and ambulance services or any combination of such services. 
    Emergency services. Fire protection, emergency medical, rescue and ambulance services or any combination of such services. 
    Emergency services impact fee. A fee for fire protection or emergency medical, rescue and ambulance service established by Subsection 070.040.030(g)(5). 
    Encroachment. A private improvement, structure, or obstruction extending into or located within, upon, above, or under any public right-of-way or public easement. 
    Engineering standards. City of Glenwood Springs Engineering Standards. 
    Evergreen. A plant that retains leaves and/or needles year-round. 
    Exterior architectural appearance. The architectural character and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not limited to the kind, color and texture of the building material and the type, design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant elements. 
    Façade. Any side of a building that faces a street or open space. The front façade is the front or principal face of a building. 
    Fence. A man-made barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen, or separate areas. 
    Finished grade. The final elevation of the ground surface after completion of authorized development and associated man-made alterations of the ground surface such as grading, grubbing, fillings, or excavating. 
    Fire protection. The prevention and extinguishment of fire, protection of life and property from fire, and enforcement of municipal, county, district and state fire prevention codes. 
    Fixture. A complete lighting unit, consisting of a lamp, reflector, refractor or lens, wiring and sockets. 
    Fixture height or mounting height. The vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the fixture to the lowest direct light-emitting part of the fixture. 
    Flag. Any fabric containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols used as an emblem, symbol, standard, or decoration and which is hoisted on a permanent flagpole or otherwise displayed from a building. 
    Floodlight. A light fixture equipped with a reflector or reflector type bulb designed to broadly light a scene or object with minimal control. The beam spread of floodlights may range from "spot" lights of ten (10) to twenty (20) degrees to "floods" with angles of thirty-five (35) or more degrees. 
    Floor area. The total habitable horizontal area of all floors in a building. Bathroom, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, garages, and similar areas are not considered habitable space. 
    Flush-mounted or recessed fixture. A fixture that is mounted above the ceiling (or behind a wall or other surface) with the opening of the fixture even with the surface. 
    Foot-candle (fc). A measure of light falling on a given surface or a unit of illumination of a surface that is equal to one (1) lumen per square foot. One (1) foot-candle is equal to the amount of light generated by one (1) candle shining on a square foot surface one (1) foot away. Foot-candles can be measured both horizontally and vertically by a foot-candle or light meter. Foot-candles shall be measured at grade level by a digital light meter, unless otherwise noted in Section 070.040.100, Exterior Lighting. 
    Footprint. For purposes of this Code, the physical area covered by a building or structure. 
    Free range. Chicken hens being allowed to move about within an open area on the property without the benefit of a chicken coop or run. 
    Freestanding sign. Any sign that is structurally separate from the building housing the use to which the sign pertains. 
    Full cut-off fixture. A fixture light distribution where a maximum of two and one-half (21/2) percent of the total lamp lumens may be emitted ninety (90) degrees above the lowest point of a sphere; a maximum of ten (10) percent of the total lamp lumens may be emitted between eighty (80) and ninety (90) degrees above the lowest point of a sphere; and ninety (90) percent of the total lamp lumens must fall below eighty (80) degrees of the lowest point of a sphere. (Figure 070-1) 

Figure 070-1: Full Cut-Off Fixture
    Fully shielded light. Light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no light rays are directly emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane as certified by a photometric test report. The fixture must also be properly installed and adjusted to effectively down direct light in order to comply with the definition. Exemptions from this definition may be allowed for aesthetic lighting elements, such as shades with perforated patterns and opaque diffusers. (Figure 070-2) 

Figure 070-2: Fully Shielded Light
    Gable roof. A pitched roof with a ridge and vertical ends. 
    Ghost sign. An old sign which may or may not be applicable to the building or use where it is located that appears faded and is not maintained. Ghost signs must be designated as historical signs. Ghost signs usually appear on masonry structures and the image appears when wet. 
    Glare. An intense light that is overpowering and visually unpleasant. 
    Grade, finished. The average of the ground elevations at the center of all walls of a building, following completion of site grading. If a wall is parallel to and within five (5) feet of a sidewalk, finished grade is measured at the sidewalk. 
    Gross floor area. The total square footage of all finished and unfinished and enclosed floors of the building, including but not limited to living areas, garages, storage, utility spaces, and enclosed porches. Crawl spaces are not included in gross floor area calculations. 
    GSHPC. The Glenwood Springs Historic Preservation Commission. 
    Hardship. A condition by which the property in question cannot be put to reasonable use under existing regulations, subject to a showing of proof under Subsection 070.060.070(a), Variance. 
    Heat island effect. Developed or built up areas that are hotter than undeveloped or rural areas due to the sun's effect on dry exposed surfaces such as roofs and pavement. Heat islands typically occur during the day and at night, and are stronger during the hot summer months. 
    Height, building. See "Building Height." 
    Height, sign. For freestanding signs, the vertical distance between the average elevation of the ground adjoining the sign and the level of the highest point of the sign. 
    High intensity discharge light source (HID). A light source characterized by an arc tube or discharge capsule that produces light, with typical sources being metal halide, high pressure sodium, and other similar types which are developed in accordance with accepted industry standards. 
    Hip roof. A roof with sloped ends instead of vertical ends. 
    Historic building, improvement, structure, site, or object. A building, structure, site, or object that that has been designated by the City Council pursuant to Article 070.050: Historic Preservation, as a local landmark or as contributing to a local historic district; or that is officially designated or has been determined eligible to be on the national or state registers of historic places. 
    Historic designation sign. A sign, designated by the City Council, as having historical significance to the City. 
    Historic district. An area designated as an "historic district" by ordinance of the City Council, which may contain within definable geographic boundaries one (1) or more landmarks, and which may have within its boundaries other properties, improvements or structures that, while not of such historic and/or architectural significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmarks located within the historic district. 
    Holiday decorations. Ornamental materials temporarily displayed on traditionally accepted holidays. 
    Holiday lighting. Lighting displays from November 15 through February 28 of the following year. 
    Illuminating Engineering Society (IES). The Illuminating Engineering Society is an association of professionals in the field of lighting and related professions. Its membership is made up of engineers, architects, designers, manufacturers, contractors, distributors, utility personnel, educators, students, and scientists. 
    Illumination, direct. Lighting by means of an unshielded light source, including neon tubing but not including electronic message signs, that is effectively visible as part of a sign, where light travels directly from the source to the viewers' eyes. 
    Illumination, indirect. Lighting by the surface of a light source that is directed at the reflecting surface in such a way as to illuminate the sign from the front or a light source that is primarily designed to illuminate the entire building façade upon which a sign is displayed, but does not include lighting that is primarily used for purposes other than sign illumination, including without limitation, parking lot lights or lights inside a building that may silhouette a window sign that are not primarily installed to serve as illumination of a sign. 
    Illumination, internal. Lighting by means of a light source that is within a sign having a translucent background and silhouettes opaque letters or designs, or that is within letters or designs that are themselves made of translucent material. 
    Impervious surface. An asphalt, concrete, or other surface that is not a component of a porous paving system. 
    Improvements. For the purposes of this Code, the community public works and facilities determined to be necessary in relation to proposed development, including, but not limited to; access drives, landscaping, parking facilities, sanitary sewers, site and street lighting, storm drainage facilities, street facilities, traffic control facilities, and water facilities. All required improvements shall comply with current requirements and standards as established in this Code and other applicable sections of the Municipal Code. 
    Infill residential. Residential development on a parcel or tract of land that shares a common lot line with at least two (2) existing single-family homes and is located within a residential zoning district. Infill development generally occurs on lots that are already subdivided, and that are less than one (1) acre in size and located within established single-family neighborhoods; however, some larger parcels may also be included in this definition. 
    Inflatable sign. Any sign of non-rigid material that utilizes air or other gases, either under pressure or heated, to maintain its shape. 
    Interior sign. See "window sign." 
    Lamp. A bulb, an outer glass envelope, and metal base enclosing a filament or arc tube and electrodes. 
    Landmark. A property or structure designated as a landmark by ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration and preservation because of its historic and/or architectural significance to the City. 
    Landmark alteration certificate. A certificate issued after approval of plans for alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a landmark or of a structure within an historic district. 
    Landscape elements. Annual plants, benches, chairs, perennial plants, planters, shrubs, statuaries, trees, yard ornaments, and similar elements. 
    Landscape strip. A landscaped area located within the public right-of-way between the sidewalk and the edge of curb or pavement. 
    Landscape, landscaping. Live plant materials or areas designed, planted, preserved, and maintained with live plant materials, including perennial ground covers, trees, shrubs, and grasses. 
    Legally subdivided. Land that has been the subject of a plat filed with the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder that legally establishes boundaries or lot lines or for which a subdivision approval has been issued. 
    Light pollution. The excess illumination of the nighttime environment that results in the loss of visibility of the stars. 
    Light source. The element of a lighting fixture that is the point of origin of the lumens emitted by the fixture. 
    Light trespass. The shining of light produced beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located, where light is produced by a light fixture or reflected light. 
    Limits of disturbance. The specific area(s) of a site established pursuant to Subsection 070.040.020(a)(4), Limits of Disturbance, within which construction and development activity shall be contained. The limits of disturbance shall be shown on the site/architectural plan and shall include all principal and accessory buildings and structures, driveways, septic fields, and areas used during construction activities. 
    Linear lighting. The use of visible or concealed light sources, including neon tubes, fluorescent tubing, and other surface-mounted or recessed light sources that describe or outline the features of a structure such as the roofline, all or part of the perimeter, the façade, walls, soffit, or other structural component, that results in the attraction of attention to the feature or structure. Lighting of drive-under canopies with a light band a maximum of ten (10) inches in width and that emit a light level of one and one-half (1/2) foot-candles or less, measured ten (10) feet from the source, are exempted from this definition. 
    Lot. A unit, plot, or parcel of land or assemblage of contiguous parcels of land as established by survey, plat, or deed. 
    Lot coverage. The percentage of a lot area occupied by the ground area of principal and accessory buildings or structures. 
    Lumen. A measure of light energy generated by a light source. Manufacturers list lumen ratings for all their lamps. Average lumen ratings are slightly lower than initial lumen ratings, as all light sources produce less light as they age. 
    Marquee. A permanent, rigid, flat, roof-like structure attached to and wholly supported by a building, and projecting over the primary entrance to a building. 
    Marquee sign. A sign depicted upon, attached to, or supported by a marquee. 
    Masonry. Stonework, brickwork, or concrete masonry unit (CMU) bonded with mortar by a mason. 
    Master plan. An optional procedure for large and complex projects whereby an applicant may obtain overall entitlements of a development project prior to submitting for site/architectural plan and/or construction plan approval pursuant to the procedures in Subsection 070.060.050(b), Master Plan. 
    Master sign plan. A comprehensive sign program for a multi-use building or multi-building commercial development. 
    Maximum extent feasible. As determined by the Director, no feasible and prudent alternative exists, and all possible efforts to comply with the regulation or minimize potential harm or adverse impacts have been undertaken. Economic considerations may be taken into account but shall not be the overriding factor in determining "maximum extent feasible." 
    Maximum extent practicable. The degree to which a project meets an adopted standard in which all possible efforts to comply with the standard or to minimize harmful or adverse effects have been undertaken by the applicant, but full compliance cannot be achieved, and no feasible or practical alternative exists. Economic considerations may be taken into account, but shall not be the overriding factor determining "maximum extent practicable." 
    Mean average. The mean average is calculated by summing all values in a series and dividing by the number of values in that series. For example, the mean average of the values 5, 7, 9, and 11 is 8 (5+7+9+11/4 or 32/4 = 8). 
    Mechanical and utility equipment. Mechanical and utility equipment includes, but is not limited to transformers, air conditioning units, heating and soft water tanks, television antennas/satellite dishes, security apparatus, and electric and gas meters. Mechanical and utility equipment does not include solar panels. 
    Median average. The median average is calculated by taking the "middle" value of all values in a series. For example, the median average of the values 5, 7, 8, 9, and 10 is 8 (two (2) values are below 8 and two (2) values are above 8). In the case where there is an even number of values, the median average shall equal the mean average of the middle two (2) values. For example, the median average of the values 5, 7, 9, and 11 is 8 (mean average of 7 and 9, or 9+7/2 = 8). 
    Minor subdivision. Any subdivision meeting the applicability standards in Subsection 070.060.060(a), Minor Subdivision. 
    Mobile home, dependent. Means a mobile home that has no toilet, bathtub or shower facilities. 
    Mobile home, independent. Means a mobile home that has a toilet and a bathtub or shower. 
    Mobile home space. Means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home. 
    Monument sign. A freestanding ground sign typically containing design elements such as a base, columns, borders, topper, or cap specifically intended for the display of the sign. 
    Multi-family development. A structure or part thereof designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) or more families and commonly referred to as a duplex (two-family dwelling), triplex, fourplex, townhouse, or apartment house. 
    Multi-tenant building. Any nonresidential building with more than one (1) tenant or use. The issuance of multiple sales tax licenses by the City is not necessarily a criteria to determine multiuse building status. 
    Natural grade. The vertical elevation of the existing ground surface prior to excavation, filling, or disturbance. 
    Neighboring. A lot or parcel of land that shares a common lot line(s) with another lot or parcel of land. A property that shares only a corner with another property is excluded from this definition. 
    Nonconforming lot. A lawfully established lot created prior to adoption of this Code that does not comply with the minimum lot size requirements of this Code. 
    Nonconforming sign. A lawfully established sign constructed or installed prior to adoption of this Code that does not comply with the sign regulations of this Code. 
    Nonconforming sign. Any sign that was lawfully erected and maintained under prior codes but that does not meet the provisions of this Code. 
    Nonconforming site feature. Any driveway, off-street parking and loading, landscaping, buffer, screening, or exterior lighting that lawfully existed prior to adoption of this Code but does not comply with the driveway, off-street parking and loading, landscaping, buffer, screening, or exterior lighting standards of this Code. 
    Nonconforming structure. A lawfully established building or structure constructed or installed prior to adoption of this Code that does not comply with the area, height, or placement regulations of this Code. 
    Nonconforming use. A use that lawfully existed prior to adoption of this Code, but does not comply with the terms of this Code. 
    Nonconformity. An existing use, structure, lot of record, or sign that was lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Code and that does not conform to one (1) or more provisions of this Code. 
    Nonconformity, illegal. An existing use, structure, lot of record, or sign that does not conform with one (1) or more provisions of this Code and that was not lawfully established before the effective date of this Code. 
    Noncontributing. A "noncontributing" property does not add to historic architectural qualities, historic associations, or archaeological values, usually because of alterations, additions or other changes. If the property no longer possesses integrity reflecting its character at the time or is incapable of yielding information about the period, then it is considered noncontributing. Many buildings are rated noncontributing simply because the building was constructed within the last fifty (50) years. 
    Non-infill residential. Residential development, on a parcel not zoned residential or on a parcel or tract of land, zoned residential, which shares common lot lines with fewer than two (2) existing single-family homes. Non-infill development will generally occur in non-residential zone districts or on residentially-zoned parcels located outside of established single-family neighborhoods; however, some parcels greater than one (1) acre in size located in established single-family neighborhoods may also be included in this definition. 
    Nonliving ground cover. Any material used in landscaping including, but not limited to, concrete, gravel, bark, mulch, asphalt, stone and brick. 
    Nonstructural trim. The molding, battens, caps, nailing strips, latticing, cut-outs, letters, and other nonessential structures that are attached to the sign structure. 
    Occupancy. The purpose for which a building or structure is used or intended to be used; and, in the case of residential uses, such term can also refer to the number of persons who reside within a building, dwelling unit, or other structure. 
    Off-premises sign. Any off-premises sign, including without limitation, a billboard or general outdoor advertising device, that directs attention to a use, product, service, or activity conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the same property or within the same building upon which such sign is located. 
    Off-site parking. A site or portion of a site devoted to the off-street parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas that is located outside the subject property boundary. 
    Off-street parking. Parking that is not located in a public or private right-of-way. 
    Open space. An area or areas suitable for passive and/or active recreational use, that provides visual relief to developed areas or that is set aside to protect water, air, wildlife habitat, vegetation, or significant or scenic views providing benefit to the particular development, surrounding environment, and/or surrounding community. 
    Open space, active. Common open space improved with permanent recreational facilities such as trails, playground equipment, ball courts, or playing fields. 
    Open space, common. A type of open space reserved for the use of the residents of a development or subdivision and their guests for passive and/or active recreation. 
    Open space, passive. Common open space lacking permanent recreational improvements. 
    Open space, private. The outdoor living area adjoining a dwelling unit or owned by or otherwise limited to the use of the residents of a particular dwelling unit. Examples include private patios, courtyards, and yard areas. 
    Ordinary repairs and maintenance. Work done on a building in order to correct any deterioration of, decay of or damage to a building or any part thereof in order to restore the same as nearly as practical to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage. 
    Orient. To bring in relation to, or adjust to, the surroundings, situation, or environment; to place with the most important parts facing in certain directions; and/or to set or arrange in a determinate position. 
    Owner of record. The person, corporation, or other legal entity listed as owner on the records of the County Clerk and Recorder. 
    Parapet. The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level. 
    Parcel. An area within legally described boundaries under common ownership and capable of being separately conveyed. 
    Park models. A trailer-type recreational vehicle designed to provide temporary accommodation for recreation, camping, or seasonal use. Park models are not intended to be permanently affixed to the property as a residence. 
    Parking area. A contiguous area provided for parking, including driveways, maneuvering space, parking lot landscaping areas, snow storage areas, and other ancillary space in addition to vehicle parking spaces. 
    Parking Demand. The total number of off-street parking spaces needed to park the vehicles associated with the operations of and individuals present at a particular site, use, or structure. 
    Permanent sign. Any sign that is permanently affixed or attached to the ground or to any structure. 
    Phasing. A plan for construction of a development in portions over time, including time ranges that shall be specified in the development application. 
    Photocell. A type of resistor that can be used to detect light. Also commonly known as a CdS (Cadmium-Sulfide) cell, photoresistor, or LDR (light dependent resistor). 
    Planned unit development (or PUD). A development designed to accommodate varied types of development in patterns or layouts not otherwise permissible in other zoning districts established by this Code. Planned Unit Developments are designed to provide additional amenities or benefits to the City in return for flexibility in the design, layout, and dimensions of the development. Approval of a PUD shall require a rezoning pursuant to Subsection 070.060.040(b), Rezoning to PUD. 
    Planning commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Glenwood Springs. 
    Plat. A map delineating the subdivision of land, commonly showing lots, blocks, streets, and other features relevant to the development of land pursuant to this Code, used as an instrument for recording real estate interests with the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder. 
    Pole sign. A freestanding sign erected on a frame, mast, or pole that is affixed to the ground and not attached to any building. 
    Porch. Any gallery, veranda, piazza, portico, or similar protection from the main wall of a building and covered by a roof, other than a carport, with no opaque side enclosures (except screens and handrails) that is more than thirty-six (36) inches in height. 
    Porous paving system. A system providing erosion control, softening hard surfaces, reducing stormwater/snowmelt runoff, and/or providing green space. The system includes concrete, plastic, or other systems which may incorporate grass or other landscaped spaces. 
    Portable sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a building, not including signs attached to vehicles, except vehicles parked specifically for the purpose of signage. 
    Premises. The land, building, or portion of the building occupied by the land use or activity being conducted. 
    Primary material. Material covering seventy (70) percent or more of the exterior wall elevations. 
    Primary street. The street from which the development faces or is accessed. Primary street frontages do not include alleys, interior parking courts, or other secondary access points. 
    Principal use. The primary or predominant use of any lot, building, or structure. 
    Projecting sign. A sign attached to a building or extending in whole or in part fifteen (15) inches or more horizontally beyond the façade of a building to which the sign is attached, but does not include a marquee sign. 
    Public hearing. A formal meeting held under public notice intended to inform the public and obtain public input. 
    Public improvements. Any improvement, facility, or service, together with its associate site and any right-of-way necessary to provide transportation, drainage, utilities, or similar essential services and facilities, that is usually owned and operated by a government entity or agency. 
    Public sign. A sign required by the local and/or state government, or signs erected or required by other government agencies, utilities, or special districts, including address signs, signs for traffic, schools, safety, railroad crossing, wayfinding, civic and special events, public notices, and other official and legal notices. 
    Reader board. An accessory sign cabinet contained within a distinct border that allows for changeable copy. 
    Recreation, active. Outdoor leisure activities requiring permanent recreational improvements to the area in which they are performed. These areas are intensively used and may include improvements such as trails, playground equipment, ball courts, or playing fields. 
    Recreation, passive. Outdoor leisure activities that do not require permanent recreational improvements to open space areas. Examples include picnicking, hiking unimproved trails, enjoyment of scenery, and play in open grassy areas. 
    Recreational vehicle. Means a portable structure not more than eight (8) feet wide and thirty-five (35) feet long that is designed for extended highway travel, to be driven as or pulled by a private vehicle which requires no special permit for the same, and which is intended as a portable dwelling for vacation and recreational purposes only; or a camp car, motorhome or tent trailer, with or without motor power, and identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer. 
    Redevelopment. Development on a tract of land with existing structures where all or a majority of the existing structures would be razed and a new structure or structures built. 
    Reflected light. The light that is reflected off surfaces, becoming a secondary light source. 
    Related accessory equipment. The transmission equipment customarily used with, and incidental to WCF antennas, including by way of example, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supply and remote radio units. 
    Relocation. Any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site. 
    Repair. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance. 
    Rezoning. A change in the zoning district classification applied to land by the Zoning Map, reviewed and decided by the City Council under Subsection 070.060.040(a), Rezoning. 
    Right-of-way. Any strip or area of land, including surface, overhead, or underground, granted by deed, easement, dedication, prescription, or lease, for construction and maintenance according to designated use, such as for streets and highways, drainage ditches, irrigation canals, etc. 
    Roof form. The shape of a roof, of which there are many variations. The most common roof forms are sloped roofs (roofs constructed of flat sections that are sloped) and flat roofs. Sloped roofs include side gable roofs or end gable roofs (based on whether the gable ends are on the sides or front and back of the building), and may have dormers. The edges of flat roofs (particularly along the front of a building) are commonly defined by parapets and/or cornices. 
    Roof sign. A sign painted on the roof of a building, supported by poles, uprights, or braces, extending from the roof of a building, or projecting above the roof of a building, but does not include a sign projecting from or attached to a façade wall. 
    Run. When associated with backyard chickens, a "run" is an enclosed and secured facility where chicken hens are able to move around more freely than within a chicken coop. 
    Screening. A method of visually shielding or obscuring a nearby structure, building, or use on an abutting or adjacent property or lot from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely planted vegetation. 
    Setback. The minimum distance between a lot line and a building or structure required by this Code. 
    Shared parking. The joint use of a parking area by more than one (1) use. 
    Sidewalk. Any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Sight distance triangle. The area around an intersection where no obstructions above forty-two (42) inches in height are permitted, and as specifically determined by the City Engineer as prescribed in the Engineering Standards. 
    Sign. Any object or device or part of an object or device situated outdoors that is used to identify, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, purpose, product, service, contract, event, or location by means of copy. Examples include: words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination, or projected images that are visible from any street, alley, or other public right-of-way. 
    Sign area. The entire area contained within the face of a sign, including all ornamentation or decoration used to attract attention. The sign area shall be the sum of the area of all letters, words, or symbols that can be contained in lines forming the smallest plane geometric shapes around all such letters, words, or symbols having eight (8) or fewer segments. 
    Sign on a parked vehicle. A sign placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers that are parked on a public right-of-way, public property or private property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product, use, service, or activity or direct people to a property. 
    Sign structure. Any supports, uprights, braces, or framework of a sign. 
    Significance. The value placed on a building relating to its architectural or historical importance, as defined by Article 070.050: Historic Preservation. 
    Single-tenant building. A building occupied by one (1) tenant or use. 
    Site/architectural plan. A plan drawn to scale showing uses and structures proposed for a lot or parcel. 
    Site/architectural plan approval. Approval of site/architectural plans according to the procedures in Subsection 070.060.050(a). 
    Site-specific development plan. A plan that has obtained final development approval under the standards and procedures contained in this Code, and that describes with reasonable certainty the type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels of property, and includes all terms and conditions of approval. A site-specific development plan includes only the following application types: 
a.  Master plan; 
b.  Administrative site/architectural plan; 
c.  Minor site/architectural plan; 
d.  Major site/architectural plan; 
e.  Planned unit development; and 
f.  Final plat. 
    Special use permit. A permit issued pursuant to Subsection 070.060.050(e), Special Use Permit, for uses designated in the allowable use table (Table 030.1) as requiring special use permit approval. 
    Start of construction. The date the building permit was issued, including substantial improvements, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. 
    Stop work order. An order issued by the Director that directs the person responsible for an activity in violation of this Code to cease and desist such activity. 
    Street. Any highway, street, avenue, or common place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway, dedicated to the City or otherwise devoted to common public use, excluding alleys. 
    Street, private. A way of access to two (2) or more parcels of land that is open to vehicular ingress and egress, and that is owned and maintained by affected property owners, but that is not considered to be a driveway. 
    Streetscape. Landscape materials located adjacent to street rights-of-way intended to enhance, soften, or screen the view of a building, structure, or land use. 
    Structure. Anything that is constructed or erected and located on or under the ground, or attached to something fixed to the ground, including a walled and roofed building, wall, fence, pergola, and/or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    Subdivision. The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, or building development, including any resubdivision. In some contexts, the term "subdivision" may also describe the process of subdividing land or the land subdivided. 
    Substantial compliance. Unless a specific permit or process establishes different criteria, a permit or plan substantially complies with the applicable approval criteria if the proposed use or development: does not significantly (i) alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property; (ii) change the uses permitted; (iii) increase the maximum density, floor area ratio, or height; (iv) decrease the amount of required off street parking; or (v) reduce the minimum yards required at the boundary of the site. 
    Suspended sign. A sign suspended from the ceiling of an awning, marquee, or canopy. 
    Tandem parking. A parking space in which two (2) vehicles are parked end-to-end or stacked vertically using lift equipment and in which one (1) vehicle must be moved before the second vehicle can access a street, driveway, alley, parking lot, or parking garage driving aisle. 
    Temporary Sign. A sign, banner, or similar device or display that is intended for a limited duration of display. 
    Temporary use. Any outdoor retail and/or wholesale sales use on a short-term basis, including, but not limited to: produce stands, peddlers, solicitors, hawkers, itinerant merchants, and transient merchants, and excluding temporary promotions or sidewalk sales by permanent businesses on their own property. 
    Temporary use permit. A permit issued pursuant to Section 070.030.050, Temporary Uses and Structures. 
    Time-temperature-date sign. A sign that displays the current time, outdoor temperature, date of the month, or any combination of that information. 
    Tract. An area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property that is the subject of a development application. For subdivisions, the term is used for units of land created for and limited by deed restriction or dedication to a specific use, including access, utility placement, open space, or natural resource areas. 
    Traffic-control sign. Any government sign used to direct or control the movement of motor vehicles and/or pedestrians within public streets, alleys, or rights-of-way. 
    Tree lawn. See "landscape strip." 
    Twinkle lighting. String lighting of low voltage (not greater than 2.5 volts per light). 
    Uniformity ratio. The ratio of average illumination to minimum illumination (unless noted otherwise). 
    Use. The utilization of land and property as permitted by this Code. Allowable uses for each zoning district are listed in Table 030.1. 
    Variance. A development permit authorizing a deviation from the standards of this Code where strict application of this Code results in a hardship due to circumstances with a particular lot and that is reviewed and decided pursuant to Subsection 070.060.070(a), Variance. 
    Vertical foot-candles. A measurement of illuminance intensity on a vertical surface, such as a wall or billboard. 
    Vested property right. The right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a site-specific development plan and any accompanying permit or agreement. 
    Walkway. An off-street hard-surfaced walk or raised pedestrian path. 
    Wall sign. A sign displayed upon or against the wall of an enclosed building, where the exposed face of the sign is in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall and extends no more than fifteen (15) inches horizontally from the face of the wall. 
    Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
    Wind sign. A sign consisting of one (1) or more flags, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, captive balloons, or other objects or material fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind. 
    Window sign. A sign that is painted on, applied, or attached to, or located within fifteen (15) inches of the interior of a window and that can be seen through the window from the exterior of the structure, but excludes merchandise included in a window display. 
    Yard sign. A non-permanent sign constructed of paper, vinyl, plastic, wood, metal, or other material that is intended to be displayed for a limited duration. 
    Zoning district. A specific delineated area on the Zoning Map within which uniform standards govern the use, placement, spacing, size, and form of land and buildings. 
    Zoning map. The official zoning map as adopted by the City of Glenwood Springs. 
(Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-2-2018) 
TITLE 080 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE 080.010 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

080.010.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Title, certain terms are defined as follows unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning was intended by the City Council: 
    Board of Utilities Service Appeal consists of the City Manager, the Director of Community Operations and the Director of Electric Services. 
    Due date means the date the utility service charges are due. 
    Electric Utility Board consists of the City Council members. 
    Utility service means electric, water and wastewater service or any one (1) or more of these. A service shall be considered a single meter or metering point or the point of connection of a service line to the City distribution (collection) line in the event a service is unmetered. 
    Utility service charges means the charges incurred by a user, be it by the owner, lessee or licensee of utility services, but shall not include line extension costs. 
(23-83 § 2) 
080.010.020 - Application for service. 
(a)  Required. Before any utility service shall be supplied to any person, application for such service shall be made to the City Manager on a form to be provided by the City. In addition to such information as deemed necessary by the City Manager, the application shall advise the applicant of the right to designate a third party to be notified in the event of discontinuance of service. Such application for service shall be signed by all parties who are responsible for payment for the utility service prior to the commencement of such service; however, the failure of a person to sign such application shall not relieve that person from liability for payment when such service is received by that person. 
(b)  Owner liability for lessee. The City, at its option, may require an owner, as well as a lessee or licensee, of premises to which utility service is supplied to agree to pay and to pay for all charges for such service, in which event the owner and the lessee or licensee, or both, shall be required to sign the application for service. 
(c)  Owner notification. In the event an owner wishes to be notified of utility service billing information for utility service to his/her premises which are occupied by others, he/she shall supply the City, on a form provided by the City, with a written notification form which must be signed by the owner and the person receiving such utility service. The City may charge a reasonable fee, determined by the City Manager, for providing such duplicate billing service. 
(Code 1971 § 22-3[a]) 
080.010.030 - Deposits. 
(a)  Requirements. The City shall require any owner, lessee or licensee to pay a deposit for each type of utility service for each residential unit and for each type of utility service for each commercial unit. Such deposit shall be paid to the City prior to the commencement of any type of utility service. The deposit fee shall be established by City Council Resolution. 
(b)  Exception. A deposit may be waived by the City Manager where the person to be responsible for payment of the utility service has an established good credit history with the City as defined in Subsection (f) below. 
(c)  Interest. Interest shall be paid on utility service deposits at the rate which is determined by the Colorado Public Utilities Commission on an annual basis. 
(d)  Application to account. Upon discontinuance of the utility service by the customer, such deposit plus accrued interest shall be applied to the final bill and the excess, if any, shall be refunded to the customer within fifteen (15) days of the discontinuance of service. In the event of discontinuance of utility service by the City, such deposit plus accrued interest shall be applied to the outstanding charges with the excess, if any, refunded to the customer within fifteen (15) days of the discontinuance of service. 
(e)  Application to other types of service. A deposit for one (1) type of utility service cannot be applied to unpaid charges for another type of utility service without the written permission of the customer. However, the City need not refund any deposits paid pursuant to this section, except for a good credit history as noted in Subsection (f) below, so long as any utility service charges are due to the City by that customer. 
(f)  Refunds. Deposits paid pursuant to this section plus accrued interest shall be refunded to the customer whenever the customer has established a good credit history with the City which, for purposes of this section, shall mean no less than twelve (12) months of payments for utility service on a current basis or upon discontinuance of utility service when charges for all types of utility service to the City have been paid in full. Such refunds shall be made within thirty (30) days of establishment of a good credit history or within fifteen (15) days of the date of discontinuance of service. 
(g)  New deposits. If a customer receives a notice of discontinuance of a utility service for nonpayment of utility service charges or has a utility service discontinued for nonpayment of service charges, such customer shall be required, in addition to other requirements of this Article, to pay a deposit as established by City Council Resolution. 
(Code 1971 § 22-3[b]; 3-93 § 1; Ord. No. 15-2018, § 2, 7-5-2018 ) 
080.010.040 - Connection fee. 
    Before any water or electric service for a new customer is commenced, the applicant for such service shall pay a fee as established by City Council Resolution for each type of service. This fee shall be paid upon initial commencement or recommencement of service. 
(18-86; Ord. No. 15-2018, § 2, 7-5-2018 ) 
080.010.050 - Utility service charges. 
(a)  When charges due and payable. All charges for utility service shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days after the date the City mails a bill to the customer. If such charges remain unpaid for fifteen (15) days after the mailing of a bill, a late fee as established by City Council Resolution and the City may follow the discontinuation procedures set forth in Section 080.010.060. 
(b)  Disputes over bills. Any customer who disputes the charges on a utility service bill may request a meeting with the appropriate City employee to resolve the dispute. Such request shall be made on or before the due date for these charges. If the customer is dissatisfied with the decision of the City employee, he/she may appeal that decision to the City Manager by filing with the City Clerk a written appeal setting forth the manner in which the customer disputes the charges. Such written appeal shall be made within five (5) business days of the date of the meeting with the City employee. The City Manager shall meet with the customer within three (3) business days of the receipt of the appeal and shall render a decision at the conclusion of such meeting. If the customer is dissatisfied with the City Manager's decision, the customer shall file a written appeal of that decision with the City Clerk within three (3) business days of the City Manager's decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the Board of Utilities Service Appeal within five (5) business days from the receipt of the appeal. The decision of the Board of Utilities Service Appeal shall be final. No utility service may be discontinued during this dispute process for legitimate disputes about charges; however, the City may begin the discontinuance notice provisions during such dispute process. 
(c)  Account history. Should a customer request a history of his/her utility service charges, the City may charge a reasonable fee, as determined by the City Manager, to pay for the cost of preparation of such account history. 
(d)  Adjustment limitation. No adjustment in charges for utility service may be made, including refunds or extra charges after twelve (12) months from the due date for such utility service charges. 
( Ord. No. 15-2018, § 2, 7-5-2018 ) 
080.010.060 - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  Grounds for discontinuance. If any utility service charges remain unpaid for fifteen (15) days after their due date, the City may terminate service for the type of utility service for which payment has not been made. In addition, the City may terminate a utility service for violation of any rule or regulation concerning such utility as set forth in this Title. 
(b)  Notice of termination. In order to terminate any services the City shall send a notice of termination by first class mail or, at the City's option, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by posting in a conspicuous place at or near the main entrance to the premises served by such utility service to the customer listed on the City records and, at the City's option, to the occupant of the premises served and/or the owner of the premises served. The notice shall include information containing the following: 
(1)  That the customer is entitled to a hearing in person before termination of service at a reasonable time and place by requesting such hearing, in writing, within ten (10) days of the date of the notice of discontinuance; 
(2)  That the customer may avoid termination of service by paying the current utility service charges in full and entering into a reasonable installment payment agreement with the City to pay any past due balance in no more than six (6) equal monthly installments; 
(3)  That, in the event the customer is unable to pay for such utility service charge as regularly billed by the City or is able to pay for such service but only in reasonable installments and there is a medical certification delivered to the City indicating that termination of service would be especially dangerous to the health and safety of the customer or a permanent resident of the customer's household, as such medical emergency is defined in Subsection (f)(3) below, there will not be discontinuance of service for sixty (60) days from the date of medical certification, with a possible thirty-day extension upon delivery of the second medical certification; 
(4)  A list of major federal, state or local governmental agencies known to the City which provide customer assistance or benefits relating to utility service. 
c.  Dispute conference. Upon the timely request of a recipient of a notice of termination, the Director of Finance shall meet and consult with the recipient of the notice within seven (7) days after receipt of the recipient's request to do so. If the Director of Finance is unavailable, the City Manager shall appoint other City personnel to do so, who shall then have all powers granted herein to the Director of Finance. The Director of Finance shall meet with the recipient and shall be empowered to settle the dispute with regard to utility service charges and violations of rules and regulations of a utility; however, any utility service charges which were not disputed by the recipient pursuant to Section 080.010.050(b) shall not be raised at this time, as such disputes shall have been deemed waived by the recipient. The Director of Finance shall issue a decision on the dispute at such conference and shall inform the recipient that the recipient has the right to appeal the decision of the Director of Finance to the Board of Utilities Service Appeals within three (3) business days of such conference. 
d.  Appeal. If a recipient files a written notice with the City Clerk to appeal the decision of the Director of Finance rendered pursuant to Subsection (c) above within three (3) business days of such decision, the City Manager shall give notice of not more than five (5) days to the members of the Board of Utility Services Appeal ("Board") and to the appellant of the time and place of a meeting of the Board to review the decision of the Director of Finance. The meeting shall be informal and, at the request of the appellant, will be recorded on the City's electronic magnetic tape system. The City and the appellant may present facts or data relevant to the dispute with or without the swearing of an oath. The Board shall consider the data and evidence before it and shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Director of Finance. The decision of the Board is final. If the decision of the Board is to order discontinuance of utility service, then such discontinuation shall occur unless, on the day of the decision or the following day, the utility service charges are paid or the violation of a rule or regulation is corrected. 
e.  Effective date of discontinuance of service. The effective date of the discontinuance of utility service shall be the earliest of: 
(1)  Eleven (11) days after the mailing by the City of a notice of termination, if no request for hearing before the Director of Finance is made; 
(2)  Four (4) working days after the decision of the Director of Finance if no appeal of his/her decision is filed with the City Clerk; or 
(3)  Two (2) days after the decision of the Board of Utility Services Appeal. 
(f)  When utility service not discontinued. Utility service shall not be discontinued: 
(1)  If all current utility service charges are paid when due and all past due amounts are being amortized by reasonable installment payments not exceeding six (6) equal monthly installments. Current bill means that portion of the bill which is not fifteen (15) days past the due date. The minimum reasonable installment payment is that which pays a current bill in full and is at least one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of any past due balance. A reasonable installment payment plan may require that the past due balance be paid in full in no more than six (6) equal installments. The City has the right, in the event there is a breach of the installment agreement, to discontinue service on or after the second day following the mailing or posting of the notice of termination to the customer at the address supplied by the customer and to require, in order for the customer to avoid termination or to be reconnected, payment in full of the current bill and of all past due amounts and the posting of a deposit and a reconnection fee as established by City Council Resolution in order for the customer to be reconnected or for utility service to continue. 
(2)  Between 12:00 p.m. on Friday and 8:00 a.m. on the following Monday or between 12:00 p.m. on the day prior to and 8:00 a.m. on the day following any federal holiday or City holiday. 
(3)  During any period when termination of service would be especially dangerous to the health or safety of any residential customer or permanent resident of the customer's household and such customer has established that he/she was unable to pay for the service as regularly billed by the City or is able to pay for such service but only in reasonable installments. Termination of service that would be especially dangerous to the health or safety of the residential customer or a permanent resident of the customer's household means that the termination of service would aggravate an existing medical condition or create a medical emergency for the customer or a permanent resident of the customer's household. Such shall be deemed to be the case when a physician licensed by the State makes a certification thereof in writing and said certification is received by the City. In the event a medical certification is delivered to or received by the City, a nondiscontinuance of service as herein prescribed shall be effective for sixty (60) days from the date of said medical certification. One (1) thirty-day extension on nontermination of service pursuant to this paragraph may be effected by delivery to and receipt by the City of a second medical certification, as defined above, prior to the expiration of the initial sixty-day nontermination. A residential customer may invoke the provisions of this paragraph no more than once during any period of twelve (12) consecutive months. A reasonable installment is defined as one which pays off at least one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the past due balance and is made no less frequently than once a month. 
(4)  In the event a customer at any time proffers full payment of any utility bill by cash or bona fide check to the Director of Finance. 
(5)  If violations of rules or regulations concerning the receipt or use of utility service have ceased. 
(g)  Reconnection. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the City from charging a reconnection fee as established by City Council Resolution before reconnecting a utility service discontinued pursuant to this section. In addition, prior to reconnection, all charges for that type of utility service must be paid to the City. 
(h)  Delivery of notice. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, whenever reference is made herein to a notice or other document being mailed or delivered, that phrase shall mean that the notice or other document is either deposited in the United States mail, postage paid, first class or certified mail, return receipt requested, at the City's option, or physically delivered to the addressee, which physical delivery will be accomplished by either handing to someone over eighteen (18) years of age at the premises served or by posting upon the main entrance of the premises served by the utility service in a conspicuous place. 
If a customer receives three (3) individual or consecutive notices of termination of service in a one (1) year timeframe, an attempt will be made to contact the account holder by an automated telephone call twenty-four (24) hours prior to services being disconnected, in accordance with the PUC 4 Code of Colorado Regulations (CCR) 723-3 Part 3, Provision 3408(f). 
(Code 1971 § 22-1[a]-[e]; Ord. No. 15-2018, § 2, 7-5-2018 ) 
080.010.070 - Short checks. 
(a)  Payments on account. All payments made for utility service charges by check for which the check is returned by the bank upon which it is drawn to the City for reason of insufficient funds or a closed account shall be considered as if no payment had been made, and the City shall have all remedies which are otherwise available to it for nonpayment. In addition, the City may add twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to the utility service charge account for each such short check. 
(b)  Shut-off notice. Where a customer has received a notice that his/her utility service will be discontinued and then pays during such notice period for such utility service by check, which check is later returned by the bank upon which it is drawn to the City for reason of insufficient funds or a closed account, the City may terminate such utility service by giving forty-eight (48) hours' notice by mailing or posting such notice in the same manner as provided in Paragraph 080.010.060(b). Such termination of utility service may only be avoided by payment in full of the check amount, plus the fee as provided in Subsection (a) above, in cash or certified funds within said forty-eight-hour period. 
(c)  Cash requirement. The City may, at any time after receiving a short check for utility service charges, require future utility service payments in cash or certified funds. 
(23-93 § 1) 
080.010.080 - Transfer of charges. 
    Whenever a person applies for utility service and has utility service charges owing to the City for the same type of utility service, the City may, at its option, require payment in full of the outstanding charges or add said charges to the new account. Such charges, if added to the new account, shall be due and payable fifteen (15) days after said new account is open. 
080.010.090 - Confidentiality of information. 
    All information acquired by the City with respect to providing utility service shall be confidential and shall not be released to any person except as follows: 
(1)  Any person, or his/her designated representative, shall have access to information relating to his/her own utility service accounts. 
(2)  Any owner, or his/her designated representative, may have access to utility service billing information for utility service to his/her premises which are occupied by others as provided in Subsection 080.010.020(c). 
(3)  Any property owner, or his/her designated representative, shall have access to information relating to current and historical utility usage on his/her property and information relating to delinquent utility service charges on his/her property. 
(4)  Any purchaser of real property under contract, or his/her designated representative, shall have access to information relating to current and historical utility usage on the subject property and information relating to delinquent utility service charges on the subject property. 
( 16-92 § 1) 
080.010.100 - Lien on property. 
(a)  Charges are lien. All utility service charges shall be a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land where the services are used from the time when incurred and shall be a perpetual lien against such lots or parcels of land until paid, and such lien shall be enforced as provided in this section. 
(b)  Notice of intent to file lien. If charges for any utility services or any combination of these services remain unpaid for fifteen (15) days after the due date for such charges, the City may send a notice of lien assessment, by first class mail or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the City's option, to the customer listed on the City's records, to the owner of the property and, at the City's option, to the occupant of the premises served. The notice shall state that the City intends to file a lien on the property served for the amount of the unpaid charges for the utility services; that the recipient of the notice may, within ten (10) days after notice is sent, contact the Director of Finance, Glenwood Springs Municipal Building, 101 W. 8th Street, Glenwood Springs, Colorado, to question, adjust and settle the matters in dispute; that the recipient may appeal the decision of the Director of Finance to the Board by filing a written notice of appeal with the Director of Finance delivered not more than three (3) working days after the decision of the Director of Finance concerning the matters in dispute; upon such appeal, that the Board shall review the matters in dispute and render a decision; that a lien for unpaid charges for utility services shall be assessed against the properties served if the arrearages remain unpaid and if the matters in dispute are determined adversely to the appellant; and that the amount of the lien shall be equal to arrearages for unpaid utilities services and other costs allowed by this Title. 
(c)  Hearings. The Director of Finance and subsequently the Board shall meet with the person to whom the notice was sent to determine whether a lien should be asserted for arrearages for utility services on the property served. The procedures shall follow substantially those set forth in Subsections 080.010.060(c) and (d), except that the question to be resolved shall be whether a lien should be asserted on the property to which utility services were furnished and the extent of arrearages for nonpayment. If the Director of Finance or, on appeal, the Board, determines that such arrearage exists as of the date of decision of the Director of Finance or the Board, respectively, or should no appeal to the Director or the Board occur, the amount of arrearages shall become a lien on the property served which shall run in favor of the City. The lien shall be certified to the County Treasurer with instructions to collect the lien in the same manner as general taxes are collected and assessed against the subject property. To collect the lien, the City may avail itself of the laws regarding liens, including laws for the sale and redemption of property for nonpayment. Without limiting the foregoing, the City may bring an action in a court of law to collect all unpaid arrearages for utility services. 
(Code 1971 §§ 22-2[a], [b], §22-81[g]; 20-11, § 2) 
080.010.110 - Violations and enforcement. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this Title or any of the rules and regulations or orders issued pursuant to this Title and, upon conviction for the same, each such person shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
080.010.120 - Low-income utility assistance programs. 
    Upon approval by an ordinance of the City Council, the City Manager may be authorized to administer assistance programs for low-income utility service customers. Such programs may include financial assistance to low-income utility customers, which assistance may be provided directly by the City or through agreement with other governmental entities. However, in no event shall preferential utility rates be granted to any utility customer under such a program. Procedures for application, billing and discontinuance of service may be approved by the City Council under such a program to supplement or supersede similar procedures as set forth in this article. 
(40-84) 
ARTICLE 080.020 - ELECTRIC REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Cannot extend electrical services into hazard avoidance area, §070.100.050, and see also Construction Building Codes in Title 060. 

080.020.010 - Electrical services rules and regulations. 
(a)  Adoption. There is hereby adopted the Rules of Practice and Procedure Before the Electric Utility Board of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, 1983 Edition, as promulgated by the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, 101 W. 8th Street, Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
(b)  Copies. Copies of the Rules of Practice and Procedure Before the Electric Utility Board are available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk, 101 W. 8th Street, Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
(c)  Disputes. All disputes arising from the Rules of Practice and Procedure Before the Electric Utility Board or other disputes regarding the provision of electrical service, except disputes over utility service charges as provided in Subsection 080.010.050, shall be made in accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure Before the Electric Utility Board of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, 1983 Edition. 
(23-83 § 3; 20-11, § 2) 
080.020.020 - Inspection and power factor. 
    The City shall have the right at any reasonable time to make inspection of lights, appliances or other devices using electrical energy from the City's electric system. If the Electric Department shall determine, upon such investigation, that the power factor of lights, luminous or other electric discharge tube lighting installations or other apparatus or equipment utilizing electricity from the City's electric system shall be less than ninety (90) percent lagging, the City may, at its option, terminate service until effective power factor corrective equipment can be approved by the City, which shall be installed at the customer's expense, or the City may increase the service rates with an adjustment to be made by increasing the measured demand one (1) percent for each one percent (1%) by which the average power factor is less than ninety (90) percent lagging. 
(Code 1971 § 22-32) 
ARTICLE 080.030 - WASTEWATER REGULATIONS 

080.030.010 - Connections to wastewater system. 
(a)  Requirement to connect. All buildings located within the City and within four hundred (400) feet of any established wastewater line, which are used for residence or business purposes or in which persons congregate or are employed, must be connected with the City wastewater system; and all plumbing fixtures in such buildings shall also be connected to the City's wastewater system. Where an established wastewater line is not so available, the building wastewater shall also be connected to a private disposal system in conformity with the design criteria and rules and regulations of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(b)  City permission required. Any person who wishes to connect onto the City's wastewater system must first make an application for such connection to the Community Development Department and pay the tap fee for such connection upon receipt of an invoice from the City which states the actual cost incurred installing the tap. 
(c)  Tap fee. The fee to tap onto the City wastewater system shall be the actual cost incurred by the City. An invoice detailing the costs incurred installing the tap shall be transmitted to the applicant for the tap. 
(d)  Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of property to maintain the wastewater service line from his/her building to the City's wastewater main. 
(e)  Abandonment of connection. No person shall abandon any building wastewater connection to the City's wastewater collection system without first obtaining a written permit therefor. Such connection shall be effectively sealed at the City's main with an approved stopper and shall be sealed as directed by the City Manager. 
(Code 1962 §§ 11-15, 11-16; Code 1971 §§ 22-45, 22-46, 22-60; 29-94 §§ 1, 2) 
080.030.020 - Line extensions. 
(a)  Service line connections or enlargement of use. No additional service line connections or enlargement of use shall be allowed on any wastewater lines which do not conform in all respects with the provisions of this article, Title 070 and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article. Any such extension shall be at the sole cost and expense of the person requesting such extension. 
(b)  Installation. All extensions to and enlargements of wastewater lines shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this article and Title 070. Such lines may, at the City's option, be installed by the City or by the person to be served by the extension or enlargement. If such extension or enlargement is to be installed by the City, the person to be served shall deposit with the Director of Finance the estimated costs of such installation. Upon completion, the person to be served shall pay any difference between the estimated cost and the actual cost; or, if an overpayment has been made, the City shall refund such excess payment. Such cost of installation shall remain a lien on the property served by such installation until paid to the City. Any extension or enlargement installed by someone other than the City shall be guaranteed for two (2) years from the date the City accepts said line. All such installations shall be subject to inspection by the City during installation. 
(c)  Oversizing. The City may require a person who requests a line extension or enlargement to enlarge the wastewater line at the time of installation to provide for anticipated users to be served by or from such line extensions. All additional costs required by such enlargement shall be paid by the City. 
(d)  Ownership of extension. All wastewater lines constructed pursuant to Subsection (b) above shall be and become the sole and exclusive property of the City, as well as any and all easements and rights-of-way therefor; and all such persons paying for the same shall, upon request of the City, execute and deliver any and all necessary and proper deeds of conveyance, assignments or other documents which the City may desire to perfect such ownership by the City. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to change the maintenance responsibility as set forth in Subsection 080.030.010(d). 
(Code 1971 §§ 22-48, 22-54, 22-56; 14-09, § 2) 
080.030.030 - Waste discharge regulations. 
(a)  Storage of wastewater lines prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any solids or insoluble matter of any kind or nature whatsoever within any wastewater line belonging to the City or any part thereof or within any connection thereto. 
(b)  Discharge of nonacceptable wastes into wastewater system prohibited. The discharge of nonacceptable wastes into the City wastewater system, whether directly or indirectly, is prohibited; and, where investigation reveals the presence in the system of nonacceptable wastes emanating from any lot, land, building or premises, the owner, lessor, renter or occupant of such lot, land, building or premises shall be required at his/her own expense to treat, neutralize or in other ways prepare the noxious substance therein to the satisfaction of the City Manager in order to convert the same into acceptable wastes. Nonacceptable wastes are herein defined as follows: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit; 
(2)  Any water or waste having a five-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand which may contain more than one thousand (1,000) parts per million by weight as averaged during any twelve-hour period, 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been property shredded; 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch, manure, grit, brick, cement, onyx, carbide or any other solid or viscous substance capable of obstruction of the flow of the wastewater lines or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater system; 
(6)  Any water or waste having a pH lower than five and one-half (5.5) or higher than nine (9), or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the wastewater system; 
(7)  Any water or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantities to injure or interfere with the wastewater process, instituting a hazard to humans or animals or creating any hazard in the receiving water at the City's wastewater treatment facility; 
(8)  Any water or waste containing suspended solids of such character or quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the City's wastewater treatment facility; 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance 
(10)  Any surface or ground water; or 
(11)  Any toxic or poisonous pollutant which causes an increase in the cost of operation and maintenance for treating and managing the sludge at the City's wastewater treatment facility. Upon violation of this paragraph, in addition to all other remedies of the City, the City shall require the violator to pay the increased costs in managing and treating such toxic or poisonous pollutants. 
In the event the above-described nonacceptable wastes cannot be treated, neutralized or in other ways prepared to the satisfaction of the City Manager, the City Manager may order the building discharging such nonacceptable wastes disconnected from the City's wastewater system until such wastes can be eliminated, treated, neutralized or in other ways prepared to the satisfaction of the City Manager. 
(c)  Use of grease, oil, sand traps. Grease, oil and sand traps or other appurtenances shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of any liquid waste containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand or other harmful ingredients. All traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City Manager and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(d)  Control manhole required. When required by the City Manager, the owner of any property served by a building wastewater line carrying industrial waste or nonacceptable waste, as defined in this section, shall install a suitable control manhole in the building wastewater line to facilitate observation and sampling of the waste by the City. Such manholes, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the City Manager. The manholes shall be installed and maintained by the owner at his/her expense. 
(Code 1962 § 11.21; Code 1971 §§ 22-51, 22-57-22-59) 
080.030.040 - Work performed. 
    Except for the digging and backfilling of ditches and except as provided in Section 050.040.050, all work upon or in connection with any portion of the wastewater system of the City or any utilities which connect thereto shall be done by the City or by a plumbing contractor licensed in accordance with C.R.S. § 12-58-101 et seq., as amended, and shall be performed in conformity with the design criteria of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment and the rules and regulations of the City. Such work shall be inspected and approved by the City. 
(Code 1962 § 11.17; Code 1971 § 22-47; 25-88 § 8) 
080.030.050 - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The City Council shall make and enforce such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the safe, efficient and economical management of the City wastewater system. There is hereby adopted by reference the Rules and Regulations Governing Construction, Maintenance and Control of the Wastewater System of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, adopted by the City Council of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, on September 21, 1972, pursuant to the authority of this section. Copies of such Rules and Regulations are available for public inspection in the Office of the City Clerk, 101 W. 8th Street, Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
(Code 1971 § 22-61; 20-11, § 2) 
ARTICLE 080.040 - WATER REGULATION 

080.040.010 - Connections to water system. 
(a)  Requirement. All connections to the City waterworks system shall be made in conformity with the provisions of this article and Title 070. 
(b)  City permission. Any person who wishes to connect onto the City's waterworks system must first make an application for such connection to the Community Development Department and pay the tap fee upon receipt of an invoice from the City which states the actual cost incurred installing the tap. 
(c)  Tap fee. The fee to tap onto the City waterworks system shall be the actual cost incurred by the City. An invoice detailing the costs incurred installing the tap shall be transmitted to the applicant for the tap. 
(d)  Service connections. The maximum size of a water service tap shall be based on the number of equivalent units (EQRs) established in Article 080.060 to be connected to the tap and shall be determined as follows: 
Number of Equivalent Units Maximum Tap Size in Inches 1 3/4 2 1 3-5 11/2 6-11 2 12-32 3 32-65 4 65-181 6  
(e)  Maintenance of service lines. All service pipe and appurtenances, including the curb cock and curb box, shall be located in a dedicated right-of-way or easement, shall be and become the sole and exclusive property of the City and shall be maintained by the City. That portion of the service line from the curb or property line to the building served shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at his/her own expense. 
(f)  Cross-connection prohibited. No person shall make, install, maintain or permit any cross-connection between the City waterworks system and any pipe, plumbing or water system which contains water of an unknown quality. Failure to remove such connection within ten (10) calendar days after being ordered in writing by the City to remove the same could result in termination of the water service. For the purposes of this subsection, cross-connection means any connection which would allow water to flow from any pipe, plumbing fixture or water system into the City waterworks system. The City also requires the installation of a Reduced Pressure Principal Assembly on any untreated (raw) water connection that uses water from the City's untreated (raw) water source. These assemblies are to be tested at the same annual frequency as other assemblies required and located on the potable water side of the City waterworks system. (Cross reference: C.R.S. § 25-1-114(h); A 24-07, §2) 
(Code 1971 §§ 22-63, 22-64; 29-94, §§ 3, 4; 24-07, § 2) 
080.040.015 - Connections to raw water irrigation system. 
(a)  Requirement. If practical and reasonable in the sole opinion of the City, any property proposed to be developed or redeveloped that is located within the City and within four hundred (400) feet of any established raw water irrigation line with available water rights for such purposes must connect to the City's raw water irrigation system in order to irrigate any lawn or other vegetation located thereon. 
(b)  City permission required. Any person wishing to connect onto the City's raw water irrigation system must first make application for such connection to the Community Development Department and pay the tap fee for such connection upon receipt of an invoice from the City which states the actual cost incurred for installing the tap. 
(c)  Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to maintain the raw water irrigation line within his/her property lines. 
(d)  Fee discounted. Any person connecting to the City's raw water irrigation system shall receive a fifty (50) percent discount on all water system improvement fees related to the property irrigated. 
(33-99 § 1; Ord. No. 14-2017 , § 2, 6-1-2017) 
080.040.020 - Water meter equipment. 
(a)  Water meter requirement. As a condition for obtaining City water service, an applicant for City water service shall install a water meter under the following circumstances: 
(1)  For any new tap upon the City's waterworks system, a water meter shall be installed prior to the commencement of service. 
(2)  For any reconnection or resumption of service following any discontinuation of service as set forth in Section 080.010.060, a water meter shall be installed prior to the resumption of service. 
(3)  When any person changes the use of an existing water tap or changes the use of water from the City's waterworks system so that a different "unit or equivalent thereof" or "classification" applies to the new use as established or defined in Article 080.060, a water meter shall be installed prior to the commencement of the new or changed use. 
(4)  Whenever there is a change of ownership of any property upon which an unmetered water service exists, the new owner shall, within sixty (60) days of the establishment of a water account in the new owner's name, install a water meter upon the previously unmetered tap. 
(5)  All residential and commercial water accounts shall be metered no later than 12:00 a.m. on December 31, 2000. 
(b)  Installation, ownership and maintenance. 
(1)  Any water meter required to be installed pursuant to this section shall be installed at the sole cost and expense of the customer. Such installation shall be performed according to design and engineering standards established by the City Engineer and shall be subject to inspection by the City. The meter or a remote readout connected thereto shall be installed and maintained in a location which is convenient to the City's meter readers. 
(2)  Water meters may be purchased by the customer from the City. The City shall sell such meters, accessory connections and, if necessary, a remote readout to the customer at cost. The customer may also purchase such meters and necessary appurtenances meeting City specifications from private suppliers. The City Engineer is hereby authorized to promulgate name brand specifications for permissible water meters and appurtenances, which specifications shall be mandatory. 
(3)  Each and every water meter installed pursuant to this section shall become and remain the property of the City when installed. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of each water user to maintain the water meter upon his/her service line in good operating condition and to replace the water meter if damaged due to any act or negligence of the water user, his/her tenants, employees or agents of any kind. The City shall repair or replace any water meter which is defective or inoperable due to no fault of the water user, his/her tenants, employees or agents. It shall be the duty of the water customer to promptly notify the City of any such defective meter. 
(c)  Metered rate requirement. All metered water users shall pay the metered water and sewer rates set forth in Article 080.050. Metered residential customers who have been heretofore billed on an unmetered basis shall, commencing February 1, 1992, be billed on a metered basis. 
(d)  Unlawful acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, obstruct or interfere in any way with the action of any water meter or remote readout installed pursuant to this section without the knowledge and consent of the City. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to apply to any licensed electrical or plumbing contractor while performing usual and ordinary services in accordance with recognized customs and standards. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any City water customer to knowingly keep and maintain a water meter or remote readout which is underestimating the quantity of water delivered to the customer. 
(e)  Failure to comply. Failure to install or maintain a water meter or otherwise comply with the requirements of this section shall be grounds for discontinuance of water service pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 080.010.060 and/or the tripling of the applicable unmetered rates set forth in Section 080.050.030. 
(37-90 § 1; 21-99 § 3; 34-00 § 1) 
080.040.030 - Line extensions. 
(a)  Construction of waterlines and appurtenances. All extensions to and enlargements of waterlines and appurtenances shall be constructed in accordance with this article, Title 070 and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to Section 080.040.070, which extension or enlargement shall be at the sole cost and expense of the person requesting such line extension. Such line extension or enlargement may, at the City's option, be installed by the City, by the person to be served by the extension or enlargement or by a plumbing contractor licensed in accordance with C.R.S. § 12-58-101 et seq., as amended. Prior to the commencement of the construction of any such waterline or appurtenance, the applicant shall obtain the written consent and approval of the City. The applicant shall submit a map or plat of the right-of-way therefor and a plan and design prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the State showing the manner in which water is proposed to be furnished to the consumer. If such extension or enlargement is to be installed by the City, the person to be served by such extension or enlargement shall deposit with the Director of Finance the estimated cost of such construction. Upon completion, such persons shall pay any difference between the estimated costs and the actual costs; or, if overpayment has been made, the City shall refund such excess payment. Such cost of construction shall remain a lien on the property served by such construction until paid to the City. Any extension or enlargement installed by someone other than the City shall be guaranteed for two (2) years from the date the City accepts said line. All such construction shall be subject to inspection by the City during construction. 
(b)  Oversizing. The City may require a person who requests a line extension to enlarge the water line at the time of installation to provide for anticipated water users to be served by or from such line extension. All additional costs required by such enlargement shall be paid by the City. 
(c)  Restrictions on extensions. 
(1)  Except upon prior approval of the City Council, no water lines or any appurtenances to the City's waterworks shall be constructed or enlarged: 
a.  Outside the corporate limits of the City; or 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  When the static pressure measured at the point of connection to the existing water system does not exceed forty (40) pounds per square inch during the average peak use periods in the months of April, May and June or when the flow pressure and volume are insufficient to ensure an adequate and constant supply of water from mains and from fire hydrants for consumption by users and for fire protection; or 
d.  Into any hazard avoidance district, as set forth in Article 070.100, except in accordance with the provisions of said Article; and 
e.  Until a preannexation agreement is entered into by any applicant for property to be served with water service outside the corporate limits of the City; the conditions for the preannexation agreement shall be determined in accordance with Title 070. 
(2)  In order to obtain the construction of water facilities as set forth in Paragraph (1) above, the applicant shall file a written application for such extension in a form approved by the City Manager which shall include, among other things, a map or plat of the right-of-way for the water lines and a plan or design prepared by a professional licensed engineer showing the manner in which the water is proposed to be finished to the user. 
(3)  In approving the extension of water lines or appurtenances and construction thereof under the circumstances set forth in Paragraph (1) above, the City Council may impose such conditions as may be necessary to ensure that water shall be available at all times to in-City users, and the City Council shall require that the construction of the approved water lines and appurtenances comply with this article, Title 070 and all rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to Section 080.040.070. 
(4)  No additional water service line connections or enlargements of the use of water shall be allowed on any water lines which do not conform in all respects with the provisions of this article, Title 070 and rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 080.040.070. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall affect, enlarge or diminish the obligations of the City under existing written contracts to provide water service, water lines or appurtenances outside the corporate limits of the City, including contracts with the West Glenwood Water District and with Sunny Acres Water Association, nor shall anything herein affect, enlarge or diminish the right of the City to construct improvements and enlargements to its waterworks outside the City in order to provide water service to in-City or out-of-City users or as otherwise allowed by law. 
(d)  Ownership of extensions. Every new extension, enlargement and constructed main or line as provided in Subsections (a) and (c) above shall be and become the sole and exclusive property of the City, as well as any and all easements and rights-of-way therefor; and all such persons paying for the same shall, upon request of the City, execute and deliver any and all necessary and proper deeds of conveyance, assignments or other documents which the City may desire to perfect such ownership in the City. 
(Code 1971 §§ 22-69-22-71; 25-88 § 9; 9-93 § 1; 14-09 §2) 
080.040.040 - Service outside City. 
    Water not needed for use by the City and its residents may be sold to consumers outside of the City's corporate limits through existing water mains and facilities for domestic, limited irrigation and industrial purposes. Such service shall be provided at the rate stated in Article 080.050 and subject to all rules and regulations for users inside the City limits. No outside City user shall use water for irrigation except for the irrigation of a parcel or tract of land not exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) square feet, which tract or parcel shall include the residence and any other improvements appurtenant to the residence. 
(Code 1971 § 22-68) 
080.040.050 - Customers not to supply water to others. 
    No occupant or owner of any building or premises which obtains water from the City waterworks system shall supply water to other persons or families or to other premises. The water supply may be discontinued for any violation of this section. 
(Code 1971 § 22-65) 
080.040.060 - Wasting Water, authority of City Manager to limit use of water during water shortage. 
(a)  Wasting water prohibited. Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and shall keep all water outlets closed when not in actual use. Hydrants, urinals, water closets, bathtubs and other openings must not be left running for any purpose other than the use for which they were intended, and all such fixtures must be kept in good repair. The escape of water from the premises upon which water is being utilized shall be prima facie evidence of wasting water. 
(b)  Water shortages. Whenever the City Manager finds that the water available to the City or to users is insufficient in quantity or quality to provide unlimited usage to all consumers, he/she is authorized and empowered to ration and limit the usage of water for other than in-house domestic usage for such periods of time and under such actions as he/she deems necessary. Notice of the rationing and of the nature of the restrictions shall be published as soon as practicable in the official newspaper of the City, and the rationing and limitation of usage shall become effective on the day following the publication of notice in the official newspaper of the City. However, if the City Manager finds that the quantity or quality of the City water is such that an acute shortage exists and impairs the ability to afford adequate fire protection or presents a substantial hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, the rationing and imposition of restrictions shall become effective immediately upon the imposition of such rationing and restrictions. As soon as practicable after the City Manager terminates the rationing and restrictions on usage, notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the City. 
(c)  Termination of service for violators. Water service shall be discontinued to all persons who waste water or who violate any rule or regulation governing the rationing or limitation of usage of water. Such service shall not be restored until the cause of waste has been corrected or the violation of such rules and regulations has been abated and until the consumer has paid the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) to cover the cost of re-establishing service. 
(Code 1971 § 22-66; 18-86) 
080.040.061 - Fluoridation. 
    The City Manager or his/her designated employee shall conduct a regular and continual program of fluoridating the City's domestic water supply in order to reduce the incidence of tooth decay in water consumers. Fluoridation shall be accomplished in compliance with any and all applicable state and federal laws and regulations regarding the use and application of fluoride compounds in municipal water systems. 
(25-85 § 1) 
080.040.070 - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The City Council may make and enforce such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the safe, efficient and economical management of the City waterworks system. 
(Code 1971 § 22-72) 
080.040.080 - Inspections. 
    Any authorized representative of the City shall have the right to enter any premises or building where City water is used for the purpose of making an inspection of pipes, fixtures or appliances and for the purpose of detecting and eliminating all abuses, whether from waste, improper use of water or any other violations of the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 080.040.070. 
(Code 1971 § 22-67) 
ARTICLE 080.050 - UTILITY SERVICE RATES 

080.050.010 - Electric rates by tariff. 
(a)  Rates established generally. All electric energy furnished to consumers by the City shall be metered and sold at the rates according to the respective classes of use as prescribed in the City's tariff sheets as adopted from time to time by the Electric Utility Board. 
(b)  Tariff sheets. The tariff sheets establishing rates, charges, rules and regulations for electrical services are available for inspection in the City Clerk's Office at 101 W. 8 th Street, Glenwood Springs, Colorado. Tariffs, excepting for fuel cost adjustment, may be amended, modified, repealed or otherwise changed in accordance with the Rules of Practice and Procedure before the Electric Utility Board as adopted in Section 080.020.010. 
(c)  Electric rates shall be set by city council resolution and shall be calculated in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1971 § 22-25; 23-83 §§ 1, 2; 9-07 § 2) 
080.050.020 - Metered water and wastewater rates. 
(a)  Water rates shall be set by City Council Resolution. 
(b)  Wastewater rates shall be set by City Council Resolution and shall be calculated in accordance with the following subsections. 
(1)  Definitions. For purposes of this subsection, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Metered wastewater user means those customers of the City's wastewater system who are also metered City water customers. 
    Summer billing means that billing for wastewater usage which occurs in the months of April through October, inclusive. Any billing cycle which includes fifteen (15) or more days in the month of April or October shall be considered a summer billing. 
    Winter billing means that billing for wastewater usage winch occurs in the months of November through March, inclusive. Any billing cycle which includes fewer than fifteen (15) days in the month of November or March shall also be considered winter billing. 
(2)  Calculation of summer billing charges. For those metered wastewater customers subject to different summer billing and winter billing, summer billing shall be calculated in the following manner: 
a.  Ongoing accounts. The monthly summer billing charge for ongoing accounts shall be based upon an average of the monthly service charges to the account for full monthly billing cycles during the preceding winter billing period. The average shall be calculated annually by the City. 
b.  Change-over accounts. For any existing accounts changed from one (1) customer to another, the previous billing history attributable to the old customer shall be used to calculate the average charge to the new customer for purposes of assessing summer billing charges. 
c.  New accounts (single-family residential). For new single-family residential accounts established in the summer billing period for which there is no account history during the preceding winter billing period, the customer shall be charged the minimum monthly charge during the first summer of usage. 
d.  New accounts (all other). For other new accounts established during the summer billing period for which there is no account history during the preceding winter billing period, the City shall establish a monthly service charge for the first summer based upon an analysis of other water accounts which are similar in kind to that of the new customer. The City's determination shall be subject to review after one (1) year pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 080.060.030. 
(Code 1971 § 22-81[B][l][a]; 30-86 § 1; 32-88 § 1; 50-88 § 1; 50-88 § 1; 39-90 §§ 1, 2; 41-91 § 2; 39-94 § 1; 21-99 § 1; 2-06 § 2) 
080.050.030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2-06, § 2, repealed § 080.050.030, which pertained to unmetered water and wastewater rates and derived from Code 1971 § 22-81[B][4]; 30-86 § 2; 13-86 § 1; 50-88 § 2; 39-90 § 3; 39-94 § 2; 21-99 § 2; 2-06 § 2. 
080.050.040 - Bulk water rates. 
    Bulk water rates for qualified bulk purchasers of water shall be set by City Council Resolution. For purposes of this section, a qualified bulk purchaser of water shall mean: 
(1)  A water district, association or similar organization which has been formed for the purpose of supplying or distributing water for domestic consumption; 
(2)  Which owns its own water distribution facilities and serves customers in a defined geographical area; 
(3)  Which has entered into a written contract with the City for the delivery of a quantity of treated water at the master meter for distribution and re-sale to its own customers; and 
(4)  For which the City provides no services other than the treatment and delivery of the water to the master meter or meters. 
(24-85 § 1; 39-94 § 3; 2-06 § 2) 
080.050.050 - Wastewater surcharge rates. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    BOD means the biochemical oxygen demand in discharged wastewater. 
    P.P.M. means parts per million. 
    Representative sampling or representative samples means samples of discharged sewage obtained by the City using generally accepted testing methods to determine the average TSS and BOD daily loading throughout a ninety-day period. 
    TSS means total suspended solids in discharged wastewater. 
(b)  Surcharge. In addition to any wastewater charges set forth in this article, if the combined discharge rates of nonresidential users for TSS and BOD exceed four hundred seventy-five (475) p.p.m. as determined by representative sampling by the City, the user shall pay a surcharge as follows for each one hundred (100) p.p.m., or fraction thereof, by which such discharge exceeds four hundred seventy-five (475) p.p.m.: 
(1)  One dollar and thirty cents ($1.30) per month per EQR as classified in Article 080.060, or fraction thereof, for nonmetered users. 
(2)  One dollar and thirty cents ($1.30) per month for each two thousand four hundred twenty-five (2,425) gallons discharged, or fraction thereof, for metered users. 
(c)  Nonacceptable wastes. Nothing in this section shall allow wastes to be discharged into the City wastewater system which wastes are prohibited by Subsection 080.030.030(b). 
(Code 1971 § 22-81(K)(1), (K)(2); 39-94 § 4) 
080.050.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 21-99, § 4, repealed § 080.050.060, which pertained to minimum water and wastewater charges and derived from 13-86 § 2; 30-86 § 3; 32-88 § 2; 50-88 § 3; 39-90 § 4; 39-94 § 5; 21-99 § 4. 
080.050.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 42-96, § 1, repealed § 080.050.070, which pertained to senior discounts and derived from Code 1971 § 22-81(J). 
080.050.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-91, § 1, repealed § 080.050.080, which pertained to trash services. 
ARTICLE 080.060 - SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT FEES 

080.060.010 - Required. 
(a)  New connections. For the privilege of connecting and tapping onto the City water system and the City wastewater system, each applicant shall be required to pay a system improvement fee in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Change in structure. When any person adds to an existing structure, enlarges a building or alters the property so that a larger number of EQR units or proportions of EQR units would become assessable in accordance with the classifications set forth in Section 080.060.020, such person shall pay the system improvement fee for the EQR units attributable to the usage increase caused by the addition, enlargement or alteration. 
(c)  Change in use. Whenever the use of any structure changes, as such change in use would be defined in Title 070 so that a larger number of EQR units or proportions of EQR units would become assessable in accordance with the classifications set forth in Section 080.060.020, there shall be charged to and paid by the owner of such structure the system improvement fee for the EQR units attributable to the usage increase caused by the change in use. 
(d)  Resumption of service. Properties which formerly received water or sewer services from the City, either directly or indirectly, and for which a reconnection to the City's water or sewer system is requested shall be exempt from payment of a system improvement fee in the following circumstances only: 
(1)  To the extent water or sewer service existed upon the subject property on or after January 31, 1981, the applicant shall be exempt from payment of system improvement fees for the privilege of reconnection. However, system improvement fees shall be assessed for any increased usage in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  To the extent water or sewer system improvement fees have been formerly paid based upon EQR units attributed to the subject property, the applicant shall be exempt from payment of new system improvement fees for the privilege of reconnection. However, system improvement fees shall be assessed for any increased usage in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(3)  When property which is eligible for an exemption under Paragraph (1) or (2) above is subdivided, credit for EQR units may be attributable to any portion of the property thus divided upon the mutual consent of the City and all affected property owners. 
(4)  In seeking an exemption under Paragraph (1) or (2) above, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish the existence and extent of prior water or sewer service or the prior payment of system improvement fees. ) 
(Code l971 § 22-81[A], [H]; 32-90 § 1) 
080.060.020 - Classification. 
    The following classifications are hereby established for payment of system improvement fees. For purposes of this article, one (1) EQR is estimated as being the equivalent of three hundred fifty (350) gallons per day of water (wastewater) usage. 
(1) Residential classifications. a. Single-family residential units: Single-family homes with fewer than four (4) bedrooms, two (2) bathrooms, one (1) kitchen, no greater than 3,500 square feet irrigated lawn and garden watered by sprinkler Greater of 0.25 EQR per bedroom or 0.06 EQR per 100 square feet, not to exceed 1.00 EQR Single-family homes, with up to four (4) bedrooms, two (2) bathrooms, one (1) kitchen, no greater than 3,500 square feet irrigated lawn and garden watered by sprinkler 1.00 EQR 1. Each additional bedroom 0.15 EQR 2. Each additional bathroom 0.50 EQR 3. Each additional kitchen 0.65 EQR 4. For irrigated green spaces, such as lawns and gardens, see Subsection (1)f. below. 5. For irrigation of common areas or parks in subdivisions of single-family residential units, see Subsection (1)f. below. 6. Swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas are additional, per Subsection (4) below. b. Secondary residential units: Accessory dwelling unit: a separate, complete, dwelling unit containing separate facilities for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation that is contained within or attached to a detached single-family dwelling, or detached from it on the same property. 0.25 EQR c. Multi-family residential units: Duplexes, apartments, townhouses, and similar facilities in the same complex, and small cabins in courts not associated with motels, with fewer than four (4) bedrooms, two (2) bathrooms, one (1) kitchen, no greater than 3,500 square feet irrigated lawn and garden watered by sprinkler Greater of 0.25 EQR per bedroom or 0.06 EQR per 100 square feet, not to exceed 1.00 EQR Duplexes, apartments, townhouses, and similar facilities in the same complex, and small cabins in courts not associated with motels, with up to four (4) bedrooms, two (2) bathrooms, one (1) kitchen, no greater than 3,500 square feet irrigated lawn and garden watered by sprinkler 1.00 EQR 1. Each additional bedroom 0.15 EQR 2. Each additional bathroom 0.50 EQR 3. Each additional kitchen 0.65 EQR 4. For irrigated green spaces, such as lawns and gardens, see Subsection (1)f. below. 5. For irrigation of common areas or parks in subdivisions of single-family residential units, see Subsection (1)f. below. 6. Swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas are additional, per Subsection (4) below. d. Mobile home or mobile home space in court: Mobile home or mobile home space in court, with fewer than four (4) bedrooms, two (2) bathrooms, one (1) kitchen, no greater than 3,500 square feet irrigated lawn and garden watered by sprinkler Greater of 0.25 EQR per bedroom or 0.06 EQR per 100 square feet, not to exceed 1.00 EQR Mobile home or mobile home space in court, with up to four (4) bedrooms, two (2) bathrooms, one (1) kitchen, no greater than 3,500 square feet irrigated lawn and garden watered by sprinkler 1.00 EQR 1. Each additional bedroom 0.15 EQR 2. Each additional bathroom 0.50 EQR 3. Each additional kitchen 0.65 EQR 4. For irrigated green spaces, such as lawns and gardens, see Subsection (1)f. below. 5. For irrigation of common areas in mobile home parks, see Subsection (1)f. below. 6. Swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas are additional, per Subsection (4) below. NOTE: Values include laundry facilities in mobile homes. Otherwise, laundry facilities, central kitchen facilities, and swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas are additional. 7. Manager's unit Calculated in accordance with Subsections (1)d.1., 2., or 3., as applicable 8. Laundry facilities 1.00 EQR e. Recreational vehicle parks: 1. Each camping or vehicle space without sewer hook-up 0.35 EQR 2. Each camping or vehicle space with sewer hook-up 0.50 EQR 3. Manager's unit 1.00 EQR NOTE: Camp pump station, irrigation, swimming pool, club house, laundry facility by special review. f. Irrigation for all residential development with irrigated area exceeding 3,500 square feet: 0.1 EQR per 2,000 sq ft landscaped area, including turf grass, greater than 3,500 sq ft, rounded to the next highest 1,000 g. Irrigation using secondary raw water: Several locations in the city limits have access to raw water for outside irrigation instead of using potable water. When outside irrigation will be exclusively from a raw water source the EQR value is determined through this section will be reduced by fifty (50) percent for water only. Sewer values will not change. (2) Commercial classifications. a. Hotels and motels: 1. Hotels, motels without kitchen facilities (i) Rooms with one (1) bed 0.15 EQR (ii) Rooms with (2) beds 0.30 EQR 2. Hotels, motels with kitchen facilities (i) Rooms with one (1) bed 0.20 EQR (ii) Rooms with (2) beds 0.40 EQR 3. Laundry facility 1.00 EQR 4. Manager's unit 1.00 EQR b. Restaurants and bars: 1. Full service restaurants and bars (per 10 seats) .65 EQR 2. Fast food restaurant (per 10 seats) 1.20 EQR 3. Sandwich/coffee shop with dishwasher (per 10 seats) .65 EQR c. General office buildings (per 1,000 sq ft) .30 EQR d. Medical office buildings (per 1,000 sq ft) 1.50 EQR e. Retail buildings (up to 5,000 sq ft) (per 1,000 sq ft) .50 EQR f. Hospital: 1. Administration space (per 1,000 sq ft) .30 EQR 2. Available in-patient bed (per bed) .70 EQR 3. Specialty practice (per 1,000 sq ft) 1.50 EQR g. Warehouse retail stores (>5,000 sq ft) (per 1,000 sq ft) .25 EQR h. Gas and service stations: 1. Per fuel nozzle 1.00 EQR 2. Per garage space (per 1,000 sq ft) .30 EQR 3. Per food/retail/office sales (per 1,000 sq ft) .50 EQR i. Industrial buildings, including warehouses (per 1,000 sq ft) .30 EQR NOTE: each 350 gal/day processed water, no more than 15% consumptive use. Where one site has multiple uses such as a contractor office, which has office uses and warehouse or vehicle repair uses each different use should be classified separately. j. Senior housing: 1. Administrative/office space (per 1,000 sq ft) .30 EQR 2. Dining/cafeteria space (per 10 seats) .65 EQR 3. Studio apartment one (1) kitchen .65 EQR 4. Up to two (2) bedrooms one (1) kitchen .75 EQR 5. Athletic/gym space (per 1,000 sq ft) 2.00 EQR k. Car washes: 1. For each self-service bay/rack with wand and/or foaming brush 3.00 EQR 2. For each automatic wash bay 15.00 EQR NOTE: Car washes that recycle water shall be evaluated by special review based upon 1 EQR per 350 GPD of potential usage for both water and sewer. l. Barber/beauty shops (per chair) .30 EQR m. Theaters (per 25 seats) .60 EQR n. Grocery stores (per 1,000 sq ft) .50 EQR o. Greenhouse/nursery (including grow house): 1. Per 1,000 sq ft for retail/admin .30 EQR 2. Per 1,000 sq ft for spray/irrigation, greenhouse/nursery space .50 EQR NOTE: Special review for drip irrigation. p. Construction yard (per 1,000 sq ft) .30 EQR q. Athletic club (per 1,000 sq ft) 2.00 EQR r. Health spa (per 1,000 sq ft) 2.00 EQR s. Commercial laundromat (per washing machine) 1.00 EQR t. Commercial business using City water for process water (per 350 gallons per day) 1.00 EQR u. Medical and recreational marijuana: 1. Office retail space (per 1,000 sq ft) .30 EQR 2. Grow facilities (per 1,000 sq ft for spray/irrigation) .50 EQR NOTE: Special review for drip irrigation. (3) Church and school classifications. a. Churches (per 100 seats; rectories or other living areas are additional) 1.00 EQR b. Schools. Day care centers, public and private day schools including Administrative centers, warehouses, buildings for equipment repair and/or storage (such as for buses). Swimming pools, hot tubs, spas and similar facilities are additional. Staff includes teachers, librarians, custodians, and administrative personnel associated with school functions. 1. Without gyms or cafeteria (per 50 potential students and staff) 1.50 EQR 2. Without gym but with cafeteria, or with gym but without cafeteria (per 50 potential students and staff) 1.85 EQR 3. With gym and cafeteria (per 50 potential students and staff) 2.10 EQR NOTE: Swimming pools, hot tubs, spas and similar facilities are additional (4) Special classifications. a. Swimming pools, hot tubs, spas splash pools: 1. Separate buildings which house swimming pools or hot tubs, and which are not covered by any other classification in this Section shall be evaluated per special review, as well as the following: 2. Swimming pools, per 25,000 gallons of capacity (lesser amounts shall be prorated accordingly) 1.00 EQR 3. Hot tubs and spas, greater than 500 gallons .20 per 500 gallons  
(Code 1971 § 22-81[A]; 18-84 § 1; 13-97 §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 7-2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-5-2016; Ord. No. 33-2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 12-15-2016; Ord. No. 14-2017 , § 3(Exh. A), 6-1-2017) 
080.060.030 - Review of EQR level. 
(a)  When review of level available. All EQR classification levels as set forth in Section 080.060.020 above may be reviewed after twelve (12) months but prior to eighteen (18) months of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or actual occupancy of a property, whichever occurs later, based upon the actual usage of water upon the property. Such review may be initiated at the City's option or upon written request of the owner during this period. 
(b)  Procedures for review. If either the City or the owner of a parcel of property desires to review the EQR level in accordance with Subsection (a) above, the procedures shall be as follows: 
(1)  Request for review. If the City desires to review the EQR level originally assessed, it shall give written notice to the owner of the property at his/her last known address within the aforesaid time for review. If the owner of the property desires to review the EQR level originally assessed, he/she shall provide written notice to the City within the aforesaid time for review. 
(2)  City engineer review. Within ten (10) days of sending the aforesaid notice or receiving the aforesaid request, the City Engineer shall make a written determination of whether or not the EQR level based upon actual metered water consumption varies from the level upon which EQRs were originally assessed by more than ten (10) percent. 
(3)  Overpayment or underpayment. If the actual metered water consumption varies from the original EQR assessment by more than ten (10) percent, the system improvement fees shall be adjusted accordingly. If there has been an overpayment of system improvement fees, such overpayment shall be refunded to the owner within thirty (30) days of the decision of the City Engineer. If there has been an underpayment of the system improvement fee, the owner shall be required to pay the additional system improvement fee within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision of the City Engineer. 
(4)  Appeal of city engineer's decision. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Engineer may appeal this matter within ten (10) days of the date of the decision of the City Engineer by filing a written letter of appeal with the City Clerk, in which case the appeal shall be heard by the City Council within thirty (30) days at a regular City Council meeting. 
(18-84 § 3; 59-87 § 1) 
080.060.040 - Amount of system improvement fee. 
    Where system improvement fees are payable in accordance with the provisions of Section 080.060.010, the owner of such property, or his/her agent, shall pay to the City a per-EQR unit system improvement fee of six thousand nine hundred sixty-four dollars and ninety-one cents ($6,964.91) per EQR for water and four thousand one hundred seventy-eight dollars and ninety-five cents ($4,178.95) for wastewater, or as set by City Council resolution. 
(Code 1981 § 22-81[H]; 53-88 § 1; 29-94 § 5; 19-05 § 3) 
( Ord. No. 33-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 1-7-2016) 
080.060.050 - When fee is due. 
    All system improvement fees to be paid pursuant to this article shall be paid as follows: 
(1)  One-half (1/2) of the system improvement fee shall be paid at the time of the application for a building permit. 
(2)  One-half (1/2) of the system improvement fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  In the event property lying outside the boundaries of the City is required to pay the system improvement fee, such fee shall be paid at the time of the application for a water tap. 
(18-84 § 2; 59-87 § 2; 7-92 § 1) 
ARTICLE 080.070 - UTILITY ENTERPRISE 

080.070.010 - Legislative declaration. 
    By virtue of Article XX, Sections 1 and 6 of the Colorado Constitution, the City has the power to construct, condemn and purchase, purchase, acquire, lease, add to, maintain, conduct and operate electric, water works and any other public utilities, for its own use and the use of its citizens; and to legislate upon, provide, regulate, conduct and control the issuance, refunding and liquidation of all kinds of municipal obligations. Accordingly, the City Council finds and determines that the City, by and through its Utilities Department, has historically provided and will continue to provide electricity, water and wastewater services by means of an enterprise, as that term is defined by Colorado law. The City Council further declares its intent that the City's utility enterprise be operated and maintained so as to exclude its activities from the application of Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(17-93 § 1) 
080.070.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings as used in this article: 
    Electric facilities means any one (1) or more of the works and improvements used in and as part of the generation or distribution of electricity for the beneficial uses and purposes for which the electricity has been or may be appropriated, or used in and as part of a fiber optic strand or related network in the provision of fiber optic services. 
    Grant means any direct cash subsidy or other direct contribution of money from the State or any local government in the State which is not required to be repaid. Grant does not include: 
(1)  Any indirect benefit conferred upon the utility enterprise from the State or any local government in the State; 
(2)  Any revenues resulting from rates, fees, assessments or other charges imposed by the utility enterprise for the provision of goods or services by such enterprise; or 
(3)  Any federal funds, regardless of whether such federal funds pass through the State or any local government the State prior to receipt by the utility enterprise. 
    Utility activity includes, but is not limited to, the diversion, storage, carriage, delivery, distribution, collection, treatment, use, reuse, augmentation, exchange or discharge of electricity, water, wastewater, fiber optics or storm drainage services, and the acquisition of electricity, water or water rights in accordance with applicable provisions of state law, the City Charter, and this Code. 
    Utility enterprise means the utility activity business owned by the City, which business receives under ten (10) percent of its annual revenues in grants from all state and local governments combined and which is authorized to issue its own revenue bonds pursuant to this Code or other applicable law. 
    Wastewater facilities means any one (1) or more of the various devices used in collection, treatment or disposition of sewage or industrial, commercial or domestic wastes of a liquid or water-carried nature, together with any groundwater, surface water or stormwater that may be contributed into or permitted to enter such devices. 
    Water facilities means any one (1) or more works and improvements used in and as a part of the collection, treatment or distribution of water for the beneficial uses and purposes for which the water has been or may be appropriated. 
(17-93 § 1; 42-01 § 1) 
080.070.030 - Utility enterprise. 
    In addition to any of the powers it may have by virtue of any of the applicable provisions of state law, the City Charter, and this Code, the utility enterprise shall have the power under this article: 
(1)  To acquire by gift, purchase, lease or exercise of the right of eminent domain, to construct, to reconstruct, to improve, to better and to extend electricity, water and wastewater facilities, wholly within or wholly without the City or partially within and partially without the City, and to acquire in the name of the City by gift, purchase or the exercise of the right to eminent domain lands, easements and rights in land in connection therewith; 
(2)  To operate and maintain electric, water and wastewater facilities for its or the City's own use and for the use of public and private consumers and users within and without the territorial boundaries of the City; 
(3)  To accept federal funds under any federal law in force to aid in financing the cost of engineering, architectural or economic investigations or studies, surveys, designs, plans, working drawings, specifications, procedures or other action preliminary to the construction of electric, water and wastewater facilities; 
(4)  To accept federal funds under any federal law in force for the construction of necessary electric, water and wastewater facilities; 
(5)  To enter into joint operating agreements, contracts or arrangements with consumers concerning electricity, water and wastewater facilities, whether acquired or constructed by the utility enterprise or the consumer, and to accept grants and contributions from consumers for the construction of electric, water and wastewater facilities; 
(6)  To prescribe, revise and collect in advance or otherwise, from any consumer or any owner or occupant of any real property connected therewith or receiving service therefrom, rates, fees, tolls and charges or any combination thereof for the services furnished by, for the direct or indirect connection with, or the use of or any commodity from such electric, water and wastewater facilities; in anticipation of the collection of revenues of such electric, water and wastewater facilities or joint system, to issue revenue bonds to finance in whole or in part the cost of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension of the electric, water and wastewater facilities; and to issue temporary bonds until permanent bonds and any coupons appertaining thereto have been printed and exchanged for the temporary bonds; 
(7)  To pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of the electric, water and wastewater facilities, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereto thereafter constructed or acquired, as well as the revenues from existing electric, water and wastewater facilities; 
(8)  To enter into and perform contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and utility activity enterprises for or concerning the planning, construction, lease or other acquisition and the financing of electric, water and wastewater facilities and the maintenance and operation thereof; 
(9)  To make all contracts, execute all instruments and do all things necessary or convenient in the exercise of the powers granted in this section or elsewhere in state law, the City Charter or this Code, in the performance of its covenants or duties, or in order to secure the payment of its bonds if no encumbrance, mortgage or other pledge of property, excluding any pledged revenues, of the utility enterprise or City is recreated thereby, and if no property, other than money, of the utility enterprise or City is liable to be forfeited or taken in payment of said bonds, and if no debt on the credit of the utility enterprise or City is thereby incurred in any manner for any purpose; and 
(10)  To issue electric, water, wastewater or joint water and wastewater refunding bonds pursuant to this Code or other applicable law to refund, pay or discharge all or any part of its outstanding electric, water and wastewater or joint water and wastewater revenue bonds issued under this article or under any other law, including any interest thereon in arrears or about to become due, or for the purpose of reducing interest costs, effecting a change in any particular year in the principal and interest payable thereon or in the related utility rates to be charged, affecting other economies or modifying or eliminating restrictive contractual limitations appertaining to the issuance of additional bonds, or to any municipal electric, water and wastewater facilities. 
(17-93 § 1) 
080.070.040 - Revenue bonds. 
(a)  In accordance with and through the provisions of this section, the utility enterprise, through its governing body, is authorized to issue bonds or other obligations payable solely from the revenues derived or to be derived from the functions, services, benefits or facilities of such enterprise or from any other available funds of such enterprise. Such bonds or other obligations shall be authorized by ordinance, adopted by the governing body of the utility enterprise in the same manner as other ordinances of the City. Such bonds or other obligations may be issued without voter approval, provided that, during the fiscal year of the City preceding the year in which the bonds or other obligations are authorized, the utility enterprise received under ten (10) percent of its annual revenue in grants or, during the current fiscal year of the City, it is reasonably anticipated that such enterprise will receive under ten (10) percent of its revenue in grants. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to require voter approval where such approval is not otherwise required by the constitution and laws of the State or the City Charter. 
(b)  The terms, conditions and details of said bonds or other obligations, and the procedures related thereto, shall be set forth in the ordinance authorizing said bonds or other obligations and shall, as nearly as may be practicable, be substantially the same as those provided in C.R.S. Part 4 of Article 35 of Title 31, relating to electric, water and sewer revenue bonds; except that the purposes for which the same are issued shall not be so limited and except that said bonds or other obligations may be sold at public or private sale in accordance with the provisions of the City Charter. Each bond, note or other obligation issued under this section shall recite in substance that said bond, note or other obligation, including the interest thereon, is payable from the revenues and other available funds of the utility enterprise pledged for the payment thereof. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, such bonds or other obligations may be issued to mature at such times as are authorized by the Charter of the City, shall bear interest at such rates, and shall be sold at, above or below the principal amount thereof, all as shall be determined by the governing body of the utility enterprise. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, in the case of short-term notes or other obligations maturing not later than one (1) year after the date of issuance thereof, the governing body of the utility enterprise may authorize enterprise officials to fix principal amounts, maturity dates, interest rates and purchase prices of any particular issue of such short-term notes or obligations, subject to such limitations as to maximum term, maximum principal amount outstanding and maximum net effective interest rates as the governing body of the utility enterprise shall prescribe. Refunding bonds of the utility enterprise shall be issued as provided in C.R.S. Part 1 of Article 56 of Title 11. The powers provided in this section to issue bonds or other obligations are in addition and supplemental to, and not in substitution for, the powers conferred by any other law, and the powers provided in this section shall not modify, limit or affect the powers conferred by any other law, either directly or indirectly. Bonds, notes or other obligations may be issued pursuant to this section without regard to the provisions of any other law. Insofar as the provisions of this section are inconsistent with the provisions of any other law, the provisions of this section shall control with regard to any bonds lawfully issued pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Any pledge of revenue or other funds of the utility enterprise shall be subject to any limitation on future pledges thereof contained in any ordinance of the governing body of the utility enterprise or of the City authorizing the issuance of any outstanding bonds or other obligations of the utility enterprise or the City payable from the same source or sources. Bonds or other obligations separately issued by the City and the utility enterprise but secured by the same revenues or other funds shall be treated as having the same obligor and as being payable in whole or in part from the same source or sources. 
(17-93 § 1) 
080.070.050 - Governing body. 
    For all purposes under the City Charter and this Code, the governing body of the utility enterprise shall be the City Council. All provisions of the City Charter and this Code which govern the provision of electric, water and wastewater services shall be administered and enforced by the utility enterprise. 
(17-93 § 1) 
ARTICLE 080.080 - LANDFILL ENTERPRISE 

080.080.010 - Legislative declaration. 
    By virtue of Article XX, Sections 1 and 6 of the Colorado Constitution, the City has the power to construct, condemn and purchase, acquire, lease, add to, maintain, conduct and operate a public landfill for the proper and legal disposal of municipal solid wastes, and to legislate upon, provide, regulate, conduct and control the issuance, refunding and liquidation of all kinds of obligations associated therewith. Accordingly, the City Council finds and determines that the City will provide landfill services by means of an enterprise, as that term is defined by Colorado law. The City Council further declares its intent that the City's landfill enterprise be operated and maintained so as to exclude its activities from the application of Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution. 
(6-99 § 1) 
080.080.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings as used in this article: 
    Grant means any direct cash subsidy or other direct contribution of money from the state or any local government in the State which is not required to be repaid. Grant does not include: 
(1)  Any indirect benefit conferred upon the landfill enterprise from the state or any local government in the State; 
(2)  Any revenues resulting from rates, fees, assessments or other charges imposed by the landfill enterprise for the provision of goods or services by such enterprise; or 
(3)  Any federal funds, regardless of whether such federal funds pass through the state or any local government in the State prior to receipt by the landfill enterprise. 
    Landfill activity includes, but is not limited to, the storage, treatment, utilization, processing, composting, recycling or final disposal of solid waste, as defined in C.R.S. § 30-20-101(6). 
    Landfill enterprise means the landfill activity owned by the City, which business receives under ten (10) percent of its annual revenues in grants from all state and local governments combined and which is authorized to issue its own revenue bonds pursuant to this article or other applicable law. 
    Landfill facilities means any one (1) or more solid waste disposal sites and facilities, as defined in C.R.S. § 30-20-101(8), now or hereafter owned or operated by the City. 
(6-99 § 1) 
080.080.030 - Landfill enterprise. 
    In addition to any of the powers it may have by virtue of any of the applicable provisions of state law, the City Charter and this Code, the landfill enterprise shall have the power under this article: 
(1)  To acquire by gift, purchase, lease or exercise of the right of eminent domain, to construct, reconstruct, improve, better and extend landfill facilities, wholly within or wholly without or partially within and partially without the territorial boundaries of the City, and to acquire in the name of the City by gift, purchase or the exercise of the right of eminent domain lands, easements and rights in land in connection therewith; 
(2)  To operate and maintain landfill facilities for its or the City's own use and for the use of public and private consumers and users within and without the territorial boundaries of the City; 
(3)  To accept federal funds under any federal law in force to aid in financing the cost of engineering, architectural, geological, hydrological or economic investigations or studies, surveys, designs, plans, working drawings, specifications, procedures or other action preliminary to the construction, operation or remediation of landfill facilities; 
(4)  To accept federal funds under any federal law in force for the construction, operation or remediation of landfill facilities; 
(5)  To prescribe, revise and collect in advance or otherwise, from any consumer served by a landfill activity, rates, fees and charges or any combination thereof for the services furnished by, or the direct or indirect connection with, the landfill facilities; and in anticipation of the collection of revenues of such landfill facilities, to issue revenue bonds to finance in whole or in part the cost of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvements, betterment or extension of the landfill facilities; and to issue temporary bonds until permanent bonds and any coupons appertaining thereto have been printed and exchanged for the temporary bonds; 
(6)  To pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of the landfill facilities; 
(7)  To make all contracts, execute all instruments and do all things necessary or convenient in the exercise of the powers granted in this section or elsewhere in state law, the City Charter or this Code, in the performance of its covenants or duties, or in order to secure the payment of its bonds if no encumbrance, mortgage or other pledge of property, excluding any pledged revenues, of the landfill enterprise or City is recreated thereby; if no property, other than money, of the landfill enterprise or City is liable to be forfeited or taken in payment of said bonds; and if no debt on the credit of the landfill enterprise or City is thereby incurred in any manner for any purpose. 
(8)  To issue refunding bonds pursuant to this article or other applicable law to refund, pay or discharge all or any part of its outstanding revenue bonds issued under this article or under any other law, including any interest thereon in arrears or about to become due, or for the purpose of reducing interest costs, effecting a change in any particular year in the principal and interest payable thereon or effecting other economies, or modifying or eliminating restrictive contractual limitations appertaining to the issuance of additional bonds or to any landfill facilities. 
(6-99 § 1) 
080.080.040 - Revenue bonds. 
(a)  In accordance with and through the provisions of this section, the landfill enterprise, through its governing body, is authorized to issue bonds or other obligations payable solely from the revenues derived or to be derived from the functions, services, benefits or facilities of such enterprise or from any other available funds of such enterprise. Such bonds or other obligations shall be authorized by ordinance, adopted by the governing body of the landfill enterprise in the same manner as other ordinances of the City. Such bonds or other obligations may be issued without voter approval, provided that during the fiscal year of the City preceding the year in which the bonds or other obligations are authorized, the landfill enterprise received under ten (10) percent of its annual revenue in grants or, during the current fiscal year of the City, it is reasonably anticipated that such enterprise will receive under ten (10) percent of its revenue in grants. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to require voter approval where such approval is not otherwise required by the Constitution and laws of the State or the City Charter. 
(b)  The terms, conditions and details of said bonds or other obligations, and the procedures related thereto, shall be set forth in the ordinance authorizing said bonds or other obligations and shall, as nearly as may be practicable, be substantially the same as those provided in C.R.S. Part 3 of Article 20 of Title 30; except that said bonds or other obligations may be sold at public or private sale in accordance with the provisions of the City Charter. Each bond, note or other obligation issued under this section shall recite in substance that said bond, note or other obligation, including the interest thereon, is payable from the revenues and other available funds of the landfill enterprise pledged for the payment thereof. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, such bonds or other obligations may be issued to mature at such times as are authorized by the Charter of the City, shall bear interest at such rates and shall be sold at, above or below the principal amount thereof, all as shall be determined by the governing body of the landfill enterprise. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, in the case of short-term notes or other obligations maturing not later than one (1) year after the date of issuance thereof, the governing body of the landfill enterprise may authorize enterprise officials to fix principal amounts, maturity dates, interest rates and purchase prices of any particular issue of such short-term notes or obligations, subject to such limitations as to maximum term, maximum principal amount outstanding and maximum net effective interest rates as the governing body of the landfill enterprise shall prescribe. Refunding bonds of the landfill enterprise shall be issued as provided in C.R.S. Part 1 of Article 56 of Title 11. The powers provided in this section to issue bonds or other obligations are in addition and supplemental to, and not in substitution for, the powers conferred by my other law; and the powers provided in this section shall not modify, limit or affect the powers conferred by any other law, either directly or indirectly. Bonds, notes or other obligations may be issued pursuant to this section without regard to the provisions of any other law. Insofar as the provisions of this section are inconsistent with the provisions of any other law, the provisions of this section shall control with regard to any bonds lawfully pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Any pledge of revenue or other funds of the landfill enterprise shall be subject to any limitation on future pledges thereof contained in any ordinance of the governing body of the landfill enterprise or of the City authorizing the issuance of any outstanding bonds or other obligations of the landfill enterprise or the City payable from the same source or sources. Bonds or other obligations, separately issued by the City and the landfill enterprise, but secured by the same revenues or other funds, shall be treated as having the same obligor and as being payable in whole or in part from the same source or sources. 
(6-99 § 1) 
080.080.050 - Governing body. 
    For all purposes under the City Charter and this Code, the governing body of the landfill enterprise shall be the City Council. 
(6-99 § 1) 
TITLE 090 - PUBLIC LANDS 
ARTICLE 090.010 - MUNICIPAL AIRPORT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-2017 , § 2, adopted Aug. 17, 2017, repealed the former Art. 090.010, §§ 090.010.010-090.010.050, and Exh. A thereto enacted a new Art. 090 as set out herein. The former Art. 090 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1972 §§ 21/2-1-21/2-4; 4-87 § 1; 8-89 §§ 1-4; 34-89 § 1; 19-93 § 1; 4-02 § 1; 4-05 § 1. 

090.010.010 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Article 090.010, unless the context clearly implies a contrary meaning, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Abandoned aircraft means an aircraft that is parked or tied-down outside of a hangar or hangared on Glenwood Springs Municipal Airport property for which no parking or tie-down fee or hangar use fee, as applicable, has been paid for at least 45 (forty-five) days. 
    Airport means any land owned, land under easement, or land controlled by the City of Glenwood Springs in support of operation of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Airport, and includes without limitation fixtures, roadways, parking areas, utilities, structures, runways, taxiways, ramps and aprons. 
    Airport Manager means the person duly authorized by the City of Glenwood Springs to exercise responsibility for the administration, maintenance, operation, protection and supervision of the Airport, property, equipment, regardless of such person's title within City government. 
    Calm wind conditions means prevailing wind speeds of less than three (3) knots, as measured on the ground at the Glenwood Springs Municipal Airport. 
    Night means the time between thirty (30) minutes after the end of evening civil twilight and thirty (30) minutes before the beginning of morning civil twilight, as published in the American Air Almanac, converted to local time. 
    Person means any tenant, individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or organization, either formal or informal. 
    Runway 14 means the runway designation for the Glenwood Springs Airport corresponding to a magnetic bearing of one hundred forty (140) and designating travel in a generally north to south direction. 
    Runway 32 means the runway designation for the Glenwood Springs Airport corresponding to a magnetic bearing of three hundred twenty (320) and designating travel in a generally south to north direction. 
    Tenant means any person, who has entered into a currently binding airport tie down agreement, hangar lease, or other formal occupancy or parking agreement with the Airport. 
    Touch-and-go landing means an operation by an aircraft that lands and departs on the runway without stopping or exiting the runway. 
    Windy conditions means prevailing wind speeds of three (3) knots or more, as measured on the ground at the Glenwood Springs Airport. 
( Ord. No. 17-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-2017) 
090.010.020 - Authority. 
(a)  The ordinances in this article and any rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall supersede all previously existing ordinances and rules and regulations for the Airport. 
(b)  Subject to prior review of proposed changes by the Airport Board, City Council reserves the right to make any additions, deletions or corrections to the ordinances in this article and rules and regulations adopted thereunder which may be necessary. 
(c)  All leases, licenses, or permits for use of the Airport are subordinate to and shall be governed by the ordinances in this article and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder, as amended from time to time. 
(d)  In any instance where the ordinances in this article and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder may be or become inconsistent with any regulation with supremacy, then such ordinances and rules and regulations shall be void as to such conflict. No part of the ordinances in this article or the rules and regulations adopted thereunder shall be construed as license or authorization to deviate from any regulation with supremacy. 
( Ord. No. 17-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-2017) 
090.010.030 - Airport use fees and agreements. 
    Persons desiring to use the Airport for aircraft ground or flight operations shall be subject to payment of fees and execution of agreements based upon the type of Airport use made, as provided in this section. 
(1)  Aircraft parked long-term at Airport. 
a.  Aircraft desired to be parked at the Airport long-term outside of a hangar shall, as a condition of parking or tying down such aircraft long-term, have in effect for such aircraft the Airport's then-effective long-term tie down agreement and have paid the Airport's then-applicable long-term parking or tie down fee in conformance with the terms of the long-term tie down agreement. For purposes of this section, an aircraft is parked at the Airport long-term if it is parked or will be parked or tied down more than seven (7) days in any calendar month and no parking or tie down fee waiver for the aircraft has been granted by the Airport Manager. 
b.  The long-term parking or tie down fee shall be established annually by City Council resolution in such amounts as are reasonably necessary to provide the City with Airport operating funds appropriate to such use. Such fee shall not be prorated for partial-year occupancy, except in the case of early termination of the long-term tie down agreement. 
c.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Airport Manager may approve, upon advance request and for a period not exceeding fourteen (14) days, a tenant's parking or tie down of an alternate qualifying aircraft in lieu of the aircraft permitted under the tenant's tie down agreement. 
(2)  Aircraft not parked long-term or temporarily using or parking at Airport. 
a.  Aircraft desired to be parked or tied down at the Airport other than long-term or under a hangar lease shall, as a condition of such parking or tying down, be subject to a per-day temporary parking fee, unless a parking or tie down fee waiver for the aircraft has been granted by the Airport Manager. All temporary parking or tie-down shall be governed by the general parking or tie down terms of the Airport's long-term tie down agreement, irrespective of the fact that a long-term tie down agreement has not been entered into for such aircraft. 
b.  Aircraft which are otherwise parked or stored on private property but for which there is a desire to utilize the runway are required to pay an annual airport user fee. 
c.  The per-day temporary parking fee and annual Airport user fees shall each be established annually by City Council resolution in such amounts as are reasonably necessary to provide the City with Airport operating funds appropriate to such use. 
d.  Failure to pay the temporary parking fee or annual use fee shall constitute cause for the immediate revocation of Airport use privileges, at the discretion of the Airport Manager, for the aircraft using the runway or parking and for which the applicable fee has not been paid, plus any other aircraft owned by such aircraft's owner or operator. 
(3)  Hangared aircraft. Aircraft desired to be hangared at the Airport shall, as a condition of hangaring such aircraft, have in effect an annual hangar lease specific to the aircraft and the Airport hangar desired to be used for such aircraft and have paid the fee required under such hangar lease. 
( Ord. No. 17-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-2017) 
090.010.040 - Liability for fees. 
    The owner and operator of a specific aircraft, and the tenant entering into a long-term tie down agreement or hangar lease for such specific aircraft, if different from the owner or operator, shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for Airport use or other fees applicable to such specific aircraft under this article. 
( Ord. No. 17-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-2017) 
090.010.050 - Liens; impoundment. 
(a)  Liens and foreclosure. Without limiting any other rights available to the City, the City shall be entitled to a lien for all unpaid Airport fees and charges under this article pursuant to C.R.S. §§ 41-2-204 and 38-20-106. The City shall have the power to foreclose the lien and exercise the power of sale in the manner set forth in C.R.S. § 38-20-107 et seq. after first providing notice of the lien and intent to foreclose to the owner of such aircraft for which Airport fees and charges have not been paid by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such owner on record with the Airport Manager and the last known address on file with the FAA Registry. 
(b)  Impoundment and sale. The City shall have the right to impound all abandoned aircraft and related abandoned property. The owner of any impounded aircraft or property shall be liable for the costs incurred by the City in impounding the aircraft, and such costs shall be subject to the lien of C.R.S. § 38-20-106. Upon impoundment, or in the event that the City has not impounded an aircraft but the aircraft is deemed an abandoned aircraft under this article, the City shall provide notice that the aircraft is deemed abandoned and, if applicable, of the impoundment and the lien under C.R.S. § 38-20-106 to the owner of such aircraft by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such owner on record with the Airport Manager and the last known address on file with the FAA Registry. Such notice shall provide the information required for notices regarding "abandoned motor vehicles" under C.R.S. § 38-20-116, specifically including a notice that the aircraft is deemed abandoned and will be subject to the power of sale under C.R.S. § 38-20-116 if the owner fails to contact the Airport Manager within thirty (30) days of postmark of such notice. If the owner thereafter fails to contact the Airport Manager within thirty (30) days of postmark of such notice, the City shall deem the aircraft abandoned pursuant to C.R.S. § 38-20-116 and have the right of sale provided by that statute. 
(c)  Notice. It is the responsibility of the aircraft owner to ensure that the Airport Manager has the owner's most recent or preferred mailing address. 
( Ord. No. 17-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-2017) 
090.010.060 - Indemnification; civil liability. 
    Any person using the Airport, except for volunteers or similarly situated persons furthering the purposes of the Airport under special permission granted by the Airport Manager, shall protect, indemnify and save City harmless from and against any and all liabilities, losses, damages, causes of action, suits, claims, demands, judgments, awards and settlements, costs and expenses (including attorney's fees and expenses), of whatever nature, even if groundless, frivolous, false or fraudulent, arising out of such person's use or occupancy of the Airport. 
    In the event that the City becomes subject to any fine or penalty by reason of a person's conduct at the Airport in violation of a governmental rule, regulation or requirement, such person shall pay such fine or penalty, plus a twenty (20) percent administrative fee to the City. In addition, such person shall provide to the City upon request all information concerning the incident(s) resulting in the violation which is reasonably available to such person, and shall otherwise participate in any reasonable manner in the City's response, if any, to such fine or penalty. 
( Ord. No. 17-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-2017) 
090.010.070 - Damage or destruction of Airport property. 
    Persons using the Airport, except for volunteers or similarly situated persons furthering the purposes of the Airport under special permission granted by the Airport Manager, shall be responsible for the cost and expense of repairing and/or replacing any Airport property damaged or destroyed by such persons, their agents, licensees or guests, including but not limited to damage or destruction to Airport infrastructure (fences, gates, roadways, etc.). The Airport property shall be repaired or replaced to a condition no less than the condition to which the property was in prior to the damage or destruction. 
( Ord. No. 17-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-2017) 
090.010.080 - Airport use restrictions. 
(a)  Nighttime landings prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person piloting an aircraft to land at the Airport at night, except for any landing associated with a legitimate medical emergency. 
(b)  Touch-and-go landings prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person piloting an aircraft to perform a touch-and-go landing at the Airport, unless needed to resolve a near emergency situation or an "overshoot." 
(c)  Restrictions on directions of take-off and landing. It shall be unlawful for any person piloting an aircraft to take off on Runway 32 or land on Runway 14 at the Airport under calm wind conditions. Under windy or other conditions, any person piloting an aircraft shall take off or land on the runway most nearly aligned against the direction of the wind. 
(d)  Motor vehicle operation. No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any runway unless specifically authorized by the Airport Manager. Under no circumstances should vehicle speed exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour. Drivers of vehicles crossing the runway shall possess an airman's certificate or have express permission from the Airport Manager. 
(e)  Walking on the runway. Walking on the runway is strictly prohibited, unless expressly authorized by the Airport Manager. 
(f)  Aircraft repair. Aircraft repair and maintenance activities are prohibited on ramps and in tie-down areas unless expressly authorized by the Airport Manager. 
(g)  Violations. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
( Ord. No. 17-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-17-2017) 
ARTICLE 090.020 - CEMETERIES 

090.020.010 - Rules and regulations adopted. 
(a)  Adoption. For the purposes of providing a just, equitable and practical method of safe, efficient and economical management of the cemeteries owned by the City, the City of Glenwood Springs Cemetery Rules and Regulations, ("Cemetery Rules and Regulations") promulgated by the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, are hereby adopted which shall be amended by City Council Resolution. 
(b)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip or maintain any grave, grave lot, monument or vault or cause or permit the same to be done, or for any person to perform any other act prohibited or fail to perform any other act required by or contrary to and in violation of any of the provisions of the Cemetery Rules and Regulations, or any order issued by the City Manager pursuant to said Rules and Regulations. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of the Cemetery Rules and Regulations shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
(d)  Conflicts. If any provision of the Cemetery Rules and Regulations conflicts with any other provisions of this Code or any state or federal law or regulation, the other provision of this Code or state or federal law or regulation shall control. 
(e)  Copies. Copies of the Cemetery Rules and Regulations are available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk at 101 W. 8th Street, Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
(Code 1971 § 41/2-1; 17-83 §§ 1, 2; 24-92 § 3; 31-95 § 4; 14-10 § 2) 
ARTICLE 090.030 - MUNICIPAL PARKS 

090.030.010 - Park and recreation areas established; designation as park lands. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby established park and recreation areas for the City which shall include all lands now owned or hereafter acquired or lands in which the City has an interest, within or without the corporate limits of the City, which are suitable or proper for parkways, boulevards and roadways, for park or recreational purposes or for the preservation of conservation of sights, scenes open spaces and vistas of scientific, historic, aesthetic or other public interest. All such lands shall hereinafter in this article be referred to as "park lands." 
(b)  Designation. The following are hereby declared to be park lands of the City: 
(1)  Axtell Park, which includes Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 29, 30, 31 and 32, Block 4, City of Glenwood Springs, Garfield County, Colorado. (Editor's Note: This land is leased for 99 years from Garfield County by a lease dated August 1, 1923.) 
(2)  Sayre Park, which is described as beginning at a point whence the quarter corner common to Sections 15 and 16, Tp. 6S., R 89W. of the 6th P.M. bears S. 50º15' E., 736.7 feet; thence N. 88º35' W. 700 feet to Corner No. 2; thence N. 1º31' E. 475 feet to Corner No. 3; thence S. 88º35' E. 700 feet to Corner No. 4; thence S. 1º28' W. 475 feet to point of beginning. 
(3)  Veltus Park, a Kiwanis project which is described as a tract of land in the NE1/4 of the SW1/4, Section 9, Tp. 6S., R 89W. of the 6th P.M. described as follows: bounded on the East by the West bank of the Roaring Fork River; on the North by the Southerly right-of-way of the County Road; on the South by the South boundary of the NE1/4 of the SW1/4 of said Section 9; on the West by the West line of abandoned Colorado Midland Railroad right-of-way as shown on map of said right-of-way in the office of the County Clerk and Recorder of Garfield County, Colorado, in Drawer 2, Map 51, Page 110. 
(4)  Horseshoe Bend Park, which is described as all that portion of the NW1/4 of the SE1/4, Section 3, T. 6S., R 89W. of the 6th P.M. Southerly of the Southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway No. 70. 
(5)  Red Mountain Park, which is described as the South 530 feet of the NW1/4 of the SE1/4, Section 9; the NE1/4, SE1/4, SE1/4, SW1/4, S1/2, SE1/4, Section 8; the West 25 acres of the SW1/4 of the SW1/4, Section 9; the NE1/4, Section 17; all in T. 6S. R 89W. of the 6th P.M. 
(6)  South Canyon Parklands, which includes the S1/2, NE1/4, N1/2, SE1/4, SW1/4, SE1/4, S1/2, SW1/4, Section 2; the S1/2, SE1/4, S1/2, SW1/4, Section 3; S1/2, NE1/4, SE1/4, Section 9; the NE1/4, NW1/4, SE1/4, SW1/4, Section 10; the NW1/4, SE1/4, SW1/4, Section 11; the S1/2, NW1/4, SE1/4, SW1/4, Section 13; the NE1/4, NW1/4, SE1/4, Section 14; the NE1/4, SE1/4, Section 15, all in T. 6S., R 90W., 6th P.M., except that portion of the SE1/4, Section 14 recorded in Book 25 at Page 109 and except railroad rights-of-way. 
(7)  Cardiff Park, which includes the following parcels: 
Tract in NE1/4, NW1/4, Section 27, T. 6S. R 89W., 6th P.M., described as follows: beginning at a point whence the 1/4 corner common to Sections 22 and 27, Tp. 6S., R 89W., 6th P.M. bears N. 1º21' E. 104.2 feet; thence N. 89º39' W. 300 feet; thence S. 14º28' W. 528.8 feet; thence S. 89º39' E. 420 feet; thence N. 1º21' E. 515 feet to point of beginning. 
That part of the SW1/4 SE1/4 and the SE1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 22, and W1/2 NE1/4 and East 1/2 NW1/4, Sec. 27, T. 6S., R 89 W., 6th P.M., described as beginning at the Northwest corner of the NE1/4 SE1/4 of said Sec. 27, thence N. 30º19' W. 3,225.0 feet; thence N. 59º41' E. 300 feet; thence S. 30º19' E. 3,421.5 feet; thence W. 347.7 feet to point of beginning. 
Tract in Sec. 27, T. 6S., R 89 W., 6th P.M. described as beginning at a point on the East boundary line of the SE1/4 NW1/4 of said Sec. 27 where a line 50 feet Northerly from and parallel to the center of the main line of the Colorado-Midland Railway Co. (as the same existed on July 5, 1895) would intersect the E. boundary line of the said SE1/4 NW1/4; thence Southeasterly along a line 50 feet from and parallel to the center line of said railway a distance of 719 feet; thence Northeasterly at a right angle to the center line of said railway 50 feet; thence Northwesterly 100 feet from and parallel to the center line of said railway 766 feet to the point of intersection of said E. boundary of the said SE1/4 NW1/4; thence South along said East boundary to the SE1/4 NW1/4 62 feet to the point of beginning. 
Tract in Sec. 27, T. 6S., R 89 W., 6th P.M. described as beginning at the Northeast corner of the NW1/4 SE1/4 of said Sec. 27; thence S. along the East boundary of the said NW1/4 SE1/4 620 feet to a point which is the intersection of the East boundary of the said NW1/4 SE1/4 with a line parallel to and 115 feet from the center line of the main line of the Colorado-Midland Railway Company, (as the same existed on July 5, 1895); thence Northwesterly on a curved line to the left parallel to and 115 feet from the center line of said railway a distance of 656 feet to the North boundary of the said NW1/4 SE1/4; thence Easterly along the North boundary of the said NW1/4 SE1/4 232 feet to the point of beginning. 
Tract in Sec. 27, T. 6S., R 89 W., 6th P.M. described as beginning at the Southeast corner of the SW1/4 NE1/4 of said Sec. 27; thence W. along the Southern boundary of the said SW1/4 NE1/4 a distance of 232 feet to a point 115 feet from the center line of the Colorado-Midland Railway Co. (as the same existed on July 5, 1895); thence Northwesterly on a curved line parallel to and 115 feet from the center line of said railway a distance of 680 feet; thence Northeasterly on a radial line of said railway 210 feet; thence Southeasterly on a curved line to the right parallel to and 325 feet from the center line of said railway 820 feet to the point of beginning. 
That part of the E1/2 SE1/4, Sec. 27, T. 6S., R 89 W., 6th P.M. West of the Roaring Fork River, less 1.33 acres conveyed to the Colorado-Midland Railway Co. 
Lots 17 through 33, Block 1; Lots 13 through 29, Block 2, Townsite of Cardiff, Garfield County, Colorado. 
(8)  Two Rivers Park which is described as a parcel of land in the City of Glenwood Springs, Garfield County, Colorado, situated in Lots 2, 6 and 7 and in the S1/2 NW1/4, all in Section 9, Township 6 South, Range 89 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, lying Southerly of the Southerly right-of-way line of an access road, Northerly of the center line of the Colorado River and Southwesterly of the Southwesterly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway No. 70, said parcel of land being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point in the center of said river whence the Survey Monument located at the Intersection of Sixth Street and Maple Street in the City of Glenwood Springs, Garfield County, Colorado bears: S. 77º12'16" E. 3037.88 feet; thence N. 87º43'00" E. 838.70 feet along the Southerly right-of-way line of said access road; thence 105.65 feet along the arc of a curve to the left, having a radius of 403.10 feet. The chord of which bears: N. 80º12'30" E. 105.35 feet; thence S. 43º21'30" E. 16.60 feet along said access road, thence 183.06 feet along the arc of a curve to the left, having a radius of 418.10 feet, the chord of which bears: N. 59º09'30" E. 181.60 feet; thence N. 46º37'00" E. 4.90 feet along said access road to a point on the Southwesterly right-of-way line of said highway; thence S. 43º23'00" E. 831.60 feet along said highway right-of-way line; thence S. 35º39'30" E. 710.00 feet along said highway right-of-way line to a point in the center of said river; thence N. 69º18'00" W. 2100.76 feet along the center of said river; thence N. 23º39'00" W. 330.75 feet along the center of said river, to the point of beginning, containing 22.22 acres, more or less. 
(9)  Reserved. 
(10)  Lookout Mountain Park, which is described as the NW1/4 SW1/4, Section 11, Township 6 South, Range 89 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian. 
(11)  East Glenwood Park, which includes the following described parcels located in Garfield County, Colorado: 
All those portions of the following three (3) described tracts of land lying easterly of the eastern City limits of the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado, and not including those portions thereof conveyed previously to the City of Glenwood Springs and to the Public Service Company of Colorado, to wit: 
Parcel 1 - The SW1/4 NE1/4 and the SE1/4 NW1/4 of Sec. 15, T. 6S., R 89 W., 6th P.M.; Parcel 2 - The south 13 acres of the SW1/4 NW1/4 and the north 12 acres of the NW1/4 SW1/4 of Sec. 15, T. 6S., R 89 W., 6th P.M.; Tract 3 - A tract of land situate in Sec. 15, T. 6S., R 89 W., 6th P.M., more particularly described as beginning at a point whence the West Quarter Corner of Sec. 15 bears S. 1º25' W. 908.30 feet, thence S. 87º09' E. 188.09 feet to the point of beginning; thence S. 87º09' E. 1048.41 feet; thence S. 1º25' W. 450.05 feet; thence N. 87º09' W. 1006.50 feet; thence N. 6º20' W. 304.32 feet; thence N. 1º25' E. 150.05 feet to the point of beginning. The above 3 parcels of land contain, in all, 102.04 acres, more or less. This property is to be used for public purposes only and is limited in use to pedestrian and equestrian travel. No motorized vehicular ways shall ever be constructed or use allowed. 
(12)  Three Mile Park which is described as Tract J, Glenwood Park Subdivision of the City of Glenwood Springs, Garfield County, Colorado. 
(13)  Boy Scout Trail which is described as including the following described territories: Lot 1, 2 and 3; NE1/4 SW1/4; and NW1/4 SE1/4, Section 10, Township 6 South, Range 89 West 6th P.M.; LESS a one-acre parcel in said Lot 3 conveyed out by document number 29145 of the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder; ALSO that area leased by the City of Glenwood Springs from Helen J. Collier and the Glenwood Hot Springs Lodge and Pool, Inc. pursuant to Leases dated July 1, 1988, as approved by Resolution No. 88-19. 
(14)  Sister Lucy Downey Park which is described as including the following described territory: A parcel of land situated in Lot 1 and the NE1/4 SE1/4 of Section 6, Township 6 South, Range 89 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian, City of Glenwood Springs, State of Colorado, said parcel being a portion of Lots 2, 3 and 4 of the Resubdivision of Lot 2, Nile Valley Federal Savings and Loan Association Subdivision; said parcel being more particularly described as follows: Commencing at the northeast corner of Mel-Ray Subdivision; thence S. 03º28'00" E. 1407.01 feet to the southwest corner of said Resubdivision, a #5 rebar in place, the true point of beginning; thence N. 01º53'00" E. along the westerly line of said Resubdivision 174.98 feet to a #5 rebar in place; thence leaving said westerly line S. 88 o 07'00" E. 165.62 feet to a point on the easterly line of said Resubdivision; thence S. 01 o 53'00" W. along said easterly line 177.31 feet; thence N. 87 o 18'00" W. along the southerly line of said Resubdivision 165.55 feet to the true point of beginning; said parcel containing 0.669 acres, more or less. 
(15)  Other . All other areas in the City which are dedicated to the City for open space or park purposes or as pedestrian, equestrian or fisherman easements or any combination of these by deed, subdivision plat or otherwise, which dedication has been duly accepted by the City Council. 
(16)  O'Leary Park, which contains 0.29 acres, more or less, and is legally described as a parcel of land situated in the SW1/4 NE1/4 of Section 16, Township 6 South, Range 89 West of the Sixth Principal Meridian. Said parcel lying Westerly of the Westerly right-of-way line of the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad (Aspen Branch), and Easterly of the centerline of the Roaring Fork River. Said parcel is a portion of the larger parcel described in Book 513 at Page 988 in the records of the Garfield County Clerk and Recorder, and is more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point on said Westerly right-of-way line, said point of beginning bears N 64°11'25" E, a distance of 422.32 feet from the center of said Section 16; thence N 28°58'00" W, along said Westerly right-of-way, a distance of 185.93 feet; thence S 59°59'16" W, a distance of 23.70 feet; thence S 32°58'00" W, a distance of 80.39 feet; thence S 44°20'42" E, a distance of 92.27 feet; thence S 62°59'11" E, a distance of 47.51 feet; thence S 72°43'18" E, a distance of 27.55 feet; thence N 59°42'48" E, a distance of 24.53 feet to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1971 § 15-1; 24-84 § 1; 52-88 § 1; 28-93 § 1; 18-96; Ord. No. 17-2018, § 2, 7-19-2018 ) 
090.030.020 - Administration of parks, recreational facilities, open spaces and recreational programs. 
    The park lands, recreational facilities, open spaces and recreational programs of the City shall be administered by the Parks Director under the supervision and control of the City Manager. 
(Code 1971 § 15-5) 
090.030.030 - Rules and regulations. 
    The City Council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of those persons utilizing the park lands. 
(Code 1971 § 15-5) 
Cross reference- Use of alcohol in park lands, §§ 120.030.070 and 120.030.080. 
090.030.040 - Issuance of permits reserving park lands and structures; closing of park lands to public. 
(a)  Permits. The City Manager shall have the authority to issue written permits reserving park lands and structures in park lands. When no permit has been issued, the use of such areas shall follow generally the rules of first-come first-served. 
(b)  Closing park lands. Any section, part or the whole of any park land may be declared closed to the public by the City Manager at any time and for any interval of time, whether temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, daily or otherwise, and whether entirely or merely to certain uses, as the City Manager shall find reasonable and necessary. 
(Code 1971 § 15-7[a], (b)) 
090.030.050 - Certain acts prohibited within park lands. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts within the park lands, to wit: 
(1)  To cut, mark, remove, break or climb upon or in any way injure, damage or deface the trees, shrubs, plants, turf or any of the building, fences, bridges or other structures. 
(2)  To pick or take away any vegetation. 
(3)  To build or place any tent, building, booth, stand or other structure without first having obtained a permit to do so from the City Manager. 
(4)  To build, light, make or use any fires, except in fireplaces and grills constructed for such purpose and under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed in the Article, or to leave the park without first having completely extinguished fires. 
(5)  To bring in any garbage, trash, refuse, fill materials or other waste materials for the purpose of dumping or depositing the same in the parkland, except upon the express consent of the City Manager. 
(6)  To deposit, throw or leave any litter, except in a receptacle or container provided for such purpose. If no receptacles are available, litter shall be carried away from the area to be properly disposed of elsewhere. For purposes of this subsection, litter is defined to include all rubbish, waste material, refuse, garbage, trash, debris or other foreign substance, solid or liquid of every form, size, kind and description. 
(7)  To bring in any glass bottle or glass container for any purpose whatsoever. 
(8)  Within the park lands located outside the territorial limits of the City, to violate any provision of this Code. 
(9)  To fail to observe or respect written permits issued by the City Manager. 
(10)  To violate any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(11)  To possess or carry a firearm or other weapon, as described in Article 120.030 of this Code. This prohibition shall not apply to City-approved shooting ranges and persons using such shooting ranges as members, guests of members and law enforcement officers or at City-approved events. 
(12)  To leave horses or livestock at the rodeo grounds unattended except pursuant to a valid special event permit. 
(13)  Smoke, as defined in Section 100.040.020. 
(Code 1971 § 15-6; 36-85; 35-02 § 1; 20-03 § 2; Ord. No. 19-2016 , § 2, 7-21-2016) 
090.030.060 - Restriction on use of park lands for commercial rafting and related activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of transporting people on the Roaring Fork or Colorado River for hire to use Veltus Park for access to or from the Roaring Fork River. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of transporting people on the Roaring Fork or Colorado River for hire to park or stand any vehicle used in said business in Two Rivers Park unless such vehicle is actively engaged in loading or unloading people or equipment. 
(c)  Any person or company engaged in the business of transporting people on the Roaring Fork or Colorado River for hire must obtain a permit from the City before using the ramp at Two Rivers Park for the loading and unloading of people or equipment into or out of the Rivers. Such ramp use shall include the disembarking of people for use of the pavilion and/or picnic areas. Such ramp use permit shall be effective for one (1) calendar year. Each permit expires on December 31 of the calendar year. The annual ramp permit fee will be set by resolution of City Council. 
(d)  Each permittee shall also be assessed a fee as set by resolution of City Council for use of the ramp. A usage report and associated payment shall be provided to the City no later than December 1st of the current year. 
(e)  No permittee will proceed to the Two Rivers boat ramp until such time as it is clearly evident that space is available for him/her to load/unload safely. The ramp area will be kept clear at all times for loading and unloading activities. 
(f)  The ramp area is to be used for loading and unloading only. Loading/unloading time shall not exceed twenty (20) minutes. 
(g)  No vehicles will be left unattended at any time. Attended vehicles will not be left in the ramp area or adjoining loop for over thirty (30) minutes, space allowing. 
(h)  No storage parking of vehicles is allowed anywhere in the park. Commercial vehicles left unattended anywhere in the park are subject to ticketing and towing. 
(i)  No commercial staging activities shall occur in Two Rivers Park. 
(j)  All permittees shall abide by the rules and regulations for use of the boat ramp and Two Rivers Park which may be established from time to time by the City. All permittees are responsible for educating their employees about these rules and regulations. 
(k)  Trash containers, portable toilets and recycling containers are provided. Commercial companies will be responsible for keeping the area clean around these facilities used by their customers. 
(l)  Permittees shall use the area west of the boat ramp, as indicated on the map attached to the ordinance codified herein as a picnic area. If overcrowding occurs in this area, permittees will be allowed to use the Two Rivers Park picnic area. This provision does not imply that the area west of the boat ramp or that the Two Rivers Park picnic area are for the exclusive use of commercial permittees. 
(m)  Failure to abide by the City regulations can result in the permittee losing his/her permit to use the boat ramp in addition to any other penalties allowed by law. All violations will be reported to the Forest Service. 
(n)  Failure by a person or company to comply with any of these permitting and reporting requirements for the use of the ramp shall result in a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the suspension of the right to use the ramp for one (1) week. Subsequent violations will result in a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation and a twelve-month suspension of the person's or company's use of the Two Rivers Park ramp, pavilion and picnic facilities. 
(o)  Reserved. 
(Code 1971 § 15-9; 33-89 § 1; 17-97 § 1; 17-97 § 1; 12-01 § 1; 12-01 § 2; 8-02 § 1; 30-02 § 1; 4-06 § 1) 
ARTICLE 090.040 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

090.040.010 - Injury to streets, sidewalks and curbs and gutters. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to injure, cut, mutilate, destroy or deface any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter, the paving or other surface thereof, or any property maintained or used in connection therewith. It shall also be unlawful to obstruct the flow of water in any street gutter. 
(Code 1962 §§ 18.22, 21.9; Code 1971 §§ 19-4, 19-14) 
090.040.020 - Restrictions on tire equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or move upon any surfaced street in the City any vehicle equipped with metal or solid rubber tires or tires which have any flange, cleat, spike or other protuberances of any material other than rubber, except for tires containing studs and protuberances allowed by state law. 
(Code 1962, § 21.13; Code 1971 § 19-6) 
090.040.030 - Duty to construct walkway at construction sites. 
    Whenever in the construction, rebuilding or repairing of any building it becomes necessary to blockade, obstruct or remove the sidewalk, the person in charge of such work shall build and maintain a good and substantial walkway, to be approved by the City Manager, around the obstructed portion of such sidewalk. 
(Code 1962 § 21.11; Code 1971 § 19-15) 
090.040.040 - Construction standards for sidewalks and curbs and gutters. 
    All sidewalks or curbs and gutters which are constructed or reconstructed shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with standards adopted by the City Council. The City Council may adopt standards for the construction or reconstruction of sidewalks or curbs and gutters; however, nothing in this section shall be construed to repeal any such standards previously adopted by the City Council unless otherwise provided in this Code, and such previous standards shall remain in full force and effect until new standards are adopted by the City Council pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1962 § 21.18; Code 1971 § 19-33; 9-84 § 1) 
090.040.050 - Structural repair and reconstruction of existing sidewalks. 
    Any owner of real property whose real property abuts a City right-of-way may repair or reconstruct sidewalks located within said right-of-way in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(Code 1962 § 21.19; Code 1971 § 19-34; 9-84 § 1) 
090.040.060 - Construction of new sidewalks and curbs and gutters. 
(a)  Duty to construct. When the City requests an owner of real property, whose real property abuts a public right-of-way, to construct a new sidewalk or curb and gutter or both, it shall be the duty of such owner to construct such sidewalk or curb and gutter or both in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Notice. When the City determines that a new sidewalk or curb and gutter or both shall be constructed along and adjacent to a public right-of-way, it shall give written notice to the abutting real property owner of such determination. Such notice shall be given by hand delivery to the owner or by mailing such notice first class mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the owner as shown in the records of the County Office. The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The City has determined that a new sidewalk and curb and gutter or both will be constructed adjacent to the owner's property; 
(2)  The owner has a right to construct such sidewalk or curb and gutter by a date certain, in which event such construction must meet the City standards as adopted in Section 090.040.040; however, should the owner not construct said sidewalk or curb and gutter or both by that date, the City will have such construction completed and charge the owner the actual cost of construction; 
(3)  The City, at the owner's option, will construct such sidewalk for the owner and indicate the approximate cost of such construction; 
(4)  If the City constructs the sidewalk, the actual cost of the construction may be financed by the City pursuant to Subsection (e) below; 
(5)  A hearing will be held to consider the proposed construction before the City Council and the date and time of such hearing; and 
(6)  The failure of the property owner to appear and object to such construction at such hearing shall waive any and all rights he/she may have to object to such construction at a later time. 
(c)  Appeal. Any real property owner who has appeared at a City Council meeting and objected to the construction of new sidewalk or curb and gutter or both pursuant to Subsection (b) above may appeal the decision of the City Council to construct such sidewalk or curb and gutter or both to the District Court pursuant to Rule 106(a)(4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, so long as such appeal is filed in the District Court no later than fifteen (15) days from the date of the City Council meeting when such determination to construct such new sidewalk or curb and gutter or both is made in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (b) above. 
(d)  Cost of construction. For purposes of this section, the cost of construction for which an owner shall be responsible shall be the actual construction cost for the minimum sidewalk width required for the property for the zone district in which it is located. The actual cost of construction shall also include, where applicable, the ordinary cost for curb and gutter. Any oversizing from the minimum width or extraordinary cost, including but not limited to retaining walls or amenities, shall be the responsibility of the City and shall not be included in the actual construction cost charged to the owner. 
(e)  Cost repayment methods. Whenever a determination is made by the City pursuant to this section to construct a new sidewalk or curb and gutter or both, the City Engineer shall prepare an estimated cost of construction for the project. After determining the estimated cost of construction, the City Engineer shall prepare, with the assistance of the Director of Finance, a cost repayment program whereby the City would finance such cost of construction if the construction is done by the City. In the event that the City constructs the sidewalk or curb and gutter or both pursuant to the terms of this section, the owner shall be offered the option of either paying for the actual cost of construction within thirty (30) days in order to avoid the finance cost of a cost repayment program or to be allowed to pay the cost of construction to the City in accordance with the cost repayment program set forth in the notice given to the owner pursuant to Subsection (b) above. If the owner constructs the sidewalk or curb and gutter or both himself/herself, the City shall not finance the construction. The interest rate for a City-financed project shall be seven and one-half (7 1/2) percent simple interest. 
(f)  Lien on owner's property. The cost of construction of a project constructed by the City shall constitute a lien on the owner's property until paid to the City, and the City may certify this amount to the County Assessor and/or Treasurer and enforce such lien in the same manner as the collection of real property taxes. 
(g)  Special improvement districts. Nothing in this section shall prohibit or otherwise limit the authority of the City to create special improvement districts which would include the cost of construction of sidewalks or curbs and gutters or both, either individually or in conjunction with other or similar construction projects. 
(Ad 9-84 § 1; 27-84 §§ 1, 2; 32-84 § 1) 
090.040.070 - Maintenance of sidewalks, curbs and gutters. 
(a)  Duty. In addition to any other obligations imposed upon owners pursuant to this article, it shall be an owner's duty to maintain the sidewalks, curbs and gutters along public rights-of-way abutting said owner's real property in a clean condition free of all debris, garbage, trash, leaves or any other substances which would impair or interfere in any way with the use of the sidewalks or curbs and gutters. 
(b)  Notice. In the event that the City determines that an owner has been negligent in performing the duty imposed by this section, the City shall provide written notice either by first class mail, postage prepaid, or by hand delivery to the owner, to perform the duties as set forth in this section. The owner shall have two (2) days from the date of the receipt of such notice to perform said duty. In the event the sidewalk or curb and gutter is in such condition as to constitute an immediate hazard to the health, safety or welfare of persons using said sidewalk or curb and gutter, the City may require the immediate performance of the owner's duty pursuant to this section. In the event that the owner fails to perform said duty, the City may, but need not, perform or have performed by an independent contractor all work necessary to ensure compliance with this section and shall charge the owner for the cost of such performance. 
(c)  Lien on owner's property. In the event that the City performs such work or has such work performed, it shall have a lien upon the owner's real property for the cost of such performance until such cost is paid, which lien may be certified to the County Treasurer and/or Assessor and enforced in the same manner as is the collection of real property taxes. The City shall be entitled to recover, in the event that the cost of performance is not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing or delivery of notice to the owner of the cost of such performance, its attorney fees incurred to collect such sums and interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month. Such attorney's fees and interest shall also constitute a lien against the owner's real property until paid. 
(d)  Violation. In addition to the remedies set forth in this section, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to fail to perform the duty required of him/her by this section and, upon conviction of the same, such person shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
(9-84 § 1) 
090.040.080 - Removal of snow. 
(a)  Shoveling of public sidewalks required. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any lot, block or parcel of ground within the City, or for any agent in charge of such property, to allow any snow or ice to accumulate or remain upon the entire width of any sidewalk in the public right-of-way abutting such property longer than twenty-four (24) hours from the time of the last accretion of such snow or ice. 
(b)  Depositing snow in right-of-way prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove snow or ice from any private property and deposit such snow or ice upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property within the City under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the snow or ice is removed from any private nonresidential property. 
(2)  When the snow or ice is removed from any private residential property containing in excess of four (4) dwelling units as defined in Title 070 of this Code. 
(c)  Obstructing and endangering public right-of-way prohibited . It shall be unlawful for any person to plow, shovel, blow or otherwise move snow or ice in or upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public property within the City in a manner which: 
(1)  Obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon the right-of-way. 
(2)  Increases hazards to vehicles and pedestrians traveling upon the right-of-way. 
(3)  Interferes with the maintenance of the public right-of-way by the City. 
(d)  Exception for public crews . Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit or regulate the manner in which persons working for or on behalf of the City clear or remove snow or ice from the public streets or other public places within the City. 
(e)  Penalties . Upon first violation of this section, occupant may be assessed a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). Upon second violation of this section, occupant may be assessed a fine of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Upon third violation of this section, property owner and occupant may be cited with a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with Section 010.020.080 of this Code. 
(Code 1962 § 21.21; Code 1971 § 19-5; 11-89 § 1; 3-04 § 1) 
090.040.085 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-2018 , § 5, adopted Aug. 2, 2018, repealed § 090.040.085 which pertained to right-of-way encroachments, and licenses to encroach, and derived from Ord. No. 46-98, § 1; Ord. No. 20-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5-06, § 4; and Ord. No. 23-09, § 2. For current provisions pertaining to right-of-way encroachments, see § 070.060.050(f) of the Development Code. 
090.040.090 - Care of vegetation within street right-of-way. 
    The maintenance of trees located within a street right-of-way shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article 090.050. The maintenance of other landscaping located within a street right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the owner of the adjacent property. 
(Code 1962 § 21.15; Code 1971 § 19-18) 
090.040.100 - Adoption of rules and regulations for safe, efficient and economical management of City streets, sidewalks and curbs. 
    The City Council may make and enforce such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the safe, efficient and economical management of the streets, sidewalks and curbs and gutters within the City. Nothing in this section shall be construed to repeal any such rules and regulations previously enacted in any form or in any manner by the City Council unless otherwise provided in this Code, and such rules and regulations shall remain in full force and effect until new rules and regulations are adopted by the City Council pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1971 § 19-19) 
090.040.105 - Bridges-Jumping prohibited. 
(a)  Jumping or hanging from, attaching foreign objects to or climbing onto any bridge or its appurtenant structures within the City is prohibited. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and punishable in accordance with Section 010.020.080 of this Code. 
(25-98 § 1) 
090.040.110 - Motorized Vehicles Prohibited on City Trails. 
(a)  Definitions . 
    Motorized vehicle means any vehicle, whether or not home-built by the user, that is not solely human powered excluding emergency vehicles, maintenance vehicles and power driven aids or devices used by a disabled person for mobility. 
    City trail means those trails which are designated on the City's Trail Map. 
(b)  Motorized Vehicles Prohibited . It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized vehicle on any City trail. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and punishable in accordance with Section 010.020.080 of this Code. 
(8-05, § 1; 6-12, § 2) 
ARTICLE 090.045 - RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT APPLICATION AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

090.045.010 - General. 
(a)  Purpose . The purposes of these standards are to: 
(1)  Minimize or eliminate any degradation to public right-of-way facilities as a result of any activity occurring within the public right-of-way, including utility and driveway cuts and any other construction activity which may result in damage to any public right-of-way facility. 
(2)  Minimize the disruption to the public's use of the public right-of-way as a result of construction activities within the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Encourage the underground placement of all utilities within the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Encourage the relocation of current overhead facilities in the public right-of-way to underground facilities. 
(5)  Encourage co-location of compatible facilities within the public right-of-way. 
(6)  Ensure that no private construction activity within the public right-of-way results in the degradation of any public right-of-way facility or results in any expense to the citizens of the City. 
(7)  Manage the public right-of-way on behalf of the citizens regarding public health, safety and convenience. 
(8)  Manage the surface of the public right-of-way to ensure the structural integrity, availability, safety and a smooth street surface for the traveling public. 
(9)  Manage the space below the surface to ensure safe and economical access to the City's electric, water, storm drainage and sanitary sewer systems. 
(10)  Manage the space below the surface to ensure safe and economical access for all current and future users of the rights-of-way. 
(11)  Manage the space above the surface by managing the placement of overhead facilities to minimize safety hazards, to minimize the impacts on community aesthetics and to promote development. 
(b)  Applicability . 
(1)  These standards shall apply to all work performed in the public rights-of-way and public property within the City. 
(2)  All contractors and public utility agencies must obtain a right-of-way permit for any work performed within the public rights-of-way prior to commencement of work. 
(3)  To preserve the original investment of the street and roadway systems within the City, minimize the disruption and maximize the safety to the traveling public caused by construction and reduce future maintenance problems, it shall be the City's responsibility to require that the installation of new utilities across existing streets be done by boring or tunneling wherever practical. Open cutting of existing streets for the installation of new utilities will be permitted only when it can be proven it is not possible to use boring or tunneling techniques. 
(4)  Applicants for right-of-way permits must plan for adequate time for review and approval by the City and any other involved agencies. Generally, the greater the scope of work, the longer the permit review and approval process will take. 
(c)  Definitions and abbreviations . Wherever the following words, phrases or abbreviations appear in these standards, they shall have the following meanings: 
    As-constructed drawings means a set of construction drawings that has been red-penciled or otherwise marked to record all changes which have occurred during the construction. 
    CDOT means the Colorado Department of Transportation. 
    City means the City of Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
    City Engineer means the City Engineer, or his/her authorized representatives acting on behalf of the entity. 
    Contractor means a person, partnership or corporation duly bonded, licensed and insured to perform work within public rights-of-way in the City. 
    Driveway, rural means that portion of gravel or hard-surfaced roadway from the street, roadway or alley to the private property line to gain access to the private property. 
    Driveway, urban means that portion of Portland cement concrete or asphalt extending from the street gutter lip to the property line for the full width of access from the public right-of-way to the private property. 
    Engineering plans means drawings, plans, profiles, cross-sections and other required details for the construction of public or private improvements within the public rights-of-way or public easements, conforming with the City's applicable improvement standards. 
    Functional classification means the objective grouping of roads, streets and highways into integrated systems, each ranked by their relative importance to the general welfare, the motorists and land use. 
    Improvement standards means a set of specifications and standards established by the City setting forth the details, specifications, instructions and procedures to be followed in the planning, design, installation and construction of public or private improvements within the public rights-of-way or public easements. 
    Inspector means an authorized representative of the City Engineer assigned to make inspections for contract performances, standards and contract compliance. 
    MUTCD means the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (Federal Highway Administration). 
    OSHA means the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
    Right-of-way (R.O.W.) means any strip or area of land, including surface, overhead or underground, granted by deed, easement, dedication, prescription or lease, for construction and maintenance according to designated use, such as for streets and highways, drainage ditches, irrigation canals, etc. 
    Right-of-way permit means an official document issued by the City authorizing the performance of a specified activity or work within public rights-of-way and public easements by a person, contractor, company, firm, corporation or public utility licensed to do business in the City. 
    Street is a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle travel ways, including the entire area within the right-of-way (includes alleyways) and any constructed facility within the right-of-way. 
    Traffic control supervisor (TCS) means a well-trained and knowledgeable individual assigned the responsibility for traffic control devices at worksites. The TCS must be ATSSA (American Traffic Safety Services Association) or CCA (Colorado Contractor's Association) certified. 
    Traffic Engineer means the City Engineer or person responsible for monitoring traffic in the City. 
    UNCC means the Utility Notification Center of Colorado (commonly referred to as "One Call"). It is the statewide clearinghouse for coordinating and scheduling utility locates. Most utilities, both public and private, utilize this service. The toll-free phone number for UNCC is 1-800-922-1987. 
(d)  Specific conditions . 
(1)  Traffic control plans. A Traffic control plan (TCP) shall be submitted prior to or submitted with the permit application for all proposed work in or on arterial and collector streets for approval by the City Engineer. Work in or on residential streets typically does not need a separate TCP, but all signs, barricades and other necessary traffic control devices shall be placed in accordance with the MUTCD, Part VI. All the work described above shall be performed by a TCS. 
(2)  Traffic flow during peak hours. No interference with traffic flow on arterial or collector streets shall be permitted during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. or from 4:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. unless authorized in writing by the City Engineer. 
(3)  End-of-day lane conditions. 
a.  Asphalt street. When work is stopped for the day, all lanes of an arterial or collector street shall be opened to traffic unless approved by the City Engineer. A traffic lane shall be considered satisfactorily open only if it is paved with hot or cold mix asphalt paving, except when the City Engineer allows an alternate temporary surface at its discretion. 
b.  Concrete street. When work is stopped for the day, all lanes of an arterial or collector street shall be opened for traffic. A traffic lane shall be considered satisfactorily open only if it is surfaced with a temporary asphalt surface. In the event the street surface has been replaced in the same day as the excavation was made, the repaired areas should be properly barricaded to protect the concrete during the curing stage. 
(4)  Inspection requests. It shall be the responsibility of the person performing the work authorized by the permit to notify the City Engineer that such work is ready for inspection. The City Engineer requires that every request for inspection be received at least twenty-four (24) hours before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by telephoning or faxing the City Engineer. 
(5)  Minimum concrete removals and replacements. Removal and replacement shall be to existing joints. 
(6)  Road closures. Road closures will only be allowed with the approval of the City Engineer. 
(7)  Permit fees. Permit fees shall be as follows: 
a.  Base fee: Permit applicants will be assessed a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee for review and processing of the permit and associated documents. This will apply to each permit application submitted. 
b.  Service installations: Service installations which attach to existing utilities will not be assessed in addition to the base fee. 
c.  Street cuts including vertical boring of surfaces more than five (5) years old: Street cuts of surfaces more than five (5) years old shall be assessed thirty-five cents ($0.35) per square foot of surface cut in addition to the base fee. 
d.  Street cuts including vertical boring of surfaces less than five (5) years old: Street cuts of surfaces less than five (5) years old shall be assessed five dollars ($5.00) per square foot of surface cut in addition to the base fee. 
e.  Horizontal boring: Horizontal boring shall be assessed ten cents ($0.10) per lineal foot of bore in addition to the base fee. 
f.  Curb, gutter and sidewalk cuts: Curb, gutter and sidewalk cuts shall be assessed thirty-five cents ($0.35) per square foot in addition to the base fee. 
(8)  Insurance requirements . 
a.  Prior to commencement of any work, the contractor shall forward certificates of insurance to the City at c/o Building Dept., 101 W. 8th Street, Glenwood Springs, CO 81601. The insurance required shall be procured and maintained for the duration of the contract and shall be written for not less than the following amounts, or greater if required by law. 
1.  Comprehensive general liability on an occurrence form (including premises operations; independent contractors; products and completed operations; broad form property damage as appropriate): 
(i)  Bodily injury: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate/five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) each occurrence. 
(ii)  Property damage: one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate/five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) each occurrence. 
2.  Products and completed operations to be maintained for one (1) year after final payment. The contractor shall continue to provide evidence of such coverage to the City on an annual basis during the aforementioned period (as appropriate). 
b.  All insurance policies shall include the City and its elected officials and employees as additional insureds as their interests may appear. 
c.  The City reserves the right to reject any insurer it deems not financially acceptable by insurance industry standards. Property and liability insurance companies shall be licensed to do business in the State and shall have an AM Best rating of not less than B+ and/or VII. 
d.  Certificates of insurance on all policies shall list the City of Glenwood Springs, 101 W. 8th Street, Glenwood Springs, Colorado, 81601 as additional insured. 
e.  Certificates of insurance on all policies shall give the City written notice of not less than thirty (30) days prior to cancellation or change in coverage. 
Any deviations from the insurance standards given above must be approved by the Engineering Department. 
(5-02 § 1; 20-11, § 2) 
090.045.020 - Permit application process. 
(a)  Minimum submittal deadlines. A completed form, together with all required submittals and all copies, shall be submitted to the City a minimum of forty (40) work hours (not including Saturdays and Sundays) prior to the proposed start of work. It is the applicant/contractor's responsibility to submit a complete application. Incomplete submittals will not be reviewed. 
(b)  Submission of plans. Drawings or plans that clearly indicate the proposed work must be attached to the permit application. These drawings must be to a working scale and must show position and location of work, street/road names/numbers, widths of streets, property lines, topographic and manmade features, existing drainage patterns, etc. Plans shall show the relative position of proposed work to existing utilities and existing improvements and shall be drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet or larger and shall include a north reference. 
(c)  Submission of traffic control plans. Traffic control plans shall show in detail the proposed work area location and the traffic control devices being proposed. Such plan shall be on paper at least eight and one-half (81/2) by eleven (11) inches and may be faxed, mailed or brought to the office of the City Engineer a minimum of forty (40) work hours prior to issuance of the permit. Traffic control plans may require more detail than normal at the discretion of the City Traffic Engineer due to unique or unusual conditions. Traffic control shall also include construction traffic routing requirements. 
(d)  Payment of fees. Permits shall not be issued until all applicable fees have been paid. 
(e)  Review of submittals. The completed submittals will be reviewed by the City. If additional information is needed, the applicant will be contacted. The City will check to make certain that the applicant has provided the required bond, license and insurance certificates. 
(f)  Approval of submittals. Once the permit form and all required submittals have been reviewed and found to be complete, the permit may be approved by the City. 
(g)  Issuance of permit. The approved permit is issued to the applicant. Any modifications to the approved permit, including any schedule or scope changes, must be submitted in writing to the City for its review and approval. The applicant is solely responsible for all work for a period of two (2) years following the project completion. 
(h)  Other permits. Permit applicants are responsible for obtaining separate permits or permission as may be required. Examples may be when work is proposed within state highway, railroad or irrigation company rights-of-way, or private property. 
(5-02 § 1) 
090.045.030 - Construction details. 
(a)  General conditions . The following general conditions apply to all work done within the public rights-of-way, such as utility line installation or repairs performed by any contractor or utility department, public or private. 
(1)  Protection of existing improvements . 
a.  The contractor shall at all times take proper precautions and be responsible for the protection of existing street and alley surfaces, driveway culverts, street intersection culverts or aprons, irrigation systems, mailboxes, driveway approaches, curb, gutter and sidewalks and all other identifiable installations that may be encountered during construction. 
b.  The contractor shall at all times take proper precautions for the protection of existing utilities, the presence of which are known or can be determined by field locations of the utility companies. The contractor shall contact the UNCC (One Call) at 1-800-922-1987 for utility locates a minimum of two (2) working days prior to his/her proposed start of work. 
c.  Existing improvements to adjacent property such as landscaping, fencing, utility services, driveway surfaces, etc., that are not to be removed shall be protected from injury or damage resulting from the contractor's operations. 
d.  The contractor shall at all times take proper precautions for the protection of property pins/corners and survey control monuments encountered during construction. Any damaged or disturbed survey markers shall be replaced by a registered land surveyor at the contractor's expense. 
e.  The repair of any damaged improvements as described above shall be the responsibility of the permit holder. 
f.  The contractor shall make adequate provisions to ensure that traffic and adjacent property owners experience a minimum of inconvenience. 
(2)  Temporary surfaces required. When the final surface is not immediately installed, it shall be necessary to place a temporary asphalt surface on any street cut opening. The temporary surface installation and maintenance shall be the responsibility of the permittee until the permanent surface is completed and accepted. It shall be either a hot mix or cold mix paving material. Temporary surfaces shall be compacted, rolled smooth and sealed to prevent degradation of the repair and existing structures during the temporary period. Permanent patching shall occur within two (2) weeks except as outlined by the City in the permit. 
(3)  Pavement patches. All permanent pavement patches and repairs shall be made with "in-kind" materials. For example, concrete patches in concrete surfaces, full depth asphalt patches with full depth asphalt, concrete pavement with asphalt overlay patches will be expected in permanent "overlaid" concrete streets, etc. In no case is there to be an asphalt patch in concrete streets or concrete patch in asphalt streets. Any repair not meeting these requirements will be removed and replaced by the contractor at his/her expense. Refer to Section 090.045.040 for details. 
(4)  Work to be done in expedient manner. All work shall be done in an expedient manner. Repairs shall be made as rapidly as is consistent with high-quality workmanship and materials. Use of fast-setting concrete and similar techniques are encouraged whenever possible without sacrificing the quality of repair. Completion of the work, including replacement of pavement and cleanup, shall normally be accomplished within two (2) weeks after the repair work or activity involving the cut is done. Extension of time for completion shall be with the written approval of the City Engineer. If the repairs are not completed in the allotted time, the City has the right to repair the street at the contractor's expense. 
(5)  Removal and replacement of unsatisfactory work. Removal and replacement of unsatisfactory work shall be completed within fifteen (15) days of written notification of the deficiency unless deemed an emergency requiring immediate action. In the event the replacement work has not been completed, the City will take action upon the contractor's bond to cover all related costs. 
(b)  Excavation . 
(1)  Excavation shall consist of removal of all material necessary for the construction of the roadway section to the subgrade elevation, line and grade shown on the plans or as specified in the contract documents. Unacceptable material, defined as any earthen material containing vegetable or organic silt, topsoil, frozen material, trees, stumps, certain manmade deposits, industrial waste, sludge or landfill, or other undesirable materials will be categorized as "unclassified excavation" and removed from the site and disposed of in accordance with applicable city, state and federal requirements. All tree stumps and roots shall be removed to a minimum of two (2) feet below subgrade. Unclassified excavation includes any and all earthen materials encountered, including rocks and boulders measuring less than one-half (1/2) cubic yard in volume, during construction. 
(2)  Any work on trees, including roots, must be reviewed by the City. 
(3)  Excavation shall be performed in a careful and orderly manner with due consideration given to protection of adjoining property, the public and workmen. Any damage to streets, parking lots, utilities, irrigation systems, plants, trees, buildings, structures or private property, or the bench marks and construction staking due to the negligence of the contractor, shall be repaired and restored to its original conditions by the contractor at his/her expense. Those areas that are to be saved will be clearly fenced off by the contractor per the owner's instructions, and it will be the contractor's responsibility to ensure that these areas are not damaged during the construction process. Following completion of construction, should any of these trees, shrubs or irrigation facilities, etc., require replacement, it shall be done at the contractor's expense. 
(4)  All materials determined acceptable by the City Engineer acquired from roadway excavations may be used for embankment fill and backfill as needed. The entire area in the vicinity of the construction where excavation and filling has been performed shall be raked clean of all trash, wood forms and debris, after completion of the work, with no additional cost to the owner. Material removed in excavation and not acceptable or not required for embankment fill or backfill shall be disposed of by the contractor. It shall not be wasted on private property without written permission of the property owner. Waste banks shall be left with reasonable smooth and regular surfaces. 
(5)  The construction of any repair activity within the street or alley rights-of-way shall be accomplished by open cut, jacking, boring, tunneling or a combination of these methods as approved by the permit. The City Engineer shall approve any change from the approved permit. 
(6)  Trenches shall be excavated along the lines and grades established and in no case shall be more than two hundred (200) feet in length, or be trenched or backfilled in noncontinuous sections unless approved by the City Engineer. Failure by the contractor to comply with these requirements may result in an order to stop the excavation in progress until compliance has been achieved. 
(7)  All excavated material shall be stockpiled in a manner that does not endanger the work or workers and that does not obstruct sidewalks, streets and driveways. No stockpiled materials shall be allowed on the asphalt surface or adjacent walkways. The work shall be done in a manner that will minimize interference with traffic and/or drainage of the street. The contractor at the end of each day shall barricade all excavations and ditch lines, remove excess material from travel ways and thoroughly clean all streets, alleys and sidewalks affected by the excavation. If it becomes necessary to accomplish this, all streets, alleys (if asphalt or concrete) and sidewalks shall be swept or washed as required by the City Engineer. 
(8)  Materials encountered during excavation such as rubbish, organic or frozen material, and any other material that is not satisfactory for use as backfill in the opinion of the City Engineer, shall be removed from the site and disposed of daily by the contractor at his expense. Stones, concrete or asphalt chunks larger than six (6) inches or frozen material shall be considered unsatisfactory backfill and removed by the contractor. 
(9)  All excavation, shoring, trenching and the like shall comply with OSHA's "Construction Industry Standards" as well as all applicable federal and state regulations. 
(10)  No tracked vehicles shall be allowed on asphalt or concrete unless approved by the City Engineer. 
(11)  Crossings under sidewalks or curbs may be made by tunneling only when approved by the City Engineer. If the contractor elects to remove a portion of the sidewalk or curb, the applicable City standards shall be followed. 
(12)  Grading shall be done as necessary to prevent surface water from entering the excavation; any other water accumulation therein shall be promptly removed. Surface drainage, driveways, fire hydrants, manholes, water valves, etc., of adjoining areas shall be unobstructed. 
(13)  When soft or unstable material or rock is encountered in the trench subgrade that will not uniformly support the pipe, such material shall be excavated to additional depths directed by the City Engineer and backfilled with Type B material. 
(c)  Blasting . Blasting is generally not permitted within the City. If there is no other reasonable option, the City will consider the applicant's request for blasting. If allowed, the following minimum standards may apply. 
(1)  The contractor's blasting procedures shall conform to federal, state and local laws and ordinances. The contractor shall acquire all required permits prior to the start of blasting. 
(2)  Blasting for excavation will be permitted only after securing the approval of the City Engineer. The City Engineer will fix the hours of blasting. The contractor shall use the utmost care to protect life and property. All explosives shall be safely and securely stored in compliance with local laws and ordinances, and all storage places shall be clearly marked "Dangerous Explosives." No explosives shall be left unprotected where they could endanger life or property. 
(3)  When blasting in trenches, the contractor shall cover the area to be shot with earth backfill or approved blasting mats. Prior to blasting, the contractor shall station flaggers and provide signals of danger in suitable places to warn people and stop vehicles. The contractor shall be responsible for all damage to property and injury to persons resulting from blasting or accidental explosions that may occur in connection with the use of explosives. 
(d)  Equipment . 
(1)  The use of trench-digging equipment will be permitted in places where its operation will not cause damage to existing structures or features, in which case hand methods shall be employed. 
(2)  No tracked vehicles shall be permitted on streets unless approved by the City Engineer. When tracked vehicles are allowed, existing facilities will be restored to original condition at the contractor's expense. 
(3)  Construction equipment and material delivery routing will be made a condition of the permit. 
(e)  Dewatering . Where groundwater is encountered in the excavation, it shall be removed to avoid interfering with the work. It is the contractor's responsibility to comply with all federal, state and local permitting requirements prior to beginning any dewatering operations. 
(f)  Removals . 
(1)  Streets, paved . 
a.  Bituminous pavement shall be saw cut to clean, straight lines and should be perpendicular or parallel to the flow of traffic. (See Section 090.045.040(b)(2)(a)). 
b.  In existing pavement, all excavations within thirty-six (36) inches of the edge of the asphalt shall require removal and replacement from the edge of asphalt to the excavation edge. 
c.  Concrete pavement, cross-pans, driveways, streets and alleys shall be removed to neatly sawed edges cut to full depth. 
(2)  Streets, gravel . 
a.  When trenches are excavated in streets or alleys which have only a gravel surface, the contractor shall replace such surfacing on a satisfactory compacted backfill with gravel conforming to CDOT Class 6 aggregate base course. Gravel replacement shall be one (1) inch greater in depth to that which originally existed, but not less than four (4) inches. The surface shall conform to the original street grade. Where the completed surface settles, additional gravel base shall be placed and compacted by the contractor immediately after being notified by the City to restore the roadbed surface to finished grade. 
b.  Some streets may have been treated with a special surface treatment to control dust and/or bind the aggregates together. In these cases, the contractor is responsible for installing the gravel surface in the same manner as what was existing. Such surface treatments shall be of the same chemical composition as what existed prior to the excavation work. The City Engineer shall note on the permit the surface treatment that will be required. 
(3)  Concrete curb, gutter and sidewalk . Concrete shall be removed to neatly sawed edges to full depth for sidewalks and curb and gutter and shall be saw cut in straight lines either parallel to the curb or perpendicular to the alignment of the sidewalk or curb. Any removal shall be done to the nearest joint. Replaced sections may require doweling connections if required by the City Engineer. 
(g)  Backfill . 
(1)  Flowable-fill . 
a.  Flowable-fill will be required as utility trench backfill for all trenches unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Refer to Section 090.045.050 for compaction requirements. This requirement applies to all pavement and gravel locations. Flowable-fill vibration may be required. 
b.  The recommended mix for flowable-fill is shown below. Concrete backfill will not be allowed within the public right-of-way. Flash-fill may be used if approved by the City Engineer. Refer to CDOT Specification 206.02. 
Ingredients Pounds/Cubic Yard Cement 42 (0.47 sack) Water 235 (39 gallons or as needed) Coarse Aggregate (Size No. 57) 1700 Sand (ASTM C-33) 1845  
c.  The maximum desired twenty-eight-day strength is sixty (60) psi. The above combination of material, or an equivalent, may be used to obtain the desired "flowable-fill." 
d.  Flowable-fill or flash-fill shall be prohibited as a temporary or permanent street surface. Trenches shall initially be backfilled to the level of the original surface. After the flowable-fill has cured, the top surface of the flowable-fill shall be removed and the temporary or permanent surface shall be placed. 
e.  Bridging and cutback requirements as described in these standards may still be required if the street failures indicate a clear need. 
f.  Repair of failed trenches will be the responsibility of the party requiring the trench. 
(2)  Conventional backfill (other than flowable-fill) . 
a.  When "non-flowable-fill" backfill material has been preapproved by the City Engineer, backfill in existing or proposed streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and alleys shall be a Class 6 aggregate. 
b.  Maximum dry density of all soil types used will be determined in accordance with AASHTO T 99 or AASHTO T 180. These densities will be determined prior to placement of backfill. 
c.  When a hydro-hammer or drop hammer compaction machine is used for compaction of fill in trenches, the maximum layer shall be thirty (30) inches. 
(3)  Compaction testing requirements . See Section 090.045.050. 
(4)  Embankment and slopes . The City Engineer shall approve all fill material. All cut slopes shall conform to OSHA standards. 
(h)  Restoration . 
(1)  Bore holes, vertical and horizontal. 
a.  For openings less than or equal to six (6) inches in diameter, bore holes shall be filled with patching material (cold mix is not acceptable) to prevent entry of moisture. Patching material used shall be in all cases compatible with the existing surface. Subgrade shall be replaced with flowable-fill to provide necessary support to the surface. The sealing of bore holes is the responsibility of the contractor or person making the bore. 
b.  For openings greater than six (6) inches in diameter, the limits of repair shall be identified in the permit. 
c.  The completed job shall be flush with the surrounding pavement and have no indentations, pockets or recesses that may trap and hold water. 
(2)  Subgrade . 
a.  The subgrade for the pavement structure shall be graded to conform to the cross-sections and profile required by the construction plans. Prior to the placement of aggregate base course or subcourse, the subgrade should be properly prepared. The subgrade should be scarified to a minimum depth of six (6) inches, moisture adjusted as necessary and recompacted to not less than the following: 
1.  For cohesive soils, ninety (90) percent maximum Modified Proctor dry density at two (2) percent of optimum moisture content, or ninety-five (95) percent maximum Standard Proctor dry density at two (2) percent of optimum moisture content. 
2.  For noncohesive soils, ninety-two (92) percent maximum Modified Proctor dry density at two (2) percent of optimum moisture content, or ninety-seven (97) percent maximum Standard Proctor dry density at two (2) percent of optimum moisture content. 
3.  For expansive soils, eighty-eight (88) percent maximum Modified Proctor dry density at three (3) percent or greater above optimum moisture content, or ninety-three (93) percent maximum Standard Proctor dry density within one (1) percent or greater above optimum moisture content. For highly expansive soils (swell potential two (2) percent under two hundred (200) psf surcharge pressure), paving will not be permitted without a subgrade treatment approved by the City Engineer. 
b.  Prior to approval to place the base or subbase course, all utility main and service trenches shall be compacted to not less than the above-referenced densities required for the given soil classification. This density requirement also applies to all utility trenches within the public rights-of-way from a point four (4) feet beyond the edge of asphalt and descending at 1:1 outward. 
(3)  Asphalt surfacing. 
a.  Any damage, even superficial, to the existing asphalt surface in the vicinity of the work shall be repaired at the expense of the contractor, including but not limited to gouges, scrapes, outrigger marks, backhoe bucket marks, etc. A slurry seal type covering will be considered the minimum repair. Patching may be required, at the discretion of the City. 
b.  The depth of asphalt patches in asphalt streets shall typically be the depth of the existing asphalt surface plus two (2) inches, or as specified by the City Engineer. 
c.  The asphalt patch area for street excavations that fall within the wheel path of the vehicular travel lane shall be increased in size to the center of the lane or adjacent lane. In no circumstance will the edge of a patch area be allowed to fall within the wheel path. 
d.  All street cuts shall be patched as per the standards of Subsection (4) below. 
e.  In streets that are less than five (5) years old, the City reserves the right to deny any street excavation or require repairs that are over and above these specifications. 
f.  Exceptions . There may be situations where the patching standards are considered inappropriate. For example, rebuilding one-half (1/2) of a road today when it is known that the road is due for reconstruction at a different profile in two (2) to three (3) years. In these cases, the permit holder can provide a more modest patch adequate to accommodate traffic for the two-to-three-year period. In addition, the permit holder may be required to make a financial contribution to the street maintenance, rehabilitation or reconstruction program to support the more permanent improvements that are anticipated. This determination shall be made by the City Engineer. 
(4)  Concrete surfacing and patching . 
a.  The concrete pavement shall be replaced with four thousand (4,000) psi concrete to match the finish and thickness of the existing pavement, but not less than eight (8) inches thick. All concrete construction shall be protected from vehicular traffic, including contractor vehicles, until the concrete has achieved eighty (80) percent of its ultimate strength. Concrete shall be coated and sealed with a uniform application of membrane curing compound applied in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
b.  The use of quick-curing concrete (three thousand (3,000) psi strength within forty-eight (48) hours) shall be used on all arterial and collector streets when repair areas are less than five hundred (500) square feet or when temperatures are below forty (40) degrees F. Quick-curing concrete repairs may be opened to traffic within two (2) days or when the concrete has achieved eighty (80) percent of its ultimate strength. 
c.  Where existing cracks or damage are adjacent to the area being repaired, the repair area shall include the cracked or damaged concrete. Pavement repairs shall include all areas of damage, including leak test holes, pot holes and equipment and/or material scarring of the existing surface. 
d.  When repairing concrete, the removal perimeter shall be saw-cut and replacement concrete shall be doweled into the old concrete as directed by the City Engineer. 
(5)  Joint filling . 
a.  Asphalt . Following placement of the asphalt surface, the joints where the new asphalt abuts the old shall be sealed with a fog or painted coat of bitumen cement. 
b.  Concrete . Joints shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign material then filled with a hot-poured elastic type joint filler conforming to M 173, ASTM D1190-80, ASTM D1751-83, D1752-84, D3405-78, D3406-78, D3407-78 or silicone sealants or others as approved by the City Engineer. Joint material shall be filled to within one-half (1/2) inch of the surface. Excess material shall be scraped off to provide a smooth riding surface. 
(5-02 § 1) 
090.045.040 - Developing a quality approach to street repairs. 
(a)  General . 
(1)  Every street and street repair situation is unique. Design criteria and construction standards cannot address every situation but, in order to maintain some form of consistency, these standards have been developed. In most cases, they provide the minimum acceptable standards for construction or repair. Consequently, when strictly applied, they will provide the minimum acceptable product. Therefore, this criteria has been developed to maintain the same integrity of the street pavement and subsurface condition prior to its being cut for utility installations. 
(2)  To achieve the goal of "quality" or "excellence" in street repairs, these criteria shall be viewed as standards when used in conjunction with good planning and judgment. This will restore the street to an acceptable condition with minimal patching failures. In most cases, it will be necessary to exceed the minimum standards to achieve a quality repair. 
(3)  Issues that shall be considered in a quality approach to street repairs are contained in this section. 
(b)  Appearance . Does the final appearance of the street suggest the repairs were planned or that they happened by accident? 
(1)  Consciously or not, the driving public "rates" the appearance of the street system, including street repairs, every day. Street repairs which are satisfactory from a functional point of view may produce a negative reaction from the public if they give the appearance of being poorly planned or executed. 
(2)  The public's perception of street repairs is based primarily on shape, size and orientation - the geometry of a patch. The following are some standards for the geometry of a quality patch: 
a.  Existing pavements should be removed to clean, straight lines parallel and perpendicular to the flow of traffic. Do not construct patches with angled sides and irregular shapes. 

b.  Avoid patches within existing patches. If this cannot be avoided, make the boundaries of the patches coincide. 

c.  Do not "leave" strips of pavement less than one-half (1/2) a lane in width from the edge of the new patch to the edge of an existing patch or the lip of the gutter. 

d.  In concrete pavements, remove sections to existing joints in the case of concrete in good repair. In damaged concrete, the limits of removal should be determined in the field by a representative of the City Engineer. 

e.  Asphalt and concrete pavements should be removed by saw cutting or grinding. Avoid breaking away the edges of the existing pavement or damaging the remaining pavement with heavy construction equipment. 

f.  In the case of a series of patches or patches for service lines off a main trench, repair the pavement over the patches by grinding and overlay when the spacing between the patches is less than seventy-five (75) feet (in cases where the existing pavement is in poor condition and may require overlay within the next few years, this requirement may be modified or waived by the City Engineer). 

(c)  Rideability . Are the transitions on and off of the repair smooth? Does the patch itself offer a smooth ride? Are the joints located outside of the normal wheel path? 
(1)  Completed street repairs should have rideability at least as good as, if not better than, the pavement prior to the repairs. A driver may be able to see a street repair, but in the case of a quality repair, he/she should not be able to "feel" it in driving normally down the street. 
(2)  Do not place overlays with feathered edges on streets of any classification. Overlays should be placed by first removing the existing pavement to the desired depth by grinding, and then placing the pavement flush with the adjacent surfaces. 

(3)  Surface tolerances for street repairs should meet the standard for new construction. That is, the finished surface of the street repair, when tested with a ten-foot straightedge parallel to the center line or perpendicular across joints, will show variations measured from the testing face of the straightedge to the surface of the street repair which do not exceed one-quarter (1/4) inch. 

(d)  Pavement management . Is the repair consistent with the long-term pavement management strategy for the particular street? 
(1)  Street repairs should leave a pavement in a condition at least as good as, if not better than, the condition prior to the repairs. 
(2)  In most cases, and particularly in the cases of extensive excavation and repairs, it is desirable to survey the existing pavement condition with a representative of the City prior to the work. After completion of the work, survey the pavement condition again to verify that the pavement condition has been maintained or improved. 
a.  In the case of minor repairs, these pavement surveys can be made by visual observation. 
b.  However, in the case of major projects that involve excessive haul of materials or unusually heavy construction equipment or activity, nondestructive testing of the pavement condition before and after construction is required. 
(3)  Consideration of pavement management issues may also identify opportunities for joint efforts between the utilities and the City. For example, suppose that the repair of a utility line requires an overlay on one-half (1/2) of a street, and that the condition of the remaining one-half (1/2) of the street might also warrant an overlay. We may decide at that point to overlay the entire street, with the City's street authority and the utility splitting the cost of the overlay. In such a case, the utility may be able to save the cost of grinding one-half (1/2) the street. The City's street authority will allocate a reasonable percentage of its annual overlay program to accommodate its share of these situations. This includes minor (two-to-three-block) maintenance projects and larger capital improvement projects (major water line extension). Coordination for these types of cooperative repairs should occur as far in advance of actual construction as possible. 
a.  Transverse patches on arterial and collector streets shall be overlaid across the entire street width for a distance of two (2) feet minimum on all sides of the trench. 

b.  Do not allow the edges of patches to fall in existing wheel paths. The edges of patches parallel to the direction of traffic shall be limited to the boundaries of lanes or to the center line of travel lanes. 

c.  Patches should have a smooth longitudinal grade consistent with the existing roadway. Patches should also have a cross-slope or cross-section consistent with the design of the existing roadway. 

(e)  Future maintenance . Will the repair pose any future maintenance problems or make future maintenance more difficult? 
(1)  Excavations and street repairs, even well-constructed street repairs, shorten a pavement's life. Several types of street distress, settlement, alligator cracking and potholes often show up around patches. Quality street repairs should attempt to reduce the occurrence of these types of distress. 
(2)  Avoid weakening or destroying the existing pavement around an excavation with heavy construction equipment, stockpiling or delivery of materials, etc. When damage does occur, remove the damaged pavement, extending the limits of the street repair, before replacing the pavement. Remember, no stockpiling of backfill or road-building materials is permitted on the pavement. 
a.  When the proposed excavation falls within ten (10) feet of a section of failed pavement, the failed area shall be removed to sound pavement and patched. Scarring, gouging or other damaged pavement adjacent to a patch shall be removed and the pavement repaired. 

b.  In the case of older pavement where the likelihood of cracking and potholes next to the patch is greater, it may be necessary to extend the "shoulders" of the pavement beyond the two-foot minimum, and reinforce this area with a geotextile. "T" cutting is required for all repairs. 

c.  For patches in asphalt, a tack coat shall be applied to all edges of the existing asphalt before placing the new pavement. After placing the new asphalt, all seams (joints) between the new and existing pavements shall be sealed with an asphalt tack coat or rubberized crack seal material. 
d.  Avoid frequent changes in width of patches. For future maintenance, this simplifies removal of adjacent pavement failures. 

(5-02 § 1) 
090.045.050 - Testing. 
(a)  Description . The contractor is required to provide material testing for each phase of the work and at no cost to the City. The independent geotechnical testing firm chosen to perform this work for the contractor must be qualified and identified on the permit application. 
(b)  Testing frequencies . 
(1)  The number of density tests required may be increased if directed by the City Engineer. The costs of any testing, as required, shall be borne by the contractor. Proctors shall be determined prior to backfilling. Independent lab results shall be faxed to the City as soon as possible. The horizontal frequencies of density tests are as follows: 
a.  Utility mains: One (1) test per one hundred (100) linear feet per lift. 
b.  Service lines: One (1) test per each service per lift. 
c.  Manholes and valve boxes per each lift. 
(2)  Following are the minimum number of tests required for each construction activity. These tests must be submitted to the City Engineer on a daily basis as required and shall be hand-delivered or faxed to the City. 
a.  Native or imported backfill : One (1) test for every two (2) vertical feet and every one hundred (100) feet horizontally, or some fraction thereof, with at least one (1) test per each lift. 
b.  Flowable-fill : Testing may be required at the discretion of the City Engineer. 
c.  Concrete pavement, curbs, gutters and sidewalks : Testing to be conducted for every one hundred (100) cubic yards or portion thereof, with a minimum of one (1). The types of testing required shall be as prescribed by the City. 
d.  Asphalt pavement : 
1.  Asphalt content: One (1) test per five hundred (500) tons or fraction thereof of mix produced, minimum of one (1) test per job. 
2.  Gradation; aggregate: One (1) test per five hundred (500) tons or fraction thereof of mix produced, minimum of one (1) test per job. 
3.  In-place density: One (1) test per five hundred (500) tons or fraction thereof of mix placed, minimum of one (1) test per job. 
e.  Aggregate base course materials : One (1) test per four hundred (400) lane feet. No less than two (2) tests per excavation. 
(5-02 § 1) 
090.045.060 - Inspection. 
(a)  All construction work within the public rights-of-way shall be subject to inspection by the City Engineer, and certain types of work may have continuous inspection. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to provide safe access for the inspector to perform the required inspections. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the person performing the work authorized by the permit to notify the City Engineer that such work is ready for inspection. The City Engineer requires that every request for inspection be received at least twenty-four (24) hours before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by telephoning or faxing the City Engineer. 
(c)  The City Engineer may make or require other inspections of any work as deemed necessary to ascertain compliance with the provisions of these standards, the City's Street Design and Construction Standards or the Municipal Code. Any work performed without the required inspections shall be subject to removal and replacement at the contractor's expense, regardless of the quality of the work. 
(d)  Where large-scale projects exceed the ability of the City to provide inspection, the contractor or utility company will incur the cost of a private inspection firm. This inspection firm will be mutually agreed upon by the permit applicant and the City prior to issuance of the permit. 
(e)  Inspection fees . Inspections conducted by the City Engineer shall be billed at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour, with a two-hour minimum for each inspection. 
(Ad 5-02 § 1) 
ARTICLE 090.050 - STREET TREES 

090.050.010 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this article are to provide generally for the protection of trees, to ensure proper planting and maintenance of trees in the public right-of-way and in City parks, to provide for the abatement of nuisance trees on public and private property, and to provide for the proper licensing of all tree cutters doing business in the City. 
090.050.020 - Administration. 
    The Parks Superintendent is hereby appointed to administer and implement this article. Subject to review and approval by the City Council, the Superintendent shall promulgate and make available to the public such rules, regulations and policies as are necessary to carry out the administration of this article. 
090.050.030 - Trees on public property. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, destroy or cause to be planted, removed or destroyed any tree in or upon the public right-of-way or other public property within the City without having first obtained a written permit therefor. For purposes of this section, a development plan duly approved under the procedures set forth in Title 070 of this Code shall be considered a permit. The planting of trees and vegetation on public rights-of-way shall meet City criteria in accordance to spacing street trees, tree species from the superintendent's list of approved street trees, and recommendations affecting blockage of street signs, street corners and vision of traffic. Plantings shall be approved by the Superintendent. 
(b)  Permit application. Any person desiring a permit pursuant to this section shall make written application therefor at the office of the Superintendent upon forms furnished by the Superintendent. Such application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the person doing the work, the kind or species of tree involved and the location of same, a specific description of the work to be performed and such other information as the Superintendent may require. The applicant shall, at the time of making the application, agree in writing to save and hold the City harmless and protect the City and the public at all times in connection with the work authorized by the permit. 
(c)  Criteria for permit issuance. The Superintendent shall base any decision to approve or deny a permit upon the extent to which the application does or does not comply with City goals, policies and plans, with the purposes of this article and with any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article. In addition, the Superintendent shall take the following factors into account: 
(1)  The extent to which a tree does or may create hazards to motorists, pedestrians and other members of the public; 
(2)  The extent to which a tree does or may constitute a threat to public or private property, including but not limited to, buildings, streets, curbs, sidewalks, driveways and utilities; 
(3)  The extent to which a tree does or may interfere with solar access to public or private property; 
(4)  The extent to which a tree is diseased, infested, dead or dying or is susceptible to disease, infestation or death; and 
(5)  The extent to which a tree is or is not appropriate for the local climate and growing conditions and does or does not require extraordinary maintenance efforts. 
(d)  Rights of abutting property owners . Property owners shall have the right to plant and care for trees on any abutting public right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Planting of trees or other vegetation must be approved by the superintendent, and must come from the superintendent's list of approved street trees, unless otherwise approved in writing by the Superintendent. 
(2)  Trees must be planted thirty (30) feet apart, unless otherwise approved in writing by the Superintendent. 
(3)  Planting shall be done so as not to impede vision at corners of intersections of streets, alleys, driveways and other thoroughfares of traffic, as well as of signage for such traffic. 
(e)  Topping prohibited . Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to top a tree in or upon the public right-of-way or other public property within the City. For purposes of this subsection, topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or trees that pose an imminent threat to property or to public safety such that other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this section at the discretion of the Superintendent. 
(f)  Stop orders . Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this section, the Superintendent may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized in writing by the Superintendent to proceed with the work. 
090.050.040 - Trees on private property. 
(a)  Nuisance trees . It shall be the duty of the owner of any property to adequately prune or otherwise abate any nuisance trees upon the owner's property or adjacent right-of-way after notice as required in Subsection (f) below. For purposes of this section, nuisance trees are defined as: 
(1)  Trees that pose a threat to public safety or adjacent public property, including but not limited to public rights-of-way, or any tree growing over a public alley, street or highway, shall be trimmed by the owner of the property on which the tree stands, so that there shall be a clear height of fourteen (14) feet above the surface of the street, alley or highway and eight (8) feet above the surface of the sidewalks. Such owner shall remove all dead branches and stubs on such trees that are or may become a menace to travelers on public highways, streets or alleys of the City. Trees whose roots are causing upraised sidewalk slabs are hereby declared a nuisance. If a tree or its parts in any other way cause a hindrance to the general public or in any way endanger the security or usefulness of any public street, highway, alley, sewer or sidewalk as determined by the Superintendent, it is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. If the owner of such private property does not correct or remove such nuisances within a reasonable time after written notification by the Superintendent, the Superintendent shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner of the property in question as required in Subsection (f) below. 
(2)  Trees that harbor any destructive or communicable disease or other pestilence that endangers the well-being of other trees in the City or that are capable of causing an epidemic spread of a communicable or insect infestation. 
(b)  Any owner or occupant of real property shall trim all trees on property owned or occupied by him/her so that the branches thereon will not interfere with public travel as more specifically required in Paragraph (a)(1) above. 
(c)  Any owner or occupant of any real property shall maintain all hedges and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of such hedges or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk of the City. 
(d)  The trees, vegetation and turf grass on the right-of-way between the street and sidewalks shall be considered the responsibility of the adjacent landowner, including maintenance, such as watering, mowing, trimming and weed control. 
(e)  Injuring . It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, or without lawful authority to do so, to willfully deface, disfigure or destroy any tree or shrub or to injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or plant located either on private ground or on any public place, thoroughfare, trails or parklands. 
(f)  Notice of abatement . Upon the discovery of a nuisance tree, the Superintendent shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the property upon which the tree is located requiring the owner to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time specified in such notice. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the requirements of any notice given pursuant to this section within the time specified in such notice. If the notice to abate is not complied with within the required time, the City may cause such nuisance to be abated, shall assess the costs of such assessment against the property and shall notify the owner of the amount thereof. Such assessment shall be a lien upon the property until it is paid. 
090.050.050 - Licensing of commercial tree cutters. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the City and the citizens thereof and to protect and preserve trees in the City by assuring a minimum level of knowledge and competency on the part of all persons engaged in the business of cutting trees in the City. 
(b)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of cutting, trimming, pruning or removing trees within the City without first procuring a license from the City. For purposes of this section, business is defined as any work for which a charge is made, either by a fixed sum, price, fee, wage, percentage, barter or any combination of these. 
(c)  Application procedure. Any person desiring a license pursuant to this section shall make application therefor at the Office of the Superintendent on forms to be provided by the Superintendent. Within ten (10) days after receipt of the application, the Superintendent shall examine the applicant either orally or in writing as he/she shall deem appropriate. At the discretion of the Superintendent, the examination may also include an actual demonstration of the applicant's ability. No license shall be issued or renewed without the approval of the Superintendent. 
(d)  Insurance. Every person granted a license under this section shall maintain at all times workers' compensation insurance, as well as public liability and property damage insurance in the following minimum amounts: seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000,00) coverage per occurrence, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) coverage for bodily injury and death per person, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage. 
(e)  License fees, term and renewal. No license shall be issued or renewed hereunder until the applicant has paid an annual license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Every license issued hereunder shall expire twelve (12) calendar months after it is issued. Renewal applications may be submitted at the Office of the Superintendent any time within thirty (30) days of the date the license will expire. 
(f)  Suspension or revocation of license. Upon the verified complaint in writing by any person, the Superintendent may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder for violations of this article or for violations of any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this article. The complaint shall be submitted in writing to the Superintendent and shall state the date, time and place of the violation for which the suspension or revocation of said license is requested. Before suspending or revoking any license pursuant to this section, the Superintendent shall first mail, by certified mail, a copy of the complaint to the license holder and give notice to the license holder of a date, not less than five (5) days after the date of mailing of such notice, on which the Superintendent will hold a hearing to determine whether or not such license should be suspended or revoked. 
(g)  Appeal of suspension or revocation. In the event of any suspension or revocation of a license by the Superintendent, the licensee shall have the right to appeal such suspension or revocation to the City Manager and thence to the City Council. An appeal of the Superintendent's decision must be submitted in writing to the Superintendent within ten (10) days after the suspension or revocation of the license or, if an appeal for the decision of the City Manager, within ten (10) days of his/her decision. The City Manager or the City Council shall have the power to affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Superintendent or City Manager, respectively. 
(33-83 § 5; 29-97 §§ 1, 2) 
ARTICLE 090.060 - VANDALISM 

090.060.010 - Vandalism prevention. 
    The City Manager shall establish a regular program of offering a reward, not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), for information leading to the arrest and conviction of persons who engage in vandalism within the City. Such reward shall be derived from the annual budget and appropriation for public safety. Such reward shall be paid by the City upon certification of the City Manager that the same has been earned as set forth in this section. For purposes of this section, vandalism shall mean the willful or malicious destruction, damage or defacement of public or private property, for which criminal sanctions are imposed under this Code or pertinent state laws. 
(31-86 § 1) 
ARTICLE 090.070 - NEWSRACKS 

090.070.010 - Newsracks regulated. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or maintain a newsrack on property owned by the City or on other publicly owned sidewalks without complying with the provisions of this article regulating size, color, maintenance, location and liability. 
(19-98 § 1) 
090.070.015 - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this article, newsrack means any outdoor self-service or coin-operated container, rack or structure used or maintained for the distribution of newspapers, news periodicals or other printed material. 
(19-98 § 1) 
090.070.020 - Newsracks allowed only in specified areas. 
(a)  Newsracks on City-owned property or on publicly owned sidewalks shall be lawful within the General Improvement District ("GID"), as it is defined and amended by ordinance from time to time, at the six (6) locations currently in use on the effective date of this ordinance and in the size and color specified herein. Such locations are as follows: 
(1)  9th Street and Colorado (Post Office); 
(2)  9th Street and Grand Avenue (Northeast corner); 
(3)  8th Street and Colorado (County Building); 
(4)  8th Street and Grand Avenue (Southwest corner); 
(5)  8th Street and Cooper Avenue (Northwest corner); and 
(6)  10th Street and Grand Avenue (Southeast corner). 
(b)  Outside the GID, those existing newsracks that substantially conform to the provision of this article may remain in their present locations subject to other relevant provisions of this article. 
(19-98 § 1) 
090.070.025 - Newsrack specifications. 
    Anyone desiring to use, operate, place or maintain newsracks on City-owned property or publicly owned sidewalks located in the City's GID shall provide, at his/her expense, an adequate number of K-4916 or K-100 modular racks with pedestals to house his/her publications. All such racks shall be black in color only. All other newsracks located outside the GID and on City-owned property or publicly owned sidewalks may continue without restriction. 
(19-98 § 1; Ord. No. 9-2015 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-21-2015) 
090.070.030 - Maintenance of newsracks. 
    Anyone using, operating, placing or maintaining a newsrack on City-owned property or publicly owned sidewalks shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of his/her respective racks. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, disposing of trash and debris in the vicinity of the newsrack, working operation and adequate anchorage. Failure to adequately maintain any newsrack resulting in failure to comply with the aesthetic intentions and goals of this ordinance shall subject the affected newsracks to removal by the City. 
(19-98 § 1) 
090.070.035 - Hold harmless. 
    Anyone owning, maintaining, placing, using or leasing a newsrack on City-owned property or publicly owned sidewalks shall indemnify, defend and hold the City and its officers and employees harmless for any loss or damage, including attorney's fees, arising out of the use, placement, maintenance or leasing of such newsrack(s). 
(19-98 § 1) 
090.070.040 - Insurance requirements. 
    Anyone owning, placing, leasing, using or maintaining a newsrack on City-owned property or publicly owned sidewalks shall maintain liability insurance with a company, insuring against all liability that the owner, lessor or user of the newsrack may incur by virtue of the placement, care, use, operation and existence of the newsrack. Such insurance shall have limits as required by the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act to protect the City from any and all liability associated therewith. The insurance shall name the City as an additional insured and shall not be cancelable without thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the City. In lieu of such insurance, a waiver of such insurance may be obtained from the Director of Community Development upon a showing, acceptable to the City Attorney, that such person has sufficient unencumbered assets available for attachment and execution to satisfy any judgment that would be rendered against it, up to and including three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). Evidence of insurance or evidence of sufficient assets, as the case may be, shall be provided to the Director of Community Development on an annual basis. Failure to comply with this provision of this article will subject the newsrack to immediate removal by the City. 
(19-98 § 1) 
090.070.045 - Location restrictions. 
    No newsrack shall be located adjacent to any mailbox, post, pole, water feature, art or monument or adjacent to or within any raised planter, except when pedestrian circulation space between such items and the newsrack is not needed and sufficient space for maintenance of such items and newsracks is provided or in a manner that unsafely: 
(1)  Impedes or interferes with the reasonable use of a crosswalk, display window or building entrance; 
(2)  Impedes or interferes with the reasonable use of any bench, trash receptacle, bicycle rack, driveway, alley or bus shelter; 
(3)  Interferes with the reasonable use of any fire hydrant, traffic signal box or other emergency facility; 
(4)  Impairs or interferes with pedestrian traffic; 
(5)  Interferes with or impairs the vision of operators of vehicles at street intersections; 
(6)  Reduces the clear, unimpeded sidewalk width to; 
a.  Ten (10) feet on sidewalks over twelve (12) feet in width; or 
b.  Less than three-quarters (3/4) of the width of the sidewalk on sidewalks less than twelve (12) feet, with a four-foot minimum. 
In determining an unimpeded sidewalk, features such as fire hydrants or similar structures shall be considered. 
(19-98 § 1) 
090.070.050 - Location changes. 
    So long as the provisions of this article are complied with, newsracks may be allowed at additional locations within the GID upon the approval of the City and after considering the safety aspects of such new location outlined in prior sections herein. Should the City fail to approve any new location request, it shall inform the requester of its decision in writing, giving the specific reasons for such nonapproval. 
(19-98 § 1) 
090.070.055 - Rights granted. 
    The approval of any location for use as a newsrack shall not be construed as granting the user any right or interest to or in the property owned by the City. The rights granted by this article are merely a license to use the property for permitted purposes, subject to the provisions of this article. 
(19-98 § 1) 
090.070.060 - Anchorage of newsracks. 
    Newsracks shall be anchored with bolts to the sidewalk at their respective sites. Newsracks may not be anchored to trees, posts or poles with chains, rope, cable or otherwise. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage or repairs caused or necessitated by the removal or installation of any newsrack to bring the site to its original condition, ordinary wear and tear excepted. 
(19-98 § 1) 
090.070.065 - Nonemergency newsrack removal. 
(a)  Notice. If at any time it is determined by the City that a newsrack is not in compliance with the requirements of this article, a "Notice of Intent to Remove" shall be issued in writing and affixed to the affected newsrack. Such notice shall state the violation that constitutes the basis of the proposed removal. The notice shall contain the date, time and place for hearing to be held before removal. 
(b)  Hearing. The hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days after the date of service of notice. Prior to the hearing, the newsrack owner or user may file a written response to the notice specifically setting forth the reasons the newsrack should not be removed. At the hearing, the Director of Community Development shall determine whether the newsrack complies with the provisions of this article. In the event the Director of Community Development determines that the newsrack is not in compliance with this article, the newsrack shall be removed by the owner or user within ten (10) days or otherwise brought into compliance. If the newsrack is not removed as required, the City may consider the newsrack abandoned, remove the newsrack and dispose of it as it would other surplus property of the City. 
(c)  Appeal. Any decision or order may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days after the decision of the Director of Community Development and shall specify the basis for the appeal. The Commission shall consider the appeal based on the written submissions only. 
(19-98 § 1; 13-06, § 2) 
090.070.070 - Emergency newsrack removal. 
(a)  Removal. In the event that it is determined by the City that the location or operation of the newsrack constitutes an immediate physical threat to public life, safety or health, the newsrack may be removed by the City immediately without any prior nonce or hearing. This provision shall not be enforced in any way related to the content or expressions of the material distributed by the newsrack. 
(b)  Notice and hearing. In the event of such an emergency removal, the City shall immediately contact the newsrack's owner or user, if known, and inform the representative of the removal and the reasons therefor. If requested by the representative, the City shall hold an immediate hearing before the Director of Community Development to determine whether or not the removed newsrack constituted an immediate threat to the public's life, safety and health. In the event that the Director of Community Development determines that the newsrack did not constitute such an immediate threat, the City shall immediately, at its own expense, replace the newsrack to its original location. In the event that no immediate hearing is requested by the newsrack's owner or user, a hearing as provided in Section 090.070.065 above shall be held. 
(c)  Appeal. Any decision or order may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days after the decision of the Director of Community Development and shall specify the basis for the appeal. The Board shall consider the appeal based on the written submissions only. 
(19-98 § 1; 13-06, § 2) 
090.070.075 - Unauthorized newsracks. 
    Any newsrack on City-owned property or publicly owned sidewalks, except those that comply with the regulations of this article, shall be impounded by the City without prior notice or hearing. The City shall make reasonable efforts to determine the owner of the newsrack and shall notify the owner of the impoundment. The owner of any impounded newsrack shall be responsible for the expense of removal and storage of such newsrack. If the owner fails to reclaim the impounded newsrack and pay the expenses of removal and storage within thirty (30) days after notice of impoundment, the newsrack may be deemed unclaimed property and may be disposed of in the same manner as other unclaimed or surplus City property. 
(19-98 § 1) 
090.070.080 - Noncomplying designs within General Improvement District. 
    Newsracks located or to be located in the GID must comply with the provisions of this article no later than September 1, 1998. Failure to comply by this date will result in the immediate removal and disposal of any noncomplying newsrack by the City. 
(19-98 § 1) 
TITLE 100 - PUBLIC HEALTH 
ARTICLE 100.010 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

100.010.010 - Health Officer. 
(a)  Appointment. The City Manager shall appoint a physician licensed to practice medicine under the laws of the State as the Health Officer. In the event a licensed physician is unavailable, the City Manager may appoint another person as the Health Officer, which person may be otherwise employed by the City. 
(b)  Compensation. The Health Officer shall not receive a regular salary but shall be paid a reasonable sum to be billed to the City for services performed. In the event a City employee is appointed Health Officer pursuant to Subsection (a) above, he/she shall be compensated in accordance with the provisions of Section 030.020.030. 
(c)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The Health Officer shall have charge and control of all functions involved in protecting and preserving the public health. He/she shall have all power provided by state law or City ordinance relative to public health. 
(2)  The Health Officer shall have the supervision and control of all matters relating to health and sanitation within the City, and he/she shall have the power to compel the removal or abatement of any nuisance, source of filth, cause of disease or unwholesome business or establishment within the City or within one (1) mile of the corporate limits of the City. 
(3)  The Health Officer shall enforce all laws of the State and provisions of this Code and other City ordinances, except as otherwise provided, in relation to health and sanitation. He/she shall cause all nuisances to be properly abated; and, for the purpose of carrying out the requirements of this Code, he/she shall be permitted at all times to enter into premises, houses, stores or other buildings or places to take such steps as he/she shall deem necessary to make an examination thereof, and to cause all dead animals or other nauseous or unwholesome substances or things to be buried, removed or disposed of as he/she may direct. The Health Officer is also hereby granted authority to do all things which are reasonably necessary to prevent the spread of communicable diseases and to enforce compliance with the laws and regulations of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
(d)  No limitation on other City officials . Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City Manager or anyone acting at his/her direction from enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Compliance with orders of Health Officer required. It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner, agent or occupant of any premises within the City to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any lawful order made by the Health Officer. 
(Code 1962 §§ 13.1, 13.3, 13.8; Code 1971 §§ 8-1-8-4; 18-98 § 1) 
100.010.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words shall have these meanings ascribed to them: 
    Container or Receptacle means a metal or other non-absorbent container equipped with a tightly fitting metal or non-absorbent lid, or sealed, plastic bags. 
    Dumpster enclosure is a structure for the purpose of fully enclosing a trash container or receptacle, constructed in accordance with the requirements of the International Building Code and other requirements as adopted by the City. 
    Garbage includes kitchen, fruit and table refuse, offal, any decaying vegetable matter and all substances which attend the cooking, serving, dealing in, processing or storage of meats, fowl, fruits, vegetables or other food products. 
    Inoperable vehicle means any motor vehicle as defined in the Model Traffic Code without current license plates or which is not capable of travel under its own power. 
    Junk includes, but shall not be limited to, waste matter, debris, rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, soil, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, discarded, unusable, broken or inoperable machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal and other pieces of metal whether ferrous or nonferrous, used in building or construction materials, dead plants and trees, trimmings from plants and trees, cans, bottles, barrels, bones, rags, used rubber or used rope, unusable objects or equipment such as appliances, furniture, stoves, hot water heaters, refrigerators, freezers, furnishings, sporting equipment or inoperable vehicles, and all other items commonly known as junk. 
    Non-noxious weed means a troublesome and valueless plant growing wild and uncontrolled, but which is not classified as a noxious weed. 
    Noxious weed means any plant or part thereof which has been classified by the City's Noxious Weed Management Plan as a "List A" or "List B" noxious weed. 
    Recyclables includes but is not limited to newspapers, magazines, office paper, cardboard, glass containers, plastic containers, and steel and aluminum cans. 
    Refuse means, but shall not be limited to, all decomposed and non-decomposed solid wastes, ashes, dirt, waste cement, wastepaper, rubbish, petroleum products including gasoline, kerosene, oil, grease and the like, whether new or used, street cleanings, litter, dead animals and industrial wastes. 
    Special event means an outdoor gathering such as a concert, conference or festival, whether occurring on public or private land. 
    Spring cleanup debris includes but is not limited to recyclables, tree limbs cut shorter than six (6) feet in length, refrigerated appliances with "Freon free" certificate attached; it does not include garbage, glass, grass clippings, dirt, sod, concrete, or hazardous items such as paint, antifreeze, gas, tires, waste motor oil, televisions, computers, copiers, batteries, air cylinders or gas tanks. 
    Trash means any junk, discarded items; scrap building materials; scrap wood, or any abandoned item of personal property. 
    Visual blight means an unsightly condition which degrades the physical appearance of a property or properties, thus adversely affecting the well-being and values of the surrounding neighborhood. 
    Wildlife resistant refuse container is a container used for the storage of garbage, refuse or trash that has been certified to be wildlife resistant by the Inter-Agency Grizzly Bear Committee. A container not so certified is considered a wildlife resistant refuse container if it is fully enclosed, of sturdy construction, and includes a latching mechanism suitable to prevent wildlife from opening the container. Latching mechanisms shall allow a gap between the container lid of no more than one-half (1/2) inch. Latching mechanisms shall keep the lid closed in the event the container is turned on its side or upside down. Wildlife resistant refuse containers may include drain holes no larger than one (1) inch in any dimension. 
(Code 1962 § 19.1; Code 1971 § 7-1; 23-85 § 1; 18-98 § 2; 12-08 § 2; Ord. No. 8-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-16-2015; Ord. No. 13-2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-16-2016; Ord. No. 8-2019 , § 2, 4-4-2019) 
100.010.030 - Prohibited acts regarding littering, dumping, weed control and property maintenance standards. 
(a)  Littering on public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, throw, deposit or place any garbage, refuse or trash upon the streets, alleys or other public places located within the corporate limits of the City or upon any property owned or leased by the City and designated as a park land which is located outside the corporate limits of the City, except on designated waste disposal sites and for spring cleanup regulations in Section 100.010.035, or as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  Placing of garbage, refuse or trash on private property. It shall be unlawful for any owner, person in charge or control of private real property, manager or occupant, whether owner, lessee, renter or licensee of any private building or private real property to allow any garbage, refuse or trash, whether natural or manmade, to be placed, dumped or deposited on private property which subjects or tends to subject abutting or adjacent property, or the public at large, to harm or injury due to fire, flood or drainage hazard; visual blight; rodent, vermin or insect infestation; noxious odors; blowing matter or debris; communicable disease or infection; or other similar harmful or injurious effects. Any owner, occupant or person with responsibility for the maintenance of property shall be responsible for collecting refuse, garbage and trash that has transferred to another's private property or public property due to animal scavenging, vandalism, wind or any other event. 
(c)  Noxious and non-noxious weed and grass control. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property within the City to allow noxious weeds to grow or remain in place on the property or on adjacent rights-of-way. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property within the City to allow non-noxious weeds or grass to grow to a height of twelve (12) inches or more on the property or on adjacent rights-of-way or to have non-noxious weeds or grass of any size on their property or adjacent rights-of-way if they subject or tend to subject adjacent property or the public at large to harm due to fire hazards, rodents, vermin or insect infestation, visual blight, or other similar harmful effects. Such prohibition shall not include native grasses or Xeriscaping, so long as both are visibly managed and controlled so as not to negatively impact the health and safety of adjacent property owners. 
(d)  Accumulation. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the accumulation of any garbage, junk, refuse or trash which by reason of its location and character: is dangerous to public health, safety and welfare or unsightly; interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors; detrimentally affects property values in the surrounding neighborhood or community; or would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the premises. This Subsection shall not apply to a business conducted wholly within a building or to the sale of used motor vehicles or spring cleanup regulations in Section 100.010.035. 
(e)  Dumping or littering on property of another. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, throw, deposit or place any garbage refuse or trash upon the property of another person or in any receptacle of another person without the consent of the person in charge or control thereof. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of receptacles provided by the City for public use, or recycling receptacles at pre-designated recycling sites. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit large quantities of garbage refuse or trash in City-owned receptacles without prior approval. For purposes of this subsection, large quantities shall mean anything larger than a standard grocery bag. 
(f)  Dumping in stream, river or riverbank area. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, throw, deposit or place any garbage, refuse or trash, whether manmade or natural, on private or public property in a stream, river or riverbank area unless otherwise permitted in this Code. For purposes of this section, the term banks shall be defined to include: 
(1)  A thirty-foot setback area measured horizontally from the high-water mark of the stream or river; and 
(2)  Any land area with a slope in excess of two (2) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical lying contiguous to the high-water mark of the river or stream, excepting manmade benches or ten-foot width or less; and 
(3)  A five-foot setback area measured horizontally from the top of any slope as described in Subparagraph (2) above. 
(g)  Grading without a permit . It shall be unlawful to perform any grading within the City without first having obtained a grading permit from the Building Official. For purposes of this section, grading shall mean any excavating, filling or combination thereof. A grading permit shall not be required for public improvement projects undertaken by the City. 
(h)  Property maintenance standards . It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or person with responsibility for the maintenance of property to allow the existence of any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The premises are a detriment to public health, safety or general welfare. 
(2)  The premises are so defective, unsightly or in such condition of disrepair that they substantially diminish the value of surrounding property or are otherwise substantially detrimental to surrounding properties. Examples of this condition shall include, but shall not be limited to, the keeping on, or disposing of on, or the scattering over the premises of garbage, junk, refuse or trash. 
(3)  The premises are so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent property as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent properties. 
(i)  Violations . Violations of any provision of this section shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense, as defined in Section 120.010.010. Culpable mental state is not required with respect to any material element of a violation of this subsection. 
(23-85 § 2; 15-88 §§ 1, 2; 32-92 § 1; 4-93 § 1; 18-98 § 3; 5-08 § 2; 12-08 § 2; Ord. No. 13-2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-16-2016; Ord. No. 8-2019 , § 3, 4-4-2019) 
100.010.035 - Spring cleanup. 
(a)  Spring cleanup is a service available to City residents only on the dates and in the geographic zones scheduled by the City Manager. Approved items, limited to five (5) cubic yards per residence, are collected by zone, and items must be placed in front of or adjacent to the residential property, away from regular trash service, fences, and buildings. Approved items may be placed no earlier than two (2) calendar days before the assigned zone start date, and no later than 7:00 a.m. of the zone start date. Community piles are prohibited unless prior written authorization is received from the City Manager. Any recyclable items must be placed separately. Hazardous materials and garbage will not be accepted. 
(b)  Notice. Notice of the spring cleanup dates and zones will be published: 
(1)  On the City's website twenty (20) days prior to the first pickup date in the first zone, and notice shall remain on the website through the last day of pickup in the last zone; and 
(2)  In a newspaper published in the City for not less than two (2) publications. The notices shall be published not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than five (5) days prior to the first pickup date in the first zone. 
(c)  Nonresident dumping. No person who is not a resident of the City is permitted to dump or abandon spring cleanup debris or other garbage, junk, refuse, trash, or weeds within the City during spring cleanup. 
(d)  Penalty schedule for Section 100.010.035 violations. 
(1)  First and subsequent offenses. Any violation of a provision of Section 100.010.035 shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of the continuing violation. Such penalty shall be assessed against the owner, occupant, or any person or entity responsible for the maintenance of such property. 
(2)  Nonresident dumping offense: Any violation of a provision of Section 100.010.035 by a nonresident of the City shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of the continuing violation. 
( Ord. No. 13-2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-16-2016) 
100.010.040 - Certain conditions declared nuisances. 
(a)  Garbage, junk, refuse, trash, noxious and non-noxious weeds and property maintenance standards. Any of the conditions which are prohibited by the provisions of Section 100.010.030 are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Toilets and garbage containers. Any unclean, leaking, foul, unsafe or dangerous, defective or filthy drain, privy, toilet, ditch, tank or gutter or any leaking or broken garbage container for waste products hereby is declared to be a nuisance. 
(c)  Adoption of common law and state law nuisance. In all cases where no provision is made defining nuisances in this Code or by City ordinance, those offenses which are known to the common law of the land and the statutes of the State as nuisances may, in case the same exist within the City or within one (1) mile of the corporate limits of the City, be treated as such and proceeded against as provided in this article or in accordance with any other provision of law. 
(Code 1962 §§ 13.4, 13.5; Code 1971 §§ 14-2, 14-3; 12-08 § 2; Ord. No. 8-2019 , § 4, 4-4-2019) 
100.010.050 - Abatement of nuisances. 
(a)  Notice. When a nuisance does not require summary abatement pursuant to Section 100.010.055, the City shall cause notice to be served upon the owner, occupant, any person with responsibility for maintenance of property or agent in charge of any property upon which any nuisance may be found, or any person who may be the cause of such nuisance, requiring him/her to abate the nuisance within fourteen (14) days or as otherwise specified in such notice. The abatement notice may be hand-delivered to such owner, occupant, agent or cause of nuisance or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested. Where deemed appropriate and effective by the City, abatement may involve the screening of the nuisance from adjacent properties by the owner, occupant or agent; increasing the number of containers available; or increasing the frequency of garbage, refuse or trash pickup service. When the nuisance is a noxious weed, the City will specify whether the noxious weed must be eradicated, contained or suppressed and will provide guidance on methods to achieve eradication, containment or suppression. Generally, List A noxious weeds must be eradicated. 
(b)  Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with a notice to abate a nuisance issued pursuant to Subsection (a) above. 
(c)  City may abate and assess lien. In addition to or in lieu of prosecuting the owner, occupant, or any person with responsibility for maintenance of the property or agent for such violation, if the notice to abate is not complied with within the required time, the City may cause such nuisance to be abated, shall assess the cost of such abatement against the property and shall notify the owner, occupant or agent of such assessment and the amount thereof. Such assessment shall be a lien upon the property until it is paid. If the charge or assessment is not paid to the Director of Finance within thirty (30) days after the delivery of such notice of assessment, the charge or assessment shall be certified to the County Treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with a ten (10) percent penalty added to defray the cost of collection. 
(Code 1962 § 13.7; Code 1971 § 14-4; 23-85 § 3; 5-08 § 2; 12-08 § 2; Ord. No. 8-2019 , § 5, 4-4-2019) 
100.010.055 - Summary abatement. 
(a)  Whenever a nuisance exists which constitutes an emergency presenting immediate danger of serious injury to a person or property, the City Manager or his/her authorized representative may order, without notice or judicial action, that the nuisance be summarily abated by removal, destruction or mitigation. 
(b)  Whenever a nuisance does not require summary abatement, abatement shall proceed as set forth in Section 100.010.050. 
(c)  The expense incurred by the City in summarily abating any nuisance may be recovered by proper action from the author thereof. In addition to or alternatively to any other remedies or actions stated in this article, if the expenses are not paid when due, the delinquent charge shall be certified to the County Treasurer to be placed upon the tax list for the current year and collected in the same manner as other taxes are collected, with a ten (10) percent penalty added to defray the cost of collection. 
(12-08 § 2) 
100.010.060 - Garbage, refuse, and trash collection. 
(a)  Removal. Except for spring cleanup as set forth in Section 100.010.035, furniture, appliances, dirt, rocks or construction debris from residential customers shall be removed by the owner or his/her agent. 
(b)  Collection vehicles generally. All vehicles used in collecting refuse, garbage, refuse and trash shall be equipped with a tight box or tank which shall be constructed entirely of metal and shall have a cover so as to prevent the escape of substances and foul odors from substances after being placed therein. All such vehicles shall be kept thoroughly clean. 
(c)  Placement of containers for collection. All garbage, refuse and trash shall be placed and kept in containers suitable to not attract or to be edible by animals or wildlife, near the alley abutting the premises or, if there is no alley, in some accessible place where it can be removed by the collector. 
(d)  Collection and removal. All garbage, refuse and trash shall be collected and removed by the owner or occupant of the premises generating the same, by employees of the City acting in furtherance of the City's solid waste disposal system, by persons under contract with the City for such purpose or by persons holding a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Public Utilities Commission of the State. No other person shall collect such materials within the City or convey them over or upon any of the streets, alleys or rights-of-way of the City. 
(e)  Contract for collection service. The City Council may enter into a contract or agreement with any person for the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse, trash and waste materials, or any portion thereof, throughout the City, or it may do such collecting and disposal with its own employees. 
(f)  Collection schedule. 
(1)  No owner of any vacant land, occupant or owner of any single-family residence, owner, manager or operator of any multiple-family residence or private club, or owner, operator or employee of any commercial or industrial establishment shall fail to have containers sufficient to contain the accumulation of garbage, refuse, and/or trash or to have it collected frequently enough so that it does not putrefy or accumulate on the premises or so that is not attractive to or edible by animals or wildlife. 
(2)  All collections shall be made between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. No Sunday collections shall be allowed except for limited collection during City-wide special events. If a regularly scheduled collection day falls on a legal holiday, such collections may be made on the following day. 
(g)  Closed vehicles or receptacles required. It shall be unlawful for any person to convey or cause to be conveyed through the streets of the City any garbage, refuse, trash or other loose material of any description except in tight receptacles or truck bodies equipped with covers which prevent the escape of any material contained therein. 
(h)  Penalty. Properties found to be in violation of this section are subject to the penalties as defined in this article. 
(Code 1962 § 19.2, 4, 5, 7 § 21.12; Code 1971 § 7-3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11; 32-99 § 1; 3-05, § 1; 5-08 § 2; 12-08 § 2; Ord. No. 8-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-16-2015; Ord. No. 13-2016 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-16-2016) 
100.010.065 - Animal and wildlife protection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, place of business, or occupant of premises within the City to store garbage, refuse or trash, including recyclables, that is attractive to or edible by animals or wildlife. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or any person with responsibility for maintenance of any property located within the City, including properties used for special events and properties that are the site of construction activities, to permit the accumulation on the property of garbage, refuse or trash attractive to or edible by animals or wildlife. Garbage, refuse, and trash shall be stored on and collected from such properties in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly leave or store any garbage, refuse, trash, recyclable, food product, pet food, grain, salt or any other materials attractive to or edible by animals or wildlife in a manner which may attract or entice animals or wildlife. 
(d)  Bird feeders shall be permitted under this section. However, between the dates of April 15 and November 15, all feeders must be suspended on a cable or other device so that they are inaccessible to animals and wildlife, other than birds, and the area below the feeders must be kept free of the accumulation of seed, seed debris, or other attractive or edible materials. 
(e)  Penalty schedule for Section 100.010.065 violations. The penalties outlined below may be reduced or suspended upon the violator providing proof of purchase of a Wildlife Resistant Refuse Container on or before the violator's appearance in Municipal Court on such offense. 
(1)  First offense: Fifty dollar ($50.00) fine to the owner, occupant or any person with responsibility for maintenance of such property. 
(2)  Second offense: Five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine to the owner, occupant or any person with responsibility for maintenance of such property. 
(3)  Subsequent offenses: The Municipal Court may impose such fines and penalties as it is authorized pursuant to Municipal Code Section 010.020.080. 
( Ord. No. 8-2015 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-16-2015) 
100.010.070 - Violations. 
    In addition to any other remedies provided by this article, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
ARTICLE 100.020 - ANIMAL CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE 

100.020.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
    Animal means any vertebrate creature other than a human being. 
    Animal litter means defecation by an animal. 
    Animal owner means a person who owns an animal; has a property right in an animal; or intentionally has an animal in his/her custody, possession, maintenance, care or control. Animal owner shall include a person who is temporarily boarding an animal or has undertaken the care, custody, control, maintenance or possession of an animal, and includes a person providing food, drink, shelter, or care to stray animals otherwise running at large. 
    Harboring means the occupant of any premises on which an animal is kept or to which it customarily returns daily for food and care for a minimum period of ten (10) days is presumed to be harboring or keeping the animal. 
    Rabies vaccination means inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine approved by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
    Running at large means each of the following: 
(1)  Being anywhere off the real or personal property of the owner and not under the immediate control of a person restraining the animal by leash; 
(2)  Being on or about any public, hard surface trail of concrete, brick, or asphalt or within the boundaries of Two Rivers Park and not under the immediate control of a person restraining the animal by leach of six (6) feet overall length or less. 
(35-92 § 1; 7-05, § 1; Ord. No. 15-2017 , § 2, 7-6-2017) 
100.020.020 - Keeping of certain animals and fowl restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person anywhere in the City to maintain, keep, harbor, raise, house, stable or corral any cattle, goats, sheep, swine, foxes, chickens, ducks, turkeys or geese or any more than four (4) rabbits, except in connection with the commercial slaughter and processing of animals unless in accordance with Section 070.030.030(c). 
(Code 1962 § 20.9; Code 1971 § 3-5; 8-12 § 3; Ord. No. 19-2018 , 6, 8-2-2018) 
100.020.030 - Maintenance of premises required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any barn, stable, building or other place where fowl or animals are kept when such premises are not clean and free from obnoxious odors. In addition to the penalty therefor, such animals and premises are hereby declared to be nuisances and shall be subject to abatement as provided in Section 100.010.050. 
(Code 1962 § 20.6; Code 1971 § 3-2) 
100.020.040 - Animal littering prohibited. 
    Any person owning, harboring or having charge of any animal shall forthwith pick up, remove and dispose of in a sanitary fashion any and all animal feces attributable to such animal. In addition to any penalty therefor, the failure of such person to pick up, remove and dispose of all animal feces attributable to his/her animal is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as provided in Section 100.010.050. 
(Code 1971 § 3-34; 18-98 § 4) 
100.020.050 - Dog licenses. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any dog within the City without obtaining a license for such dog. 
(b)  Term. The license required by this section shall expire (12) months following the date of purchase of the license. 
(c)  Fees. Every person desiring to keep a dog within the City shall make application to the Police Chief therefor and shall pay a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per year for each neutered or spayed dog, and fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year for any other dog. 
(d)  Tags. The Police Chief shall issue a license to any person desiring to keep a dog within the City limits upon the payment of the required fee and proof of the dog's rabies vaccination required by this section. The Police Chief shall also issue a tag for each dog licensed, and the owner or custodian shall attach such tag to the collar or harness of the dog so licensed. The Police Chief shall keep a record of the date of issuance of each dog tag, the name and address of the person to whom the tag is issued, the number thereof, a description of the dog licensed and the date of its rabies vaccination. 
(Code 1971 §§ 3-28, 3-29, 3-31; 35-92 § 2; 30-97 § 1) 
100.020.060 - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  Required. Every person owning or harboring an animal shall have such animal vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian once each three-year period commencing upon such animal attaining the age of three (3) months or at such later time as shall be prescribed by the veterinarian. 
(b)  Who may administer. All veterinarians who are duly registered and licensed as such by the State are hereby authorized to vaccinate animals against rabies and to execute certificates of vaccination as provided in this section. 
(c)  Certificate of vaccination. Upon vaccination, the veterinarian administering the vaccine shall execute and furnish to the owner of the animal, as evidence thereof, a certificate containing the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner or harborer of the inoculated animal; 
(2)  The date of the inoculation; 
(3)  The type of vaccine used; 
(4)  The year and series number of the rabies tag; and 
(5)  The breed, age, color and sex of the inoculated animal. 
The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy and a duplicate copy shall be filed with the Police Department. 
(d)  Tags . Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination, the veterinarian shall furnish to the owner or harborer of an animal, and such owner or harborer shall attach to the collar or harness of the vaccinated animal, a metal rabies tag, serially numbered and bearing the year of issuance and the name and jurisdiction and state. The City shall furnish an adequate supply of such tags to each veterinarian designated to perform such vaccinations. 
(e)  Proof . It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors any dog, cat or other animal to fail or refuse to exhibit his/her copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1971 §§ 3-20-3-24; 18-98 § 5) 
100.020.070 - Vicious animal. 
    A person shall be held strictly liable for owning, keeping or harboring a vicious animal. For purposes of this section, a vicious animal is any animal that inflicts unprovoked bites or attacks human beings or other animals either on public or private property or acts in a vicious or terrorizing manner, or approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon the street, sidewalks or any ground or place commonly used by the public. 
(Code 1971 §§ 3-18, 3-35; 18-98 § 6; 30-04 § 1) 
100.020.080 - Euthanasia. 
    In addition to prosecuting a person for a violation of Section 100.020.070 in the Municipal Court, the City may file an action in the District Court for an order declaring the animal to be a public nuisance and for such nuisance to be abated by euthanasia or other suitable means. If probable cause exists to believe an animal is vicious, as defined in Section 100.020.070, the animal may be impounded until trial before the Municipal Court for a violation of Section 100.020.070 or before the District Court, for abatement of a public nuisance. In addition, if notice is given pursuant to Subsection 100.020.130(b) and if the owner does not redeem the animal pursuant to said notice or after court proceedings are finally determined, it may be euthanized. 
(Code 1971 § 3-35) 
100.020.090 - Duty to report animal bites. 
    Any person having knowledge of an animal bite shall immediately report the incident to the Police Department. Failure to report such animal bite shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
(Code 1971 § 3-25; 18-98 § 7) 
100.020.100 - Quarantine of animals. 
(a)  When required and procedures for quarantine. Any animal which has bitten a person shall be observed for a period of ten (10) days from the date of the bite. The procedure and place of observation shall be designated by the investigating officer or as provided by state law. The owner or harborer of any animal that has been reported as having inflicted a bite or any other person shall, on demand, produce said animal for quarantine as prescribed in this section. 
(b)  Removal of animals from quarantine. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of isolation or quarantine any animal which has been isolated or quarantined pursuant to this section or by state law without the consent of the impounding agency. 
(Code 1971 §§ 3-26, 3-27) 
100.020.110 - Animals or fowl which disturb peace and quiet prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal or fowl within the City which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(Code 1962 § 20.6; Code 1971 § 3-1) 
100.020.120 - Animal-Related Nuisance. 
(a)  Circumstances in which animal ownership, custody, maintenance or control creates, contributes to, or permits any of the following undesirable animal conduct or conditions upon public or private property causing injury or substantial annoyance, or discomfort to the health and welfare of others shall be unlawful. 
(1)  Molesting pedestrians or passing vehicles; 
(2)  Attacking or chasing people or other animals, with the exception of trespassers upon the private premises of the animal owners; 
(3)  Damaging public or private property, including failure of the owner or custodian of an animal to immediately remove feces deposited by such animal upon any public or private property (other than property of the owner); 
(4)  Running at large; 
(5)  Making continuous noise in an excessive manner which is persistent and loud enough to be heard beyond the premises where the animal(s) is kept or harbored, and which substantially interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of other nearby properties in the community. 
(6)  The existence of substantial stench/offensive odor, or general unsanitary conditions in which the animal(s) is kept, so as to interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of other nearby properties or otherwise make their physical occupation unreasonably uncomfortable. 
(b)  No animal owner shall permit any animal-related nuisance or condition caused by animal(s) in his/her temporary or permanent care, custody, control, maintenance or possession. 
(c)  Animal control or law enforcement officials shall have the specific authority to impound an animal(s) upon violation of this Code section and to issue uniform citations to the animal's owner. Officials shall possess the power to enter private property in the performance of their duties only if consent of the owner or occupant of the property is freely given or a search warrant is obtained or in the event of the imminent actual harm to the animal or others. 
(Code 1962 § 20.8; Code 1971 §§ 3-3, 3-4, 3-33; 35-92 § 3; 26-96 § 1; 18-98 § 8, 7-05, § 1) 
100.020.130 - Impoundment of animals. 
(a)  In general . Animals shall be taken up and held in a suitable place provided therefor when found in the City under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Any animal, except domestic house cats, running at large; 
(2)  Any animal without a current rabies tag attached to its collar or harness; or 
(3)  A dog without a current license tag attached to its collar or harness. 
(b)  Redemption of impounded animals . As soon as practicable after impoundment, notice of impoundment shall be given to the owner thereof, if known; and if not known, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the Glenwood Springs Municipal Building for a period of five (5) working days. Any impounded animal not held as a vicious animal may be redeemed by payment of impoundment fees and, if applicable, license fees and rabies vaccination costs. If the owner contests his/her guilt, the animal may be released upon payment equal to the impoundment fee and, if applicable, license fee and vaccination costs. If the owner is acquitted, the amount of the impoundment fee shall be returned; if convicted, the entire amount of the fees shall be retained by the City and deemed payment of the applicable fees. If any animal is not claimed within five (5) working days of the date of notice, said animal shall be deemed abandoned and may be euthanized. 
(c)  Fees . There shall be charged to the owner of each animal impounded the following fees, whether or not such owner redeems the animal: 
(1)  Impoundment fee : Ten dollars ($10.00) for the first impoundment of an animal; twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the second impoundment of the same animal; and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent impoundment of an animal within one (1) year; 
(2)  Room and board : The actual cost charged to the City by the kennel boarding the animal; 
(3)  Rabies vaccination : If required, the actual cost charged to the City; 
(4)  License fee : If required, the cost of a license pursuant to Section 100.020.050; 
(5)  Euthanasia fee : The actual cost charged to the City by the veterinarian euthanizing the animal. 
The City shall retain a copy of any statement provided to it establishing the actual cost to the City for such fees. 
(Code 1971 §§ 3-36-3-38; 35-92 §§ 4, 6) 
100.020.140 - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  In general. It shall be unlawful to willfully injure, attempt to injure, overwork, torture, beat or fail to provide any animal with proper food, drink or protection from the weather, to mutilate, kill or transport in a cruel or inhumane manner said animal, or to allow any of these acts to be done. 
(b)  Frightening horses. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully do any act which is calculated or intended to frighten any horse which is being driven or ridden within the City. 
(c)  Poisoning animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to poison any animal or to distribute poison in any manner whatsoever with the intent to poison any such animal or with reckless disregard resulting in the poisoning of an animal, except that the owner or agent of the owner of any animal may euthanize said animal for the purposes of the health, safety or welfare of the animal or of persons. 
(Code 1962 §§ 18.24, 18-25; Code 1971 § 3-6-3-8; 35-92 § 5; 18-98 § 9) 
100.020.150 - Interference with Animal Control Officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or impede the Animal Control Officer in the discharge of his/her duties. 
(Code 1971 § 3-39) 
100.020.160 - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
ARTICLE 100.030 - WOOD STOVES AND COAL FURNACES 

100.030.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Approved nonsolid fuel-burning device means any device that operates with nonsolid fuel (gas, liquid, electricity, etc.) and is installed pursuant to the building permit, including a properly installed fire box, flues and gas log apparatus. 
    Approved pollution control device means any device installed upon or in conjunction with a solid fuel-burning device which utilizes Best Practical Control Technology "BPCT" and which appears on a list of approved devices adopted by the City. 
    Approved solid fuel-burning device means a solid fuel-burning device which is certified by the Air Pollution Control Division of the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
    Commercial building means, for purposes of this article, a building which houses or intends to house uses which are primarily and predominantly for-profit commercial uses. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities, including provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation for use by not more than one (1) family, and no ingress or egress through any other dwelling unit. 
    Install means to place into service at a particular location. 
    Solid fuel-burning device means any open hearth or freestanding fireplace, stove, firebox or device intended and/or used for the purpose of burning wood, coal, pulp, paper or other nonliquid or nongaseous fuel. 
(34-87 § 1; 43-95 § 1) 
100.030.020 - Applicability. 
    This Article shall be effective and shall apply to all solid fuel-burning devices existing on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein within the City. This Article shall apply to such devices whether new or used, whether an original installation or a reinstallation of a device taken from another location, and without regard to the point of original purchase of any such device. 
(34-87 § 1; 43-95 § 1) 
100.030.030 - Regulation of new solid fuel-burning devices. 
    No solid fuel-burning device shall be installed within any new residential or commercial building within the City. 
(43-95 § 1) 
100.030.035 - Elimination of nonconforming solid fuel-burning devices in existing buildings. 
(a)  Within two (2) years after the transfer of ownership of such dwelling or commercial property, the owner of each nonconforming solid fuel-burning device, with the exception of open hearth fireplaces existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, shall for each device remove said device, replace said device with an approved solid fuel-burning device, install an approved pollution control device or replace said device with an approved nonsolid fuel-burning device, 
(b)  Within ten (10) days after the closing, the owner of the property shall notify the Building Official upon forms provided by the City, the names and addresses of the owner of the property containing the nonconforming solid fuel-burning device. 
(c)  Within two (2) years after the closing, the owner of the property containing the nonconforming solid fuel-burning device shall obtain a permit from the City for the removal or replacement of said device. 
(d)  The owner of the property containing the nonconforming device shall, within one hundred eighty (180) days of obtaining the permit, remove or replace the nonconforming device. 
(e)  The owner of each nonconforming solid fuel-burning device, including open hearth fireplaces, wishing to install a new approved solid or nonsolid fuel-burning device must first obtain a permit from the Building Department. The fee for such permit shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). This fee shall be increased three (3) percent per calendar year, rounded to the nearest dollar up or down. 
(43-95 § 1) 
100.030.040 - Compliance order. 
(a)  The City Manager may, after notice and an opportunity for a public hearing, issue an order by and through the Chief Building Official, which specifies a date for compliance with any requirement set forth in this article. If a public hearing is requested by an interested person, the written request shall, within twenty (20) days after its receipt by the City, be transmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall, within sixty (60) days after the request, hold a public hearing with respect thereto and within thirty (30) days after such hearing issue its decision and order. 
(b)  An order pursuant to this section may be issued if the order: 
(1)  Is issued after notice to the public containing the content of the proposed order and after an opportunity for a public hearing thereon; and 
(2)  Contains a schedule and timetable for compliance which requires compliance as expeditiously as practical, but in no event later than three (3) months following the date of such order. 
(c)  Any order issued pursuant to this section shall be terminated if the Commission determines, after notice and a hearing, that such order would result in undue hardship. In no event shall monetary considerations be a factor or element in determining undue hardship. 
(43-95 § 1; 13-06, § 2) 
100.030.050 - Hearings. 
(a)  Not less than fifteen (15) calendar days after a hearing has been requested, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall grant such request and set a time and place for such hearing not more than sixty (60) calendar days following the City's receipt of such request. Notice of such hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper with general circulation at least ten (10) days before the date of said hearing. 
(b)  The Chief Building Official shall appear as a party in any hearing before the Commission and shall have the same rights as any other party before the Commission. 
(c)  All testimony taken at any such hearing before the Commission shall be under oath or affirmation. A full and complete record of all proceedings and testimony presented shall be taken and filed. The stenographer shall furnish, upon payment and receipt of any fees charged therefor, a certified transcript of the whole or any part of the record to any party of such hearing requesting the same. 
(d)  After due construction of the written and oral statements, testimony and arguments presented at any such hearing, the Commission shall make its findings and decision, based upon the evidence in the record. Such findings and decision shall be made within thirty (30) calendar days following the completion of such hearing. 
(43-95 § 1; 13-06, § 2) 
100.030.060 - Judicial review. 
    Any final order or determination by the Chief Building Official or the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be subject to judicial review by the District Court in accordance with the provisions set forth in Rule 106 of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(43-95 § 1; 13-06, § 2) 
100.030.070 - Penalties. 
    Any person, upon conviction of a violation of this article, shall be subject to any penalties provided by Section 010.020.080 of this Code. 
(43-95 § 1) 
100.030.080 - Use of fees/fines. 
    The Finance Director shall establish a separate revenue account entitled the "Air Quality Fund." Any fees for fines collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited in said fund and applied in the discretion of the City Council as follows: 
(1)  Hiring and/or paying of personnel to enforce air pollution ordinances and regulations; 
(2)  Air pollution reduction programs; or 
(3)  Any other purpose the City Council determines will improve air quality within the City. 
(34-87 § 1; 43-95) 
ARTICLE 100.040 - CONTROL OF SMOKING 

100.040.010 - Legislative Declaration. 
    The City of Glenwood Springs hereby finds and determines that it is in the best interest of the people of this City to protect nonsmokers from involuntary exposure to environmental tobacco smoke in most indoor areas open to the public, public meetings, food services establishments, and places of employment. The City further finds and determines that a balance should be struck between the health concerns of non-consumers of tobacco products and the need to minimize unwarranted governmental intrusion into, and regulation of, private spheres of conduct and choice with respect to the use or nonuse of tobacco products in certain designated public areas and in private places. Therefore, the City hereby declares that the purpose of this article is to preserve and improve the health, comfort and environment of the people of this City by limiting exposure to tobacco smoke. 
(8-06 § 2) 
100.040.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
    Airport Smoking Concession means a bar or restaurant, or both, in a public airport with regularly scheduled domestic and international commercial passenger flights, in which bar or restaurant smoking is allowed in a fully enclosed and independently ventilated area by the terms of the concession. 
    Auditorium means the part of a public building where an audience gathers to attend a performance, and includes any corridors, hallways, or lobbies adjacent thereto "bar" means any indoor area that is operated and licensed under C.R.S. Article 47 of Title 12, primarily for the sale and service of alcohol beverages for on-premises consumption and where the service of food is secondary to the consumption of such beverages. 
    Cigar-tobacco bar means a bar that, in the calendar year ending December 31, 2005, generated at least five (5) percent or more of its total annual gross income or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in annual sales from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors, not including any sales from vending machines. In any calendar year after December 31, 2005, a bar that fails to generate at least five (5) percent of its total annual gross income or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in annual sales from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors shall not be defined as a "cigar-tobacco bar" and shall not thereafter be included in the definition regardless of sales figures. 
    Downtown area means, for purposes of this article, the area within the boundaries of the Glenwood Springs Downtown Development Authority, as may be altered from time to time. Copies of the downtown development authority map and legal description are available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk at 1010 West 8th Street, Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
    Employee means any person who: 
(1)  Performs any type of work for benefit of another in consideration of direct or indirect wages or profit; or 
(2)  Provides uncompensated work or services to a business or nonprofit entity. 
    Employee includes every person described above in this subsection regardless of whether such person is referred to as an employee, contractor, independent contractor, or volunteer or by any other designation or title. 
    Employer means any person, partnership, association, corporation, or nonprofit entity that employs one (1) or more persons. Employer includes, without limitation, the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of state government; any county, city and county, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the state, special district, authority, commission, or agency; or any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of state or local government. 
    Entryway means the outside of the front or main doorway leading into a building or facility that is not exempted from this under Section 100.040.040. Entryway also includes the area of public or private property within a specified radius outside of the doorway. The specified radius shall be determined by the local authority or, if the local authority has not acted, the specified radius shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
    Environmental tobacco smoke or ETS or secondhand smoke means the complex mixture formed from the escaping smoke of a burning tobacco product, also known as "side stream smoke," and smoke exhaled by the smoker. 
    Food service establishment means any indoor area or portion thereof in which the principal business is the sale of food for on-premises consumption. The term includes, without limitation, restaurants, cafeterias, coffee shops, diners, sandwich shops, and short-order cafes. 
    Indoor area means any enclosed area or portion thereof. The opening of windows or doors, or the temporary removal of wall panels, does not convert an indoor area into an outdoor area. 
    Place of employment means any indoor area or portion thereof under the control of an employer in which employees of the employer perform services for, or on behalf of, the employer. 
    Public building means any building owned or operated by: 
(1)  The state, including the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of state government; 
(2)  Any county, city and county, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the state, a special district, an authority, a commission, or an agency; 
(3)  Any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of state or local government. 
    Public meeting means any meeting open to the public pursuant to C.R.S. Part 4 of Article 6 of Title 24, or any other law. 
    Smoke-free work area means an indoor area in a place of employment where smoking is prohibited under this article. 
    Smoking means the burning of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other matter or substance that contains tobacco. 
    Tobacco means cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies, and periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff and snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobacco; shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or for smoking in a cigarette, pipe, or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking. Tobacco also includes cloves and any other plant matter or product that is packaged for smoking. 
    Tobacco business means a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, or other enterprise engaged primarily in the sale, manufacture, or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products, or smoking devices or accessories, either at wholesale or retail, and in which the sale, manufacture, or promotion of other products is merely incidental. 
    Transit stop means any transportation center, public bus stop, or school bus stop. 
    Work area means an area in a place of employment where one (1) or more employees are routinely assigned and perform services for or on behalf of their employer. 
(8-06 § 2; Ord. No. 19-2016 , § 3, 7-21-2016) 
100.040.030 - General smoking restrictions. 
    Except as provided in Section 100.040.040, and in order to reduce the levels of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke in the following areas: 
(a)  In any indoor area, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Public meeting places; 
(2)  Elevators; 
(3)  Government-owned or -operated means of mass transportation, including, but not limited to, buses, vans, and trains; 
(4)  Taxicabs and limousines; 
(5)  Grocery stores; 
(6)  Gymnasiums; 
(7)  Jury waiting and deliberation rooms; 
(8)  Courtrooms; 
(9)  Child day care facilities; 
(10)  Health care facilities including hospitals, health care clinics, doctor's offices, and other health care related facilities; 
(11)  a.  Any place of employment that is not exempted. 
b.  In the case of employers who own facilities otherwise exempted from this article, each such employer shall provide a smoke-free work area for each employee requesting not to have to breathe environmental tobacco smoke. Every employee shall have a right to work in an area free of environmental tobacco smoke. 
(12)  Food service establishments; 
(13)  Bars; 
(14)  Limited gaming facilities and any other facilities in which any gaming or gambling activity is conducted; 
(15)  Indoor sports arenas; 
(16)  Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in public and private buildings, condominiums, and other multiple-unit residential facilities; 
(17)  Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in hotels and motels, and in at least seventy-five (75) percent of the sleeping quarters within a hotel or motel that are rented to guests; 
(18)  Bowling alleys; 
(19)  Billiard or pool halls; 
(20)  Facilities in which games of chance are conducted; 
(21)  The common areas of retirement facilities, publicly owned housing facilities, and nursing homes, not including any resident's private residential quarters; 
(22)  Public buildings; 
(23)  Auditoria; 
(24)  Theaters; 
(25)  Museums; 
(26)  Libraries; 
(27)  To the extent not otherwise provided in C.R.S. § 25-14-103.5, public and nonpublic schools;] 
(28)  Other educational and vocational institutions; and 
(29)  The entryways of all buildings and facilities listed in paragraphs (1) to (28) of this subsection (a). 
(b)  In any of the following outdoor areas: 
(1)  Within fifty (50) feet of any child care center or school as defined in Article 070.070; 
(2)  In the downtown area, between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; 
(3)  Within twenty-five (25) feet of a transit stop; 
(4)  On any park, parkland, or recreation area or facility as established in Section 090.030.010; and 
(5)  Within twenty-five (25) feet of any common open space as defined in Section 070.040.040. 
(c)  A cigar-tobacco bar shall not expand its size or change its location from the size and location in which it existed as of December 31, 2005. A cigar-tobacco bar shall display signage in at least one (1) conspicuous place and at least four (4) inches by six (6) inches in size stating: "smoking allowed. Children under eighteen (18) years of age must be accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(8-06 § 2; Ord. No. 19-2016 , § 3, 7-21-2016; Ord. No. 19-2018 , 6, 8-2-2018) 
100.040.040 - Exceptions to smoking restrictions. 
(a)  This Article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Private homes, private residences, and private automobiles; except that this article shall apply if any such home, residence, or vehicle is being used for child care or day care or if a private vehicle is being used for the public transportation of children or as part of health care or day care transportation; 
(2)  Limousines under private hire; 
(3)  A hotel or motel room rented to one (1) or more guests if the total percentage of such hotel or motel rooms in such hotel or motel does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent; 
(4)  Any retail tobacco business; 
(5)  A cigar-tobacco bar; 
(6)  An airport smoking concession; 
(7)  The outdoor area of any business; 
(8)  A place of employment that is not open to the public and that is under the control of an employer that employs three (3) or fewer employees; 
(9)  A private, nonresidential building on a farm or ranch, as defined in C.R.S. § 39-1-102, that has annual gross income of less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(8-06 § 2) 
100.040.050 - Optional prohibitions. 
(a)  The owner or manager of any place not specifically listed in Section 100.040.030, including a place otherwise exempted under Section 100.040.040, may post signs prohibiting smoking or providing smoking and nonsmoking areas. Such posting shall have the effect of including such place, or the designated nonsmoking portion thereof, in the places where smoking is prohibited or restricted pursuant to this article. 
(b)  If the owner or manager of a place not specifically listed in Section 100.040.030, including a place otherwise exempted under Section 100.040.040, is an employer and receives a request from an employee to create a smoke-free work area as contemplated by Section 100.040.030(1)(k)(i), the owner or manager shall post a sign or signs in the smoke-free work area as provided in subsection (1) of this section. 
(8-06 § 2) 
100.040.060 - Unlawful acts-Penalty-Disposition of fines and surcharges. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls the use of a premises subject to this article to violate any provision of this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a person to smoke in an area where smoking is prohibited pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A person who violates this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a first violation within a calendar year, a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a second violation within a calendar year, and a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within a calendar year. Each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(8-06 § 2) 
ARTICLE 100.050 - MOTORIZED WATERCRAFT PROHIBITED ON RIVERS 

100.050.010 - Motorized watercraft prohibited. 
    Except as specifically provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized watercraft in or upon the Colorado River or the Roaring Fork River within the City. For purposes of this prohibition, motorized watercraft includes any self-propelled conveyance which is designed primarily for travel in or upon water and which is generally and commonly used to transport persons or property in or upon water. The term shall include, by way of example, any form of motor boat, jet skis or similar devices. Authorized emergency watercraft and other vessels operated by any governmental agency shall be exempt from this section. 
(10-90 § 1) 
ARTICLE 100.060 - IDLING OF MOTOR VEHICLE ENGINES 

100.060.010 - Declaration of nuisance. 
    Continuous idling in excess of fifteen (15) minutes of motors of any diesel fuel-burning bus or motor vehicle or the motor of any motor vehicle of any kind whatsoever is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a public health hazard. 
(4-91 § 1) 
100.060.020 - Unlawful idling. 
    Except as specifically provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to idle or permit the idling of the motor of any diesel fuel-burning bus or motor vehicle or any motor of any motor vehicle of any kind whatsoever for any continuous period of time in excess of fifteen (15) minutes, within the limits of the City at any time of day or night. 
(4-91 § 1) 
100.060.030 - Exceptions. 
    The idling restriction in this article shall not apply to emergency vehicles; to vehicles engaged in traffic operations; to vehicles which are being serviced; or to vehicles en route to a destination that are stopped by traffic congestion. Furthermore, the idling restriction in this article shall not apply to vehicles which idle to operate auxiliary equipment, including, but not limited to, pumps, compressors, air-conditioning units or refrigeration units, but only when such vehicles are actively engaged in an operation for which the auxiliary equipment is required to be engaged. 
(4-91 § 1; 18-98 § 10) 
ARTICLE 100.070 - REGULATION OF NOISE 

100.070.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words shall have these meanings ascribed to them: 
    Construction work means any and all activity incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings, structures, roads or appurtenances thereto, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling. 
    Device means any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually produces, noise when operated or handled. 
    Engine brakes (commonly referred to by brand names such as Jacobs Brake, Jake Brake or Dynatard brake) means an engine retarder or dynamic braking device used primarily on large trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. 
    Noise means a sound which is measured as the sound pressure level in decibels (dB) which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings. 
    Normal residential noise includes but is not limited to noise from lawn, garden or household equipment, stereos and ban instruments. 
    Normal traffic noise includes but is not limited to noise from public service utilities and motor vehicles in public rights-of-way and on streets and highways. 
    Person means any human being, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user, owner or operator, including any municipal corporation, state or federal governmental agency or district, and any officer or employee thereof. 
    Plainly audible noise means any noise for which the information content of that noise is unambiguously transferred to a listener, such as, but not limited to, understanding of spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, or comprehension of musical rhythms. 
    Sound means a temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical quantity, in a medium with interval forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distance points. 
(29-92 § 1; 5-05 § 1) 
100.070.020 - Declaration of policy. 
    The City Council finds and declares that noise is a significant source of environmental pollution that represents a present and increasing threat to the public peace and to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City and to its visitors. Noise has an adverse effect on the psychological and physiological well-being of persons, thus constituting a present danger to economic and aesthetic well-being of the community. Accordingly, it is the policy of the City Council to provide for regulation of certain noise within the City. 
(29-92 § 1) 
100.070.030 - Noises prohibited. 
    The following noises are declared a nuisance and are in violation of this section: 
(1)  Construction work. Any noise created by operating or causing to be operated any equipment (mechanical or nonmechanical, self-propelled or manually manipulated) used in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances at any time other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday. The City Manager is hereby authorized to issue a construction work noise permit allowing construction work noise to occur at a time other than the time set forth herein based on circumstances which necessitate such construction work. In the event the City Manager issues such a permit, the City Council shall be advised of such issuance at the next regular City Council meeting. 
(2)  Radios, tape players, record players, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices. It shall be unlawful to use, operate or permit the operation of any radio receiving set, phonograph, tape player, television set, musical instrument or other machine or device for the production of sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible at twenty-five (25) feet from such device when operated in the City. In addition to the foregoing within all commercial zone districts, businesses shall make reasonable efforts to contain any noise produced by the business within the confines of the business' premises. 
(3)  Engine braking device. Any noise created from the operation of any motor vehicle with an engine brake engaged. 
(29-92 § 1; 5-05, § 1) 
100.070.040 - Violations. 
(1)  General Violations . In addition to any other remedies provided by this article, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
(2)  In the event of a second conviction of a noise violation by a commercial business, such business shall submit a noise mitigation plan to the City Manager for review and approval. A recommendation shall be made to the Municipal Court. 
(29-92 § 1; 5-05 § 1) 
100.070.050 - Exemptions. 
    The following activities and/or events shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Normal residential noise between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(2)  Normal traffic noise unless otherwise prohibited by Federal or State law or other provisions of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code. 
(3)  Special events at municipal parks, in accordance with the provisions of Article 090.030 regarding Municipal Parks. Such events shall conclude at 10:00 p.m. or the time posted at the park. 
(4)  Special use permits issued in writing by the City Manager. 
(5-05 § 1) 
TITLE 110 - PUBLIC SAFETY 
ARTICLE 110.010 - POLICE 

110.010.010 - Police Department composition. 
    The City shall have a paid Police Department consisting of a Chief of Police and such number of police officers as in the judgment of the City Manager may be necessary to the peace and good order of the City. 
(Code 1962 § 9.1; Code 1971 § 18-1) 
110.010.020 - Duties of Chief of Police generally. 
    The Police Department shall be headed by a Chief of Police. He/she shall direct, subject to the supervision of the Director of Public Safety, the police work of the City and be responsible for the maintenance of law and order. His/her work shall include control of investigation, records, traffic, crime prevention and all subjects allied to police work. He/she shall be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property used by the Police Department. The operation of the Police Department shall be in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and with the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1962 § 7.2-5; Code 1971 § 18-2) 
110.010.030 - Duties of police officers. 
    All members of the Police Department shall have powers and duties as follows: 
(1)  They shall perform all duties required by the Police Chief; 
(2)  They shall suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace, apprehend all disorderly persons in the City and pursue and arrest any person fleeing from justice in any part of the State. 
(3)  They shall be the enforcement officers of the City and shall enforce the provisions of this Code, other ordinances of the City and the laws of the State. They shall arrest without process all persons engaged in such violations in their presence. Upon such arrest, they shall forthwith convey such offenders before the proper officer to be dealt with according to law; provided that they may incarcerate any person whom they shall arrest at a late and unusual hour of the night until the following morning; and, provided further, in the special cases relating to traffic offenses set forth in Title 120, they may release an arrested person upon his/her written promise to appear in court. 
(4)  They shall report such offenses as may come to their knowledge to the proper City officials or they shall report the same to the Municipal Judge, securing a warrant for the arrest of offenders when desirable. 
(5)  They shall execute and return all writs and processes to them directed by the Municipal Court in any case arising under a City ordinance, and they may serve the same in any part of the County. 
(6)  If they observe a condition of a street, alley or sidewalk that would likely become a hazard to traffic and/or pedestrians, or an obstruction, nuisance or impediment thereon, they should report the same to the Director of Public Works within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1962 § 9.2; Code 1971 § 18-3; 7-96 § 1) 
110.010.040 - Disposition of lost, abandoned and confiscated property held in possession of City. 
(a)  The Chief of Police shall act as custodian of all property seized, taken or delivered into the possession of the Police Department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep a record of all property which may be seized or taken, or possession of which is delivered to the Police Department. 
(c)  All property seized or taken or the possession of which is delivered to the Police Department shall be held for a period of ninety (90) days, during which period of time such property may by claimed by the rightful owner thereof; however, if any such property so seized, taken or held in possession shall be of a perishable nature or so bulky or of such nature as to make it dangerous or inadvisable to retain possession thereof for the length of time herein specified, the Chief of Police may, with approval of the City Manager, cause such property to be forthwith advertised in the official newspaper of the City and sell such property at public auction at any time after twenty-four (24) hours shall have elapsed from the date of such publication. 
(d)  Upon claim being made by any person for any property held by the Chief of Police, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to make such inquiry and examination as to the ownership of said property as he/she may deem necessary; and if he/she is satisfied that said property belongs to the person claiming the same, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to deliver possession thereof to such person upon such person giving proper receipt therefor. 
(e)  All property not returned to a claimant within the period of time above provided shall be sold at public auction not less than once annually. Notice of such sale shall be published in the official paper of the City at least once, which notice shall be directed to the public and shall contain a statement of the following matters: 
(1)  A general statement of the property which will be sold at public auction; 
(2)  Notification to all persons who have any claim of ownership or title to the property to make presentment of their claim prior to the date of sale; 
(3)  The time and place where all unclaimed property shall be sold; and 
(4)  That the sale shall not be held earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of first publication of the notice of sale. 
(f)  A sale of all unclaimed property shall be conducted by the Chief of Police or his/her agent at public auction for the highest and best price obtainable, and he/she shall receive from the purchaser of each and every article the amount bid in cash or certified funds by such purchaser for the same. The proceeds of all sales shall be promptly remitted to the Director of Finance, along with a description of each article sold and the amount of money received for each article. 
(g)  No property seized or taken or the possession of which is delivered to the Police Department and which may be used as evidence in any court shall be subject to the provisions of this section until such time as such property is released into the final custody of the Police Department by the court having jurisdiction in the premises. 
(Code 1971 § 18-5) 
110.010.050 - Permits for concealed weapons. 
(a)  The Chief of Police may issue permits allowing any person to carry a handgun concealed on or about his/her body. The permit shall be valid for one (1) year. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of the permit to carry a concealed weapon, the Chief of Police must be satisfied that the individual applying for the permit has demonstrated need to carry a concealed weapon, is proficient in the safe operation of the weapon and has no prior criminal conviction making the carrying of said weapon unlawful under the laws of the State or the United States. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, handgun means any revolver or pistol capable or intended to be capable of discharging bullets, cartridges or other explosive charges. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, concealed means the location of a handgun on a person's body or under his/her clothing in a manner that obstructs observation of all or most of the handgun from view of another person. 
(Code 1971 § 8-6) 
ARTICLE 110.020 - FIRE 

110.020.010 - Organization of Fire Department. 
    The Fire Department shall be a volunteer department, except for the Fire Chief and such other employees as should be determined necessary by the City Council, who shall be full-time employees of the City. The Fire Department shall be a part of the Emergency Services Department. The operation of the Fire Department shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in this article. 
(Code 1962 § 7.2-6; Code 1971 § 6-27; 38-90 § 3; 26-99 § 2) 
110.020.020 - Duties of Fire Chief and Fire Department. 
(a)  Duties of the Fire Chief . In addition to the other duties of the Fire Chief as may be set forth in this article, the Fire Chief shall be responsible for the proper operation of the Fire Department and shall be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property used by the Fire Department. In addition, the Fire Chief shall be charged with the extinguishment and prevention of fires, the protection of life and property against fires and the removal of fire hazards. 
(b)  Duties of the Fire Department . It shall be the duty of the Fire Department to prevent and extinguish fires, to educate the public in all matters pertaining to the fires and fire prevention, to care for all fire apparatus and other City property in its charge, and to perform such other duties as may be assigned to it by the Fire Chief. 
(Code 1962 § 10.1; Code 1971 § 6-28; 38-90 § 3; 26-99 § 2) 
110.020.030 - Fire Chief designated emergency response authority for hazardous wastes. 
    The Fire Chief is designated as the emergency response authority for hazardous materials incidents occurring within the corporate limits of the City. 
(Code 1971 § 6-37; 26-99 § 2) 
110.020.040 - Rules and regulations. 
    The Fire Chief may promulgate rules and regulations for the operation, organization, administration and duties of the Fire Department subject to the approval of the City Manager. 
(38-90 § 3; 26-99 § 2) 
110.020.050 - Authority to respond to alarms outside City and District. 
    The Fire Department shall not respond to alarms outside of the corporate limits and fire district limits, or as otherwise allowed by state law, leaving the City and District unprotected, except that not more than one-half (1/2) of the membership may respond to such alarms with reserve equipment only when authorized to do so by the Fire Chief. The City Council by agreement may enter into agreements with other fire departments for mutual cooperation in fighting fires both within and without the City limits. 
(Code 1962 § 10-8; Code 1971 § 6-35; 9-96 § 2; 26-99 § 2; 16-99 § 2) 
110.020.060 - Reports of Fire Chief. 
(a)  Report of fires. The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of the activities of the Fire Department and shall make a thorough investigation of each fire and report to the City Manager, in writing, at least quarterly, the following information in regard to each fire: cause, location, time, owner, tenant, occupancy, type of building, insurance carried, insurance paid, building loss, contents loss, how extinguished, apparatus used, firefighters present, adequacy of water supply and pressure and other information of value. 
(b)  Moment report. The Fire Chief shall annually make an inventory of all property owned by the Fire Department or in its charge, noting the condition of each article, which shall be submitted to the City Manager together with recommendations for the purchase of additional equipment needed and any other recommendations he/she may desire to submit affecting the Fire Department. The Fire Chief shall also submit and annually update a five-year plan for equipment replacement in the Fire Department to be considered by the City Manager and the City Council during the annual budgeting process. Loss of or damage to equipment and accidents involving members of the Department in the performance of their duties shall be reported promptly to the City Manager by the Fire Chief 
(c)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrant testing and maintenance shall comply with the provisions of the latest edition of the International Fire Code adopted by the City. Fire hydrant systems shall be subject to such periodic tests as required by the Fire Chief. Fire hydrant systems shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and shall be repaired where defective. Additions, repairs, alterations and servicing shall be in accordance with approved standards. 
(d)  List of members. The Fire Chief shall maintain in the office of the City Clerk an accurate list of the members of the Fire Department and shall report promptly any additions to or withdrawals from such membership. 
(Code 1962 § 10-6; Code 1971 § 6-33; 38-90 § 3; 9-96 § 1; 26-99 § 2; Code 1962 § 10-6A; 20-10 § 1) 
110.020.070 - Police authority. 
    The Fire Chief and members acting under his/her orders shall have full and complete police powers and authority within the fire station, at fires and proceeding to or returning from them, and shall have authority to make arrests for all violations of this Code or other City ordinances the enforcement of which is under his/her jurisdiction. All members of the Police Department shall be subject to his/her orders at fires and shall cooperate with him/her in the enforcement of the above mentioned ordinances. The Fire Chief may prescribe limits at fires within which no person shall be admitted except by his/her order. 
(Code 1962 § 10.5; Code 1971 6-32; 26-99 § 2) 
110.020.080 - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to inspect or cause to be inspected by members of the Fire Department, as often as may be necessary, all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or any violation of the provisions or the intent of any provision of this Code or any City ordinance concerning a fire hazard. 
(Code 1962 § 10.11; Code 1971 § 6-6) 
110.020.090 - Right of entry. 
    The Fire Chief and members acting under his/her orders shall have authority to enter any building in the proper performance of their duties. 
(Code 1962 § 10.12; Code 1971 § 6-7; 26-99 § 2) 
110.020.100 - Unauthorized use of fire apparatus prohibited. 
    No person not a member of the Fire Department shall use any of the fire apparatus at fires or otherwise unless acting under orders of the Fire Chief. Fire apparatus and other City property in the charge of the Fire Department shall not be loaned or rented except by permission of the Fire Chief. 
(Code 1962 §§ 10.7, 10.10; Code 1971 §§ 6-3, 6-34; 26-99 § 2) 
110.020.110 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-96, § 3, repealed § 110.020.110, which pertained to unauthorized interference with fire alarm system prohibited and derived from Code 1962 § 10.10; Code 1971 § 6-4. 
110.020.120 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-96, § 3, repealed § 110.020.120, which pertained to the prohibition of false alarms and derived from Code 1962 § 10.10; Code 1971 § 6-5. 
110.020.130 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-96, § 3, repealed § 110.020.130, which pertained to the prohibition of interfering with Fire Department members and derived from Code 1962 § 10.10; Code 1971 § 6-2. 
110.020.140 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9-96, § 3, repealed § 110.020.140, which pertained to miscellaneous fire regulations and derived from Code 1962 §§ 10.15, 10.16; Code 1971 §§ 6-11-6-13. 
110.020.150 - Fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions . As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Fireworks means any article, device or substance prepared for the primary purpose of producing a visual or auditory sensation by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, including, without limitation, the following articles and devices commonly known and used as fireworks: toy cannons or toy canes in which explosives are used, blank cartridges, the type of balloon which requires fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, rockets, Roman candles, Day-glo bombs, torches, capsticks, bottle rockets or other fireworks of like construction, and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound or any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substance. Fireworks does not include: 
(1)  Toy caps which do not contain more than twenty-five hundredths of a gram of explosive compound per cap; 
(2)  Sparklers, toy smoke devices, trick matches, cigarettes loads, trick noise makers and novelty auto alarms; or 
(3)  Highway flares, railway fuses, ship distress signals, smoke candles and other emergency signal devices. 
    Manufacturer means any person who manufactures, makes, constructs or produces any fireworks article or device. 
    Retailer means any person who sells, delivers, consigns or furnishes fireworks to another person not for resale. 
    Wholesaler means any person who sells, delivers, consigns, gives or in any way furnishes fireworks to a retailer for resale. 
(b)  Unlawful to sell or use certain types of fireworks. Except as provided in Subsection (c) hereof, it shall be unlawful in the City for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell or have in his/her possession with intent to offer for sale, sell, use or explode any fireworks. 
(c)  Permits for display. The Fire Chief shall have the power to grant permits for supervised public fireworks displays and to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of such permits. Application for a permit shall be made in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of display. Every display shall be handled by a competent operator and shall be of such character and so located, discharged and fired as not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person. Before a permit is granted, the operator and the location and handling of the display shall be approved, after investigation, by the Fire Chief. No permit shall be transferable or assignable. 
(d)  Bond. A bond may be required of each permittee in a sum not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be caused either to persons or property by reason of the licensed display and arising from the acts of the permittee, his/her agents, employees or subcontractors. 
(e)  Construction. This Section shall not be construed to prohibit: 
(1)  Any person, including a manufacturer, who has first obtained a license to sell display fireworks from offering for sale, exposing for sale, selling or having in his/her possession with intent to offer for sale, or sell, fireworks to any person or organization holding a display permit issued pursuant to this section; 
(2)  Any person from using or exploding fireworks in accordance with the provisions of any display permit issued pursuant to this section; 
(3)  Any resident manufacturer from manufacturing and selling, or resident wholesaler, dealer or jobber from selling at wholesale, such fireworks as are not prohibited under this article; the sale of any kind of fireworks, provided that the same are to be shipped directly out of state in accordance with regulations of the United States Interstate Commerce Commission covering the transportation of explosives and other dangerous articles by motor, rail and water; the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination; the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show theater, signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports or by military organizations; or the use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under conditions approved by the City; 
(4)  Any person from offering for sale, exposing for sale, selling, having in his/her possession with intent to offer for sale, or sell, or from using or firing toy pistols, toy guns, sparklers or other devices in which caps manufactured in accordance with this article are used; or 
(5)  The importation, purchase, sale or possession of fireworks which are used or to be used solely to prevent damage to crops by animals or birds, the sale and use of which shall be governed by rules and regulations adopted by the City with the assistance of other appropriate departments of the State. 
(f)  Seizure of fireworks . The Police Department or Fire Chief shall seize, take and remove, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this section. 
(Code 1971 § 6-52; 21-87 §§ 1, 2; 6-88 § 1; 26-99 § 2) 
110.020.160 - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
110.020.170 - Permit Fees. 
    The Fire Department is authorized to collect fees set by Resolution of City Council for project plan review applications and permits when submitted for approval. 
    For all permits required by the latest edition of the International Fire Code adopted by the City, an application shall be completed and on file with the Glenwood Springs Fire Department. The building owner and or business operator shall renew these permits annually or as required by Glenwood Springs Fire Department. 
110.020.180 - Fire Restrictions 
    Whenever the City Council or City Manager finds that there is high fire danger, the City Council or City Manager may impose a fire restriction and/or ban for such periods of time and under such actions as deemed necessary. Notice of the restrictions and/or ban shall be published as soon as practicable in the official newspaper of the City, and the ban shall become effective on the day following the publication of notice in the official newspaper of the City. If imposed solely by the City Manager, he/she shall provide notice of the fire restrictions and/or ban to the City Council at its next regular meting. As soon as practicable after the City Council or City Manager terminates the fire restrictions and/or ban, notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the City. 
(19-04, § 2; 20-10, § 1; 9-12 § 2) 
ARTICLE 110.030 - DISASTER EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- C.R.S. § 28-2-107, as amended. 

110.030.010 - Disaster agency established. 
    There is hereby created and established a City disaster agency, to be composed of the Mayor as chairman and such other persons as the Mayor may appoint from time to time. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. 
(Code 1962 § 14.1; Code 1971 § 5-1) 
110.030.020 - Duties. 
    The City disaster agency shall perform such functions as are required of it by state law. 
(Code 1962 § 14.2; Code 1971 § 5-2) 
110.030.030 - Rules and regulations. 
    The Mayor shall have the power to promulgate, in writing, rules and regulations which shall be reasonably necessary for providing disaster emergency services. 
(Code 1962 § 14-3; Code 1971 § 5-3) 
110.030.040 - Acts done under Article's authority immune from liability. 
    All things done by authority of this article, or by authority of any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this article, shall constitute the exercise by the City of its governmental functions; and the City, its officers, authorized persons and organizations as herein provided for, and any persons complying with this article, or with the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, shall not be liable for any damage sustained by any person or property as a result of the enforcement of or compliance with this article or any such rule or regulation. 
(Code 1962 § 14.4; Code 1971 § 5-4) 
110.030.050 - Compliance with Article required. 
    It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of this article or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this article and upon, conviction of the same, such person shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080. 
ARTICLE 110.040 - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES 

110.040.010 - Organization of Emergency Medical Services. 
    The Emergency Medical Services Section of the Fire Department shall be staffed by volunteers except for the Emergency Services Director and such other employees, as shall be determined necessary by the City Council, who shall be full-time employees of the City. The operation of the Emergency Medical Services Section shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth in this article. 
(25-92 § 1; 26-99 § 2) 
110.040.020 - Duties of Fire Chief and Emergency Medical Services Section. 
(a)  Duties of the fire chief. In addition to the other duties of the Fire Director as may be set forth in this article, the Fire Chief shall be responsible for the proper operation of the Fire Department and shall be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property used by the Fire Department. In addition, the Fire Chief shall be charged with providing emergency medical services to persons within the service area of the Fire Department. 
(b)  Duties of the emergency medical services section. It shall be the duty of the Emergency Medical Services Section to provide emergency medical services under the direction of the Fire Chief and to perform such other duties as may be assigned to it by the City Manager. 
(c)  Exclusive responsibility of emergency medical services section. The Emergency Medical Services Section shall be exclusively responsible for providing emergency medical services, including those arising from 911 calls, within the boundaries of the City. For purposes of this provision, emergency medical services includes any actual or perceived event which appears to threaten life, limb or well-being of an individual in such a manner that a need for immediate medical care is created. Emergency medical services also includes services provided upon request for emergency medical service to transport or assist persons in apparent sudden need of medical attention or a medical emergency, or to transport blood or any therapeutic device, accessory to such device, tissue or organ. 
(d)  Nonemergency medical services. Medical emergency services, including ambulance services, other than those provided under the auspices of the Emergency Medical Services Section, may be utilized in nonemergency situations such as calls which require routine medical services in conjunction with transportation, such as patient transfers from hospitals to nursing homes or private residences. Nonemergency ambulance services shall not provide emergency medical services as set forth in this section unless specific authorization is given by the Fire Chief due to the nature of the emergency situation and the availability of necessary levels of emergency medical services. Nonemergency ambulance services which provide such services within the City shall be required to submit an "Operational Service Plan" to the Fire Chief annually. The Fire Chief shall be empowered to develop rules and regulations concerning the Operational Service Plan requirements of this subsection. 
(25-92 § 1; 26-99 § 2) 
110.040.030 - Rules and regulations. 
    The Fire Chief may promulgate rules and regulations for the operation, organization, administration and duties of the Emergency Medical Services Section such to the approval of the City Manager. 
(25-92 § 1) 
110.040.040 - Authority to respond to calls outside City. 
    The Emergency Medical Services Section shall not respond to calls outside the City and Fire District, or as otherwise allowed by state law, except pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement duly approved by the City Council. 
(25-92 § 1; 9-96 § 4) 
110.040.050 - Reports of Fire Chief. 
(a)  Report of emergency medical services calls. The Fire Chief shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of the activities of the Emergency Medical Services Section and shall make a thorough report to the City Manager, in writing, at least annually or as requested, in regard to each emergency medical services call: purpose, location, time, persons served, insurance carried, insurance paid, outcome of call, apparatus used, personnel present and other information of value. 
(b)  Equipment report. The Fire Chief shall annually make an inventory of all property owned by the Emergency Medical Services Section or in its charge, noting the condition of each article, which shall be submitted to the City Manager, together with recommendations for the purchase of additional equipment needed and any other recommendations he/she may desire to submit affecting the Emergency Medical Services Section. The Fire Chief shall also submit and update annually a five-year plan for equipment replacement in the Emergency Medical Services Section to be considered by the City Manager and the City Council during the annual budgeting process. Loss of or damage to equipment and accidents involving members of the Department in the performance of their duties shall be reported promptly to the City Manager by the Fire Chief. 
(c)  List of members. The Fire Chief shall maintain in the office of the City Clerk an accurate list of members of the Emergency Medical Services Section and shall report promptly any additions to or withdrawals from such membership. 
(25-92 § 1; 26-99 § 2) 
110.040.060 - Right of entry. 
    The Fire Chief and members acting under his/her orders shall have authority to enter any building or other property in the proper performance of their duties. 
(25-92 § 1; 26-99 § 2) 
110.040.070 - Unauthorized use of Emergency Medical Services Section equipment prohibited. 
    No person not a member of the Emergency Medical Services Section shall use any of the emergency medical services apparatus at emergency medical services calls or otherwise unless acting under orders of the Fire Chief. Emergency Medical Services Section apparatus and other City property in the charge of the Fire Department shall not be loaned or rented except by permission of the Fire Chief. 
(25-92 § 1; 26-99 § 2) 
110.040.080 - Interfering with Emergency Medical Services Section members prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with the members of the Fire Department in the performance of their duties. 
(25-92 § 1; 26-99 § 2) 
TITLE 120 - CRIMINAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE 120.010 - CULPABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY 

120.010.010 - Strict liability. 
    The minimum requirement for conduct upon which a penalty may be imposed under this Code is the performance by a person of conduct which includes a voluntary act or the omission to perform an act which he/she is physically capable of performing. If that conduct is all that is required for the commission of a violation of a provision of this Code, or if the violation or some material element thereof does not require a culpable mental state on the part of the actor, the offense is one of strict liability. If a culpable mental state on the part of the actor is required with respect to any material element of a violation of a provision of this Code, the violation is deemed to be one of "mental culpability". 
(Code 1971 § 11-32) 
120.010.020 - Intentional acts. 
    When the violation of any provision of this Code or any element thereof requires a particular culpable mental state, that culpable mental state is ordinarily designated by the use of the terms, "intentionally," with "intent," "knowingly," "willfully," "recklessly," "wantonly" or "maliciously," which describes a specific kind of intent or knowledge. Although no culpable mental state is expressly designated by a provision of this Code, a culpable mental state may nevertheless be required for the commission of a violation of this Code, or with respect to some or all of the material elements thereof, if the proscribed conduct necessarily involves such culpable mental state. If a provision of this Code provides that criminal negligence suffices to establish an element of violation of this Code, that element is also established if the person acts recklessly, knowingly or intentionally. If recklessness suffices to establish an element, that element also is established if a person acts knowingly or intentionally. If acting knowingly suffices to establish an element, that element also is established if a person acts intentionally. When a provision of this Code establishing or defining an offense prescribes as an element thereof a specified culpable mental state, that culpable mental state is deemed to apply to every element of the offense unless an intent to limit its application clearly appears. 
(Code 1971 § 11-33) 
120.010.030 - Definition of intentional acts. 
    As used in this Title, the following words shall have these meanings ascribed to them: 
    Culpable mental state means intentionally or with intent, knowingly, willfully, recklessly, negligently, wantonly or maliciously. 
    Intentionally or with intent means action by a person when his/her conscious objective is to cause a specific result proscribed by the statute defining the offense. It is immaterial whether the result actually occurred or not. 
    Knowingly or willfully means action by a person with respect to conduct or to a circumstance when the person is aware that his/her conduct is of such nature or that such circumstance exists. A person acts knowingly or willfully with respect to the result of his/her conduct when he/she is aware that his/her conduct is practically certain to cause the result. 
    Malicious or maliciously means conduct committed by a person with an intent to injure the public, to injure another or to injure the property of another. 
    Negligence or negligently means an act committed by a person when, through a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise, he/she fails to perceive a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or that a circumstance exists. 
    Recklessly means conduct whereby a person consciously disregards a substantial or unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or that a circumstance exists. 
    Wantonly means the same as recklessly. 
(Code 1971 § 11-34) 
120.010.040 - Self-defense. 
    A person is justified in using force upon another person in order to defend himself or a third person from what he/she reasonably believes to be the use or imminent use of unlawful physical force by that other person, and he/she may use a degree of force which he/she reasonably believes to be necessary for that purpose. A person is not justified in using physical force if: 
(1)  With intent to cause bodily injury or death to another person, he/she provokes the use of unlawful physical force by that other person; 
(2)  He/she is the initial aggressor, except that his/her use of physical force upon another person under the circumstances is justifiable if he/she withdraws from the encounter and effectively communicates to the other person his/her intent to do so, but the latter nevertheless continues or threatens the use of unlawful physical force; or 
(3)  The physical force involved is the product of a combat by agreement not specifically authorized by law. 
(Code 1971 § 11-35) 
120.010.050 - Liability based upon behavior of another. 
(a)  In general A person is guilty of a violation of a provision of this Code if it is committed by the behavior of another for which he/she is legally accountable as provided in Sections 120.010.060 to 120.010.100, inclusive. 
(b)  Behavior of another . A person is legally accountable for the behavior of another person if: 
(1)  He/she is made accountable for the conduct of that person by a provision of this Code; or 
(2)  He/she acts with the culpable mental state sufficient for the commission of the violation of the provision in question and he/she causes an innocent person to engage in such behavior. 
As used in this subsection, innocent person includes any person who is not guilty of the violation of the provision in question, despite his/her behavior, because of duress, legal incapacity or exemption or unawareness of the criminal nature of the conduct in question, of the defendant's criminal purpose or any other factor precluding the mental state sufficient for the commission of the violation of the provision in question. 
120.010.060 - Complicity. 
    A person is legally accountable as principal for the behavior of another constituting a violation of a provision of this Code if, with the intent to promote or facilitate the violation of the provision, he/she aids, abets or advises the other person in planning or committing the violation of the provision. 
(Code 1971 § 11-29) 
120.010.070 - Exemptions from liability based upon behavior of another. 
(a)  Victim. Unless otherwise provided by the provision defining the violation, a person shall not be legally accountable for behavior of another constituting a violation of a provision of this Code if he/she is a victim of that violation or the provision is so defined that his/her conduct is inevitably incidental to its commission. 
(b)  Termination of behavior. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge under Section 120.010.060 if, prior to the violation of the Code provision, the defendant terminated his/her effort to promote or facilitate its commission and either gave timely warning to law enforcement authorities or gave timely warning to the intended victim. 
120.010.080 - Failure to prosecute or convict another is not a defense. 
    In any prosecution of a violation of a provision of this Code in which criminal liability is based upon the behavior of another pursuant to Sections 120.010.050 to 120.010.070, inclusive, it is no defense that the other person has not been prosecuted for or convicted of a violation of the same Code provision or has been convicted of a violation of a different provision, or that the defendant belongs to a class of persons who by definition of the provision are legally incapable of violating the provision in an individual capacity. 
120.010.090 - Criminal liability of corporations. 
(a)  When liable . A corporation is guilty of a violation of a provision of this Code if: 
(1)  The conduct constituting the violation consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty of affirmative performance imposed on corporations by this Code; or 
(2)  The conduct constituting the violation is engaged in, authorized, solicited, requested, commanded or knowingly tolerated by the board of directors or a high managerial agent acting within the scope of his/her employment or in behalf of the corporation. 
(b)  Agent. As used in this section, agent means any director, officer or employee of a corporation or any other person who is authorized to act in behalf of the corporation; and high managerial agent means an officer of a corporation or any other agent in a position of comparable authority with respect to the formulation of corporate policy or the supervision in a managerial capacity of subordinate employees. 
(c)  Penalty. Every violation of a provision of this Code by a corporation shall subject the corporation to a fine authorized pursuant to Section 010.020.080. 
120.010.100 - Criminal liability of individual for corporate conduct. 
    A person is criminally liable for conduct constituting a violation of a provision of this Code which he/she performs or causes to occur in the name of or in behalf of a corporation to the same extent as if that conduct were performed or caused by him/her in his/her own name or behalf. 
120.010.110 - Conspiracy to commit a crime. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of a crime, to agree with another person that they, or one (1) or more of them, will engage in conduct which constitutes a crime or an attempt to commit a crime, or to agree to aid the other person in the planning or commission of a crime or of an attempt to commit such crime. 
(b)  No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit a crime unless an overt act in pursuance of that conspiracy is proved to have been done by him/her or by a person with whom he/she conspired. 
(c)  If a person knows that one with whom he/she conspires to commit a crime has conspired with another person to commit the same crime, he/she is guilty of conspiring to commit a crime with the other person, whether or not he/she knows his/her identity. 
(d)  If a person conspires to commit a number of crimes, he/she is guilty of only one (1) conspiracy so long as such multiple crimes are part of a single criminal episode. As used in this section, crime means a violation of any provision of this Code. 
(Code 1962 § 18.10; Code 1971 § 11-11) 
120.010.120 - Issuance of an insufficient funds check. 
    All payments made to the City, the Municipal Court or any other City operation, by check for which the check is returned by the bank upon which it is drawn for reason of insufficient funds or a closed account, shall be considered as if no payment had been made, and the City shall have all remedies which are otherwise available to it for nonpayment. In addition, the City may assess a twenty-five-dollar ($25.00) fee to anyone for each such insufficient funds check. 
(23-93 § 2) 
ARTICLE 120.020 - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS OR PROPERTY 

120.020.010 - Disorderly conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act which constitutes disorderly conduct. A person commits disorderly conduct when he/she knowingly or recklessly: 
(1)  Uses abusive, indecent, profane or vulgar language, and the language by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(2)  Makes an offensive gesture or display, and the gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Makes or causes an excessive or unreasonably loud or offensive noise which causes harm, fright or annoyance to another. 
(Code 1962 § 12.11; Code 1971 § 11-12; 48-96 § 1) 
120.020.011 - Assault. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to strike another person, commit assault upon another person or injure another person. For purposes of this section, assault shall be defined as the knowing, willful or reckless use of force or violence or unlawful touching of another. 
(2-95 § 1) 
120.020.012 - Fighting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fight with another person except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill. 
(2-95 § 1) 
120.020.020 - Harassment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act which constitutes harassment. A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he/she: 
(1)  Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise, by telephone in a manner intended to harass, threatens bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal by telephone which is obscene; 
(2)  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; or 
(3)  Repeatedly insults, taunts or challenges another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response. 
(b)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, obscene means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus or excretory functions. 
(c)  Any act prohibited by Subsections (a)(1) or (a)(2) above may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place at which the telephone call was made or received. 
(Code 1971 § 11-22; 9-94 § 1) 
120.020.030 - Theft. 
    A person commits theft when he/she knowingly obtains retains or exercises control over anything of value of another, the value of which is less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), without authorization, or by threat or deception, or receives, loans money by pawn or pledge on, or disposes of anything of value or belonging to another that he or she knows or believes to have been stolen; and 
(1)  Intends to deprive a person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; 
(3)  Uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use and benefit; 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he/she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring a thing of value to the other person; or 
(5)  Knowingly retains the thing of value more than seventy-two (72) hours after the agreed-upon time of return in any lease or hire agreement. 
(Code 1971 § 11-18; 52-85 § 1; 15-92 § 1; 31-92 § 2; 27-97 § 1; 2-08 § 2; 8-13 § 2) 
120.020.040 - Issuance of bad check. 
(a)  The City Council declares that the issuance and delivery of a known bad check by any person is, in itself, not only harmful to the person to whom it is given but is also injurious to the community at large and is, therefore, a proper subject for criminal sanction without regard to the purpose for which the check was given. 
(b)  Insufficient funds means not having a sufficient balance in an account with a bank or other drawee for the payment of a check or order when presented for payment within thirty (30) days after issuance. 
(c)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he/she issues or passes a check or similar sight order for the payment of money, in an amount less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), knowing that the issuer does not have sufficient funds in or on deposit with the bank or other drawee for the payment in full of the check or order, as well as all other checks or orders outstanding at the time of issuance. 
(d)  This Section does not relieve the prosecution from the necessity of establishing the required knowledge by evidence. However, for purposes of this section, the issuer's knowledge of insufficient funds is presumed, except in the case of a postdated check or order, if: 
(1)  He/she has no account with the bank or other drawee at the time he/she issues the check or order; or 
(2)  He/she has insufficient funds upon deposit with the bank or other drawee to pay the check or order, on presentation within thirty (30) days after issue. 
(e)  A bank shall not be civilly or criminally liable for releasing information relating to the issuer's account to a sheriff, deputy sheriff, undersheriff, police officer, City Attorney, assistant City Attorney or authorized investigator for a City Attorney investigating or prosecuting a charge under this section. 
(35-83 § 1; 52-85 § 3; 15-92 § 2; 31-98 § 1; 2-08 § 2) 
120.020.050 - Defrauding coin machines. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to insert or attempt to insert into the coin box or any receptacle of any coin-operated machine, device or parking meter, any slug, button or other article or substance, or to manipulate or operate in any manner whatsoever any mechanism or device connected or commonly used therewith, in an attempt to obtain goods, service or time therefrom without proper payment for the same. 
(Code 1962 § 18.20; Code 1971 § 11-24) 
120.020.060 - Throwing of objects. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone, snowball or other object at any building, vehicle, tree or other public or private property or at any person within the City, if: 
(1)  The actor has the intent to injure any person or to injure, deface or soil any personal or real property; or 
(2)  The actor should have reasonably foreseen that his/her acts would injure a person or injure, deface or soil any real or personal property. 
(Code 1962 § 18.23; Code 1971 § 11-26; 31-98 § 2) 
120.020.070 - Criminal mischief. 
    Any person who knowingly damages the real or personal property of one (1) or more other persons in the course of a single criminal episode where the aggregate damage to the real or personal property is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) commits the crime of criminal mischief. 
(Code 1971 § 11-19; 52-85 § 2; 15-92 § 3; 31-98 § 3; 2-08 § 2) 
120.020.075 - Criminal tampering. 
    Any person who knowingly tampers with the property of another with the foreseeable result of causing injury, inconvenience or annoyance to that person or to another is guilty of criminal tampering. 
(31-98 § 4) 
120.020.080 - Damaging City property. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to injure, deface or interfere with any property belonging to the City without proper authority to do so from the City Council. 
(Code 1971 § 11-25; 31-98 § 5) 
120.020.090 - Trespass. 
    A person commits the crime of criminal trespass if he/she unlawfully enters or remains upon premises or if he/she enters or remains in or upon premises after having been requested to leave by a person in charge or control thereof. As used in this section, premises means automobiles and other vehicles, real property, buildings and other improvements thereon and the stream banks and beds of any nonnavigable fresh water streams flowing through such real property. 
(Code 1971 § 11-20; 31-98 § 6) 
120.020.100 - Unauthorized habitation, camping and sleeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to take up temporary or permanent residence or habitation, to camp out or to sleep any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in any of the following locations: 
(1)  In or upon any vacant building or property without owning the same or without the permission of the owner or the person entitled to possession thereof. 
(2)  In or upon any street, alley, public parking lot, public park or any other public area within the City. 
(3)  In any vehicle parked upon any street, alley, public parking lot, public park or any other public area within the City. 
(30-85) 
ARTICLE 120.030 - MISCELLANEOUS CRIMINAL OFFENSES 

120.030.010 - Carrying concealed weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wear under his/her clothes or conceal about his/her person, or to display in a threatening manner or flourish any dangerous or deadly weapon. This Section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer of any governmental unit in the performance of his/her duties. For purposes of this section, dangerous or deadly weapon means any firearm, knife, bludgeon or other weapon, device, instrument, material or substance, whether animate or inanimate, which in the manner it is used or intended to be used is capable of producing death or serious bodily injury. 
(Code 1962 § 18.1; Code 1971 § 11-1) 
120.030.015 - Illegal weapons; possession. 
    Any person who knowingly possesses an illegal weapon within the City commits a misdemeanor. For purposes of this section, illegal weapon means a blackjack, gas gun, metallic knuckles, gravity knife or switchblade knife. 
(31-98 § 7) 
120.030.020 - Discharge of weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer in the performance of his/her duties, to fire or discharge within the City any weapon of any description, including, but not limited to, revolvers, pistols, shotguns, rifles, air guns, gas-operated guns, spring guns or bows, whether they are used as weapons or toys. This Section shall not apply to persons discharging such weapons in defense of person or property, nor shall it apply to persons discharging weapons upon a supervised marksmanship range approved by the Chief of Police. 
(Code 1962 § 18.2; Code 1971 § 11-2; 31-98 § 8) 
120.030.021 - Forfeiture of weapons. 
    Upon the motion of the City Attorney after the conviction of a defendant or entry of a plea of guilty by the defendant, the Municipal Court may order the forfeiture of any weapons which were used by the defendant during the course of the criminal episode which gave rise to said conviction as an element of sentencing or as a condition of a suspended or deferred sentence. Weapons forfeited under this section shall be disposed of by the Chief of Police in accordance with applicable law. 
(12-94 § 1; 31-98 § 9) 
120.030.030 - Firearms prohibited in drinking establishments. 
    Except for law enforcement officers pursuing their official duties, no person shall possess or carry a firearm in any establishment licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages or fermented malt liquor for on-the-premises consumption. 
(Code 1971 § 11.17.1) 
120.030.031 - Firearms prohibited in public places. 
    Except for law enforcement officers pursuing their official duties, it shall be unlawful for any person to posses a firearm in any public building or other public place where there are signs posted prohibiting the open carrying of firearms. 
(12-03, § 2) 
120.030.040 - Impersonating an officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely pretend to be a police officer and perform any act in that pretended capacity. 
(Code 1962 § 18.7; Code 1971 § 11-8; 31-98 § 10) 
120.030.050 - Duty to aid police officer. 
    It shall be the duty of all persons, when called upon by any police officer, to promptly aid and assist such officer in the discharge of his/her duties. 
(Code 1962 § 9.4; Code 1971 § 11-3) 
120.030.060 - Resisting arrest. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent or attempt to prevent a peace officer acting under color of his/her official authority from effecting an arrest of the actor or another by: 
(1)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the police officer or another; or 
(2)  Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing bodily injury to the police officer or another. 
(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the peace officer was attempting to make an arrest which was in fact unlawful if the police officer was acting under the color of his/her official authority and, in attempting to make the arrest, he/she was not resorting to unreasonable or excessive force giving rise to the right of self-defense. A police officer acts "under color of his/her official authority" when, in the regular course of his/her assigned duties, he/she is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made by him/her. 
(c)  The term police officer as used in this section means a police officer in uniform; or, if out of uniform, one who has identified himself/herself by exhibiting his/her credentials as a police officer to the person whose arrest is attempted. 
(Code 1962 § 18.3; Code 1971 § 11-4; 2-93 § 1) 
120.030.061 - Obstructing a police officer. 
(a)  A person commits obstructing a police officer when, by using or threatening to use violence, force or physical interference or an obstacle, he/she knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace by a police officer acting under color of his/her official authority. 
(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the police officer was acting in an illegal manner, if he/she was acting under color of his/her official authority. 
(2-93 § 2) 
120.030.062 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 28-01, § 1, repealed § 120.030.062, which pertained to false reporting to authorities and derived from Ord. No. 10-00 § 1. 
120.030.070 - Drinking in public areas. 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsection (b) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic beverage, as defined in C.R.S. § 12-47-103, as amended, in or about any public street, alley, road, highway, bridge, sidewalk, park, trail, vehicle, automobile parking lot, other publicly owned property, or property commonly or generally held out as open to the public for commercial purposes that is located within the City limits. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the prohibition in Subsection (a) above, persons of legal age may publicly drink or consume alcoholic beverages consistent with the following: 
(1)  In any establishment and premises licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, and only during such licensed hours; 
(2)  Fermented malt beverages and wine may be consumed in park lands designated in Section 090.030.010 hereof; and 
(3)  Pursuant to a special events permit granted pursuant to state law or where a permit to use a City-owned recreation facility has been granted for the purpose of conducting a private party at which guests may attend by invitation only and at which there is no sale of ethyl alcohol, direct or indirect. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume or permit the drinking or consumption of alcoholic beverages in violation of Subsections (a) and (b) above. 
(d)  During any trial for a violation of this section, any bottle, can or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of an alcoholic beverage. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol," or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can or other container was composed in whole or in part of an alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1971 § 11-16; 31-96 § 1; 18-05 § 2; 18-05 § 2; Ord. No. 9-2017 , § 2, 6-1-2017) 
120.030.071 - Owners/employees responsible for reporting disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Any liquor licensee or, in his/her absence, any employee, shall immediately report to the Police Department any unlawful or disorderly act or conduct committed on the licensed premises. The failure to report any unlawful or disorderly act or conduct shall be considered a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in Section 010.020.080. 
(b)  The term disorderly act or conduct is as defined in Section 120.020.010 of this Title. 
(c)  The term immediately shall mean presently; without delay. 
(8-94 § 1; 31-98 § 11) 
120.030.080 - Possession of open containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his/her possession any open container of an alcoholic beverage in or about any public street, alley, road, highway, bridge, sidewalk, park, trail, vehicle, automobile parking lot, other publicly owned property, or property commonly or generally held out as open to the public for commercial purposes that is located within the City limits. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the prohibition in Subsection (a) above, persons of legal age may have in his/her possession any open container consistent with the following: 
(1)  In any establishment and premises licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, and only during such licensed hours; 
(2)  Fermented malt beverages and wine, in park lands designated in Section 090.030.010 hereof; 
(3)  Pursuant to a special events permit granted pursuant to state law or where a permit to use a City-owned recreation facility has been granted for the purpose of conducting a private party at which guests may attend by invitation only and at which there is no sale of ethyl alcohol, direct or indirect; and 
(4)  One container, having not more than 750 milliliters volume, of partially consumed vinous liquor purchased from a licensed premises and resealed, as provided under C.R.S. § 12-47-421. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, open container means any container or receptacle used for holding an alcohol beverage, which container or receptacle is not corked or sealed with any stub, stopper or cap. 
(d)  During any trial for a violation of subsection (a) of this section, any bottle, can or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of an alcoholic beverage. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can or other container as "beer," "ale," "malt beverage," "fermented malt beverage," "malt liquor," "wine," "champagne," "whiskey" or "whisky," "gin," "vodka," "tequila," "schnapps," "brandy," "cognac," "liqueur," "cordial," "alcohol," or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can or other container was composed in whole or in part of an alcoholic beverage. 
(31-92 § 3; 48-95 § 1; 31-96 § 2; 31-98 § 12; 18-05 § 2; Ord. No. 9-2017 , § 3, 6-1-2017) 
120.030.090 - Possession and use of marijuana. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a quantity of marijuana of not more than two (2) ounces. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to openly or publicly display, consume or use a quantity of marijuana of not more than two (2) ounces. 
(c)  Marijuana means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or its resin. It does not include fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant or sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination if these items exist apart from any other item defined as marijuana in this subsection. Marijuana does not include marijuana concentrate as defined in C.R.S. § 12-22-303, as amended. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person who possesses or uses marijuana pursuant to C.R.S. §§ 18-18-406(10) and (11) 
(e)  Transferring or dispensing not more than two (2) ounces of marijuana from one (1) person to another for no consideration shall be deemed possession and not dispensing or sale of marijuana except as provided in C.R.S. § 18-18-106(7), as amended. 
(Code 1971 § 11-21; 36-96 § 1; 31-98 § 13; 7-12 § 2) 
120.030.091 - Control of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions . 
    Controlled substance means a drug or other substance or an immediate precursor which is declared to be a controlled substance, and also includes marijuana, marijuana concentrate and cocaine. 
    Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the laws of the City. 
(b)  Drug paraphernalia; determination, considerations . In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the Municipal Court, in its discretion, may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
(3)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
(4)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, or evidence that such person reasonably should know, that it will be delivered to persons who he/she knows or reasonably should know, could use the object to facilitate a violation of this section; 
(5)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object which explain or depict its use; 
(6)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
(7)  National or local advertising concerning its use; 
(8)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(9)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a supplier of like or related items to the community for legal purposes, such as an authorized distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(10)  The existence and scope of legal uses for the object in the community; and 
(11)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(c)  Penalty for possession of drug paraphernalia . 
(1)  A person commits possession of drug paraphernalia if he/she possesses drug paraphernalia and knows or reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia could be used under circumstances in violation of the laws of this City. 
(2)  Any person found guilty of possession of drug paraphernalia commits a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Penalty for manufacture, sale, or delivery of drug paraphernalia . Any person who sells or delivers, possesses with intent to sell or deliver or manufactures with intent to sell or deliver equipment, products or materials knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that such equipment, products or materials could be used as drug paraphernalia commits a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Penalty for advertisement of drug paraphernalia . Any person who places an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication and who intends thereby to promote the sale in the City of equipment, products or materials designed and intended for use as drug paraphernalia commits a misdemeanor. 
(Ad 22-94 §1; A 36-96 §2; A 31-98 §14) 
120.030.092 - Possession of tobacco products by minor and furnishing or selling cigarettes or tobacco products to minors prohibited. 
(a)  Except as provided in Subsection (f) below, any person who knowingly furnishes to any person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, by gift, sale or any other means, any cigarettes or tobacco products, commits a misdemeanor; and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in Section 010.020.080. It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section that the person furnishing the tobacco product was presented and reasonably relied upon a document which identified the person receiving the tobacco product as being eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(b)  Any person who is under eighteen (18) years of age and who possesses, purchases or acquires any cigarettes or tobacco products commits a misdemeanor; and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in Section 010.020.080, or the court shall allow such person to perform community service and be granted credit against the fine and court costs. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term tobacco product means any product that contains nicotine or tobacco or is derived from tobacco and is intended to be ingested or inhaled by or applied to the skin of an individual or any electronic device that can be used to deliver nicotine to the person inhaling from the device, including but not limited to an electronic cigarette, cigars, cigarillo or pipe. 
(d)  Any person who sells or offers to sell any cigarettes or tobacco products, as defined above, over the counter or by use of a vending machine or other coin-operated machine commits a misdemeanor; and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in Section 010.020.080; except that cigarettes may be sold at retail through vending machines only in: 
(1)  Factories, businesses, offices or other places not open to the general public; 
(2)  Places to which persons under the age of eighteen (18) years are not permitted access; or 
(3)  Places where the vending machine is under the direct supervision of the owner of the establishment or an adult employee of the owner, including but not limited to, establishments holding a valid liquor license issued pursuant to C.R.S. Article 47 of Title 12. As used in this section, under direct supervision means the vending machine shall be in plain vision of the employee or owner during regular business hours. 
It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this subsection that the person selling or offering to sell the tobacco product was presented with and reasonably relied upon a document which identified the person purchasing the tobacco product as being eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(e)  Any person who sells or offers to sell any cigarettes or tobacco products shall display a warning sign as specified in this subsection. Any person who fails to display said warning sign commits a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in Section 010.020.080. Said warning sign shall be displayed in a prominent place in the building and on such machine at all times and shall have a minimum height of three (3) inches and a width of six (6) inches, and shall read as follows: 
WARNING 
IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER 
EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE TO PURCHASE 
CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS 
AND, UPON CONVICTION, A FINE 
MAY BE IMPOSED. 
Any violation of the provisions of this subsection shall not constitute a violation of any other provisions of this section. 
(f)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in Subsection (b) above that the cigarettes or tobacco products were possessed or consumed by a person under eighteen (18) years of age under the following circumstances: 
(1)  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property and the cigarettes or tobacco products were possessed with the consent of his/her parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession. 
(2)  For purposes of this subsection, private property shall mean any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person or natural persons for habitation and which is not open to the public and privately real property which is not open to the public. Private property shall not include: 
a.  Any establishment which sells cigarettes or tobacco products or upon which cigarettes or tobacco products are sold; or 
b.  Any establishment which leases, rents or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. 
(21-94 § 1; 31-98 § 15) 
120.030.093 - Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. 
(a)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  "Establishment" means a business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal organization, club, institution, entity, group, or residence, and any real property, including buildings and improvements, connected therewith, and shall also include any members, employees, and occupants associated therewith. 
(2)  "Ethyl alcohol" means any substance which is or contains ethyl alcohol. 
(3)  "Possession of ethyl alcohol" means that a person has or holds any amount of ethyl alcohol anywhere on his person, or that a person owns or has custody of ethyl alcohol, or has ethyl alcohol within his immediate presence and control. 
(4)  "Private property" means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person or natural persons for habitation and which is not open to the public and privately owned real property which is not open to the public. "Private property" shall not include: 
a.  Any establishment which has or is required to have a license pursuant to C.R.S. Article 46, 47, or 48 of title 12; or 
b.  Any establishment which sells ethyl alcohol or upon which ethyl alcohol is sold; or 
c.  Any establishment which leases, rents, or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. 
(b)  (1)  Any person under twenty-one (21) years of age who possesses or consumes ethyl alcohol anywhere in the state of Colorado commits illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person. Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person is a strict liability offense. 
(2)  Illegal possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol by an underage person shall be a misdemeanor and punishable in accordance with Section 010.020.080 of this Code. The court, upon sentencing a defendant pursuant to this paragraph (b), may, in addition to any fine, order that the defendant perform useful public service, and may further order that the defendant submit to and complete an alcohol evaluation or assessment, an alcohol education program, or an alcohol treatment program at such defendant's own expense. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in subsection (2) of this section that the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age under the following circumstances: 
(1)  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property and the ethyl alcohol was possessed or consumed with the consent of his parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; or 
(2)  When the existence of ethyl alcohol in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of a confectionery which contained ethyl alcohol within the limits prescribed by C.R.S. § 25-5-410 (1) (i) (II); or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed, or intended primarily for a purpose other than oral human ingestion; or the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed, or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes; or solely from the ingestion of a beverage which contained less than one-half (1/2 of one (1) percent of ethyl alcohol by weight. 
(d)  The possession or consumption of ethyl alcohol shall not constitute a violation of this section if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the first amendment to the United States constitution. 
(e)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of Subsection (2) of this section shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and possessed or consumed ethyl alcohol anywhere in this state; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with ethyl alcohol intoxication or impairment while present anywhere in this state. 
(f)  During any trial for a violation of Subsection (2) of this section, any bottle, can, or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can, or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can, or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can, or other container were composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can, or other container as "beer", "ale", "malt beverage", "fermented malt beverage", "malt liquor", "wine", "champagne", "whiskey" or "whisky", "gin", "vodka", "tequila", "schnapps", "brandy", "cognac", "liqueur", "cordial", "alcohol", or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can, or other container was composed in whole or in part of ethyl alcohol. 
(g)  A parent or legal guardian of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age or any natural person who has the permission of such parent or legal guardian may give or permit the possession and consumption of ethyl alcohol to or by a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years under the conditions described in paragraph (a) of subsection (3) of this section. This subsection (7) shall not be construed to permit any establishment which is or is required to be licensed pursuant to C.R.S. Article 46, 47, or 48 of Title 12, or any members, employees, or occupants of any such establishment to give, provide, make available, or sell ethyl alcohol to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(h)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any statutory or home rule municipality from enacting any ordinance which prohibits persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years from possessing or consuming ethyl alcohol, which ordinance is at least as restrictive or more restrictive than this section. 
(i)  The qualitative result of an alcohol test or tests shall be admissible at the trial of any person charged with a violation of subsection (2) of this section upon a showing that the device or devices used to conduct such test or tests have been approved as accurate in detecting alcohol by the executive director of the department of public health and environment. 
(j)  Official records of the department of public health and environment relating to the certification of breath test instruments, certification of operators and operator instructors of breath test instruments, certification of standard solutions, and certification of laboratories shall be official records of the state. Copies of such records, attested by the executive director of the department of public health and environment or his deputy and accompanied by a certificate bearing the official seal for said department, which state that the executive director of the department has custody of such records, shall be admissible in all courts of record and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the information contained in such records. The official seal of the department described in this subsection (12) may consist of a rubber stamp producing a facsimile of the seal stamped upon the document. 
(k)  In any judicial proceeding in any court of this state concerning a charge under subsection two (2) of this section, the court shall take judicial notice of methods of testing a person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of alcohol and of the design and operation of devices certified by the department of public health and environment for testing a person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of alcohol. This subsection (13) shall not prevent the necessity of establishing during a trial that the testing devices were working properly and that such testing devices were properly operated. Nothing in this subsection (13) shall preclude a defendant from offering evidence concerning the accuracy of testing devices. 
(1-04 § 1) 
120.030.100 - Excreting in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any public street, upon any public sidewalk, in any other public place, in any public vehicle or in any store, assembly hall, corridor or other place open to or used by the public except rest rooms and toilets which are provided for this purpose. 
(Code 1971 § 11-14) 
120.030.110 - Loitering and other acts prohibited in or about schools. 
(a)  As used in this section, the word school shall refer to any public, private or parochial school or college or any building of such school. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to annoy, disturb or otherwise prevent the orderly conduct of classes and activities of any school. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to annoy, disturb, assault or molest any student or employee of any school while in any such school or college building or on any school or college grounds. 
(Code 1971 § 11-27; A 31-98 § 16) 
120.030.120 - Disturbing, obstructing meetings, processions, gatherings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person with the intent to prevent or disrupt any lawful meeting, procession or gathering to significantly obstruct or interfere with the meeting, procession or gathering by physical action, verbal utterance or any other means. 
(Code 1962 § 18.9; Code 1971 § 11-10) 
120.030.130 - False reporting to authorities. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in false reporting to authorities. A person commits false reporting to authorities if: 
(1)  He/she knowingly causes a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be transmitted to or in any official or volunteer fire department, ambulance service or any other government agency which deals with emergencies involving danger to life or property; 
(2)  He/she makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern when he/she knows that it did not occur; 
(3)  He/she makes a report or knowingly causes the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities pretending to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when he/she knows that he/she has no such information, or knows that the information is false; or 
(4)  He/she knowingly provides false identifying information to law enforcement authorities. Identifying information means a person's name, address, birth date, social security number, driver's license or Colorado identification number. 
(28-01 § 2) 
120.030.140 - Mufflers-Prevention of noise. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle subject to registration and operated within the city shall at all times be equipped with an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly maintained. 
(b)  Any commercial vehicle subject to registration and operated on a highway, that is equipped with an engine compression brake device, is required to have a muffler. 
(c)  A muffler is a device consisting of a series of chamber or baffle plates or other mechanical design for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine and effective in reducing noise. 
(d)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section commits a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Any person who violates subsection (b) of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(e)  This section shall not apply to electric motor vehicles. 
(7-03 § 2) 
120.030.150 - Unlawful solicitation. 
(a)  Definitions . 
(1)  "Solicit" means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(2)  "Aggressive manner" means and includes: 
a.  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
b.  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is: (1) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or (2) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
c.  Continuing to solicit within five (5) feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is (1) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or (2) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
d.  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to Article 050.030.010 of the Municipal Code, shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
e.  Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures: (1) intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or (2) words intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate the person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; or 
f.  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that: (1) is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or (2) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
(b)  Prohibited acts . It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value, or to solicit the sale of goods or services: 
(1)  In an aggressive manner in a public area; 
(2)  In any public transportation vehicle, bus, station or stop; 
(3)  Within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing businesses or within fifteen (15) feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; and 
(5)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicle's windows, or for block, occupying, or reserving a public parking space, or directing the occupant to a public parking space; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(6)  Within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection on public right-of-way unless such person has obtained a license to do business and a license to encroach, both issued by the City. 
(c)  Penalties . A violation of this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed one (1) year, or by both. 
(d)  Construction and severability . 
(1)  Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this Section 120.030.150. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Section 120.030.150 is held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such judgment shall in no way affect or impair the validity of the remaining portions of this Section 120.030.150. 
(2)  This Section 120.030.150 is not intended to prescribe any demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered. 
(53-85, § 1; 31-98, § 17; 28-01, § 2; 9-03 § 2; 16-04, § 2) 
ARTICLE 120.040 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

120.040.010 - Model Traffic Code adopted. 
(a)  Adoption. Pursuant to C.R.S. Parts 1 and 2 of Article 16 of Title 31, as amended, and for the purposes of regulating vehicles and traffic within the City, there is hereby adopted by reference the 2010 edition of the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities," promulgated and published as such by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch. 
(b)  Application. This Article shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park and every other public way, public place or public parking area, either within or outside the corporate limits of the City, the use of which the City has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. The provisions of Sections 606, 1206, 1208, 1211, 1401, 1402, and 1413 and Part 16 of the adopted Model Traffic Code, respectively concerning unauthorized devices, unattended motor vehicles, parking privileges for persons with disabilities, limitations on backing, reckless driving, careless driving, and eluding police officers shall apply not only to public places and ways but also throughout the City. (A 2-11, §2) 
(c)  Conflicts. If the provisions of the Model Traffic Code, 2010 Revision, as adopted in this article, conflict with any other provisions of this Municipal Code, then other provisions of this Municipal Code shall control to the extent allowed by law. 
(d)  Interpretation. This Article shall be so interpreted and constructed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the State's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles and traffic. Article and section headings of this article and adopted Model Traffic Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(e)  How cited. The Model Traffic Code, as adopted in this article, may be known and cited as the Model Traffic Code, and may be cited as the MTC. 
(f)  Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the Model Traffic Code. 
(g)  Copies. Copies of the Model Traffic Code, as adopted by this article, are available for inspection in the office of the City Clerk at 101 W. 8 th Street, Glenwood Springs, Colorado. 
(5-96 § 1; 16-03, § 2; 2-11, § 2) 
120.040.020 - Additions, deletions, or modifications to Model Traffic Code. 
    The following sections of the Model Traffic Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Part 1 Section 109 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of a new subsection (14) as follows: 
"Section 109(14). Low-Power Scooters, Animals, Skis, Skates, Toy Vehicles and All-Terrain Recreational Vehicles on Highways. 
"(14) Skating and Skateboarding Prohibited on Pedestrian Bridge. It shall be unlawful for any person to travel upon the Colorado River pedestrian/bicycle bridge on skates, skateboards or similar devices. For purposes of this section, the Colorado River pedestrian/bicycle bridge is defined to include any and all portions of the bridge existing and in place (easterly of the Colorado Highway 82 bridge), including all ramps, approaches, landings and stairways appurtenant thereto." 
(2)  Part 6, Subsection 225(3) of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended as follows: 
(3) Any person who violates subsection (1) of this section commits a class B traffic infraction. Any person who violates subsection 1.5 of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars $500.00). 
(3)  Part 6, Section 603 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of subsection (6) as follows: 
"Section 603(6). Obedience to Official Traffic Control Devices. 
"(5) Obedience to Turn Prohibition Signs. Whenever official signs are erected prohibiting or restricting a right or left turn, a U-turn or all turns, as authorized in Section 601, no driver shall disobey the directions of any such sign. Whenever an official sign prohibits right turns by oversized vehicles, the term "oversized vehicle" shall mean any vehicle which, due to excessive length or limitations in turning radius, is incapable of executing a right turn in the extreme right hand lane lawfully available to traffic without breaching the adjacent curb or shoulder and without encroaching into oncoming lanes of traffic." 
(4)  Part 6, Section 614 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended, as follows: 
"Section 614. Designation of Highway Maintenance, Repair or Construction Zones - Signs - Increase in Penalties for Speeding Violations. 
"(1) If maintenance, repair or construction activities are occurring or will be occurring within four hours on a state highway or municipal street, the Department of Transportation or municipal authorities, within their respective jurisdictions, may designate such portion of the highway as a highway maintenance, repair or construction zone. Any person who commits a speeding violation in a maintenance, repair or construction zone that is designated pursuant to the provisions of this section is subject to increased penalties and surcharges. 
"(2) The Department of Transportation or municipal authorities, within their respective jurisdictions, shall designate by appropriate signs that a maintenance, repair or construction activity is taking place within four hours. Such sign shall notify the public that increased penalties for speeding violations are in effect in such zone. Local authorities shall erect or place a second sign after such zone indicating that the increased penalties for speeding violations are no longer in effect. A maintenance, repair or construction zone begins at the location of the sign indicating that increased penalties are in effect and ends at the location of the sign indicating that the increased penalties are no longer in effect. 
"(3) Signs used for designating the beginning and end of a maintenance, construction or repair zone shall conform to Department of Transportation requirements. The Department of Transportation or local authority may display such signs on any fixed, variable or moveable stand. The Department of Transportation or local authority may place such a sign on a moving vehicle if required for certain activities, including, but not limited to, highway painting work." 
(5)  Part 6, Section 615 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended, as follows: 
"(1) Any person who commits a moving traffic violation in a school zone is subject to double penalties and surcharges. 
"(2) For the purposes of this section, "School Zone" means an area that is properly designated by the City as a school zone and has appropriate signs posted indicating that the penalties and surcharges will be doubled. 
"(3) This Section does not apply if the penalty and surcharge for a violation has been doubled pursuant to section 614 of this Code or C.R.S. § 42-4-614 because such violation also occurred within a highway maintenance, repair or construction zone." 
(6)  Part 11, Section 1102 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of a subsection (8) to read as follows: 
"Section 1102(8). Altering of Speed Limits - When. 
"(8) It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the prima facie speed hereinbefore set forth is greater than reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon certain streets and intersections described in traffic control schedules herein or otherwise recorded, as provided in Sections 1101 and 1102 of this Model Traffic Code, and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit upon every street and intersection so designated shall be as stated in said schedules or records, which speed so declared shall be effective when signs are erected giving notice thereof; provided, however, that decreased speed limits on streets which are a part of the state highway system shall be subject to the approval of the said Department of Highways, as specified in Section 1102(4) of this Model Traffic Code." 
(7)  Part 12 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of Section 1203 as follows: 
"Section 1203. Abandoned, Junked, Dismantled and Wrecked Motor Vehicles. 
"(1) Short Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the 'Inoperable Vehicle Ordinance.' 
"(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
"(a) 'Vehicle' is any vehicle which is designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to automobiles, buses, motor-bikes., motorcycles., motorscooters, trucks, tractors, campers, motor homes and trailers. 
"(i) 'Inoperable vehicle' is any vehicle, as defined by subsection (a) above, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto unexpired license plates, or the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. 
"(ii) Exemption: 'Inoperable vehicle,' as used in this section, shall not include: vehicles exempt from registration under the laws of the State of Colorado and specifically including those vehicles exempted by C.R.S. § 42-3-103, as the same may be now or hereafter amended; vehicles defined and registered as 'collector's items,' pursuant to C.R.S. § 2-12-101, et seq., as the same may be now or hereafter amended; and special interest vehicles. Special interest vehicles shall include, but shall not be limited to, racing vehicles, stock cars, classic and antique cars, all of which special interest vehicles shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
"(b) 'Person' shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
"(c) 'Public property' shall mean any alley, street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. 
"(3) Storing, Parking or Leaving Inoperable, Dismantled or Other Such Vehicles Prohibited; and Declared Nuisance; Exceptions. No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any vehicle of any kind which is in an inoperable, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled rusted, junked or partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any public property within the City for a period of time in excess of seventy-two (72) hours. The presence of an inoperable, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof, in public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
"(4) Notice to Remove. Whenever it comes to the attention of the Police Department that any vehicle is an inoperable vehicle as defined in Section (a)(i) above, and is therefore a nuisance, a written notice shall be affixed to the vehicle where the nuisance exists requiring its removal. In the event said vehicle, after the Police Department has affixed written notice, has not been moved for a period of seventy-two (72) hours, said vehicle shall be subject to being towed by the Police Department and impounded. Within five (5) days after the vehicle has been towed, the Police Department shall send a written letter to the registered owner of said vehicle advising them that the vehicle has been towed and stored in the impound lot or other location and that such vehicle shall be disposed of in accordance with law on a specific date. 
"(5) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as set forth in Section 010.020.080 of the Municipal Code. Each act in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense." 
(8)  Part 12, Section 1205 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of subsections 1205(5) and (6) to read as follows: 
"Section 1205(5) Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited. 
"(5) No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway for the purpose of: 
"(a) Displaying such vehicle for sale; 
"(b) Greasing, painting, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency; or 
"(c) Displaying advertising. 
"Section 1206(6) Parking of Certain Vehicles for More than two Hours; Seventy-two Consecutive Hours Adjacent to Dwelling; Parking Permit for Storage of Construction Vehicles. 
"(6) (a) Parking of Certain Vehicles. 
"(1) Definitions. 
"a. Certain Vehicles. Any 'bus,' 'commercial vehicle,' 'road machinery,' 'trailer,' 'trailer coach' or 'mobile home,' 'truck tractor,' 'semitrailer,' as defined by the Model Traffic Code. 
"b. The term 'construction equipment' shall mean, 'trailers regardless of design which am used primarily for construction; excavation equipment, backhoes, dump trucks, bulldozers, graders, front-end loaders, trackhoes, asphalt kettles and dumpsters.' 
"c. Park. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than very briefly for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers. 
"(2) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to park certain vehicles, any trailer having an empty weight of more than 250 pounds which is capable of carrying recreational vehicles such as ski-mobiles or motorcycles, and trucks exceeding six thousand (6,000) pounds empty weight, or a self-contained motor home with its own motive power exceeding twenty-two feet overall length for an aggregate period of time longer than two (2) hours during any given twenty-four-hour period upon any street, alley, municipal parking lot, parkland or other public place. 
"(b) Exception - Parking Adjacent to Dwelling. A person may park on a public street, alley or other public place, certain vehicles, any trailer having an empty weight of more than 250 pounds which is capable of carrying recreational vehicles such as ski-mobiles or motorcycles, hand trucks exceeding six thousand (6,000) pounds empty weight, or a self-contained motorhome with its own motive power, exceeding twenty-two (22) feet in overall length, adjacent to a dwelling occupied by the owner of the noncommercial recreational vehicle or his/her invitee, for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) consecutive hours during any thirty-consecutive-day period. 
"(c) Safety Hazard. If a determination is made by the traffic engineer, upon receipt of a written complaint, that the parking of the types of vehicle as set forth in this section obstructs the flow of traffic, or is a safety hazard for whatever reason, it shall be unlawful to park such vehicles upon any street, alley, municipal parking lot, parkland or other public place. The traffic engineer shall post notice on said vehicle and by certified letter to the registered owner of such vehicle, giving such owner three (3) calendar days from the date of such notice to move said vehicle. In the event said vehicle is not moved, the Police Department shall have the authority to issue a ticket for violation of this section and have said vehicle towed at the owner's expense. 
"(d) Parking of Construction Equipment. 
"1. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to park construction equipment on any public street, alley, municipal parking lot, parkland or other public place. 
"2. Exception - Permit. A person may park construction equipment on a public street, alley, municipal parking lot, parkland or other public place if such person has obtained a parking permit, at the time of issuance of a building permit, which shall state that identified construction equipment shall be allowed to be parked on the street directly adjacent to the address on the building permit during the period of active construction. 
"3. Safety Hazard. If it is the determination of the traffic engineer, upon receipt of a written complaint, that construction equipment parked pursuant to permit conflicts with other traffic or creates a safety hazard for whatever reason, it shall be unlawful to park such construction equipment upon any street, alley, municipal parking lot, parkland or other public place, and any parking permit issued for said location shall be deemed revoked. The traffic engineer and police department shall follow the procedures set forth in (c)." 
(9)  Part 12, of the Model Traffic Code is amended by the addition of Section 1212 to read as follows: 
"Section 1212. Parking Permits. The City Council may provide by resolution for parking permits granting exemption from time parking regulations on such terms and conditions and for such fees as Council may determine appropriate from time to time." 
(10)  Part 12, of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of Section 1213 (1) and (2) to read as follows: 
"Section 1213(1) Notice on Illegally Parked Vehicles. 
"(1) Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by the ordinances of the City of Glenwood Springs, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a penalty assessment notice directing the driver thereof to respond to and answer the charge against him or her at a place and at a time specified in said notice. 
"Section 1213(2) Failure to Comply with Notice on Parked Vehicle. 
"(2) If the driver or owner of an unattended motor vehicle charged with an apparent violation of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under the traffic ordinances of the City of Glenwood Springs does not respond within the time specified to a penalty assessment notice affixed to such vehicle, as provided in section 1210(2) hereof, by appearance and payment at the City of Glenwood Springs Municipal Court; by mailing payment by means of the United States Mail; or by disposition of the charge as provided by law, the clerk of said court or the Parking Enforcement Officer shall send another notice by mail to the registered owner of the vehicle to which the original notice was affixed." 
(11)  Part 12, Section 1204 is hereby amended by the addition of subsections (9) and (10) to read as follows: 
"Section 1204(9). Parking Not to Obstruct Traffic or Maintenance. 
"(a) No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or highway in such a manner or under such conditions as to interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic or proper street or highway maintenance. 
"(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, farm tractor, any implement of husbandry designed primarily or exclusively for use and used in agricultural operations, or trailer from 4:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. on Grand Avenue from 7th to 10th Street; and on 8th and 9th Streets from Cooper Avenue to Colorado Avenues." 
"Section 1204(10) Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places. 
"(a) On any street or at any place within this municipality where official signs are posted giving notice of stopping, standing or parking restrictions or prohibitions as authorized in C.R.S. § 42-4-111(a) and described in traffic control schedules, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any manner in violation of the provisions contained on such sign or signs except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device or except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers when such standing does not obstruct, impede or endanger any traffic. 
"(b) In any private parking area within this municipality where signs are posted sufficient to inform the public of the parking restrictions thereon and the penalties for violation thereof, where the vehicles properly parking thereon are obviously marked as such in the front driver's side window, and where such signs and markings have first been approved in writing by the City's Chief of Police or his/her designee. The owner of the vehicle in violation of this provision is liable for the payment of the respective fine(s) unless he/she can furnish sufficient evidence that the vehicle was, at the time of the violation, in the care, custody or control of another person. To avoid liability for payment, the owner of the vehicle must provide, within three (3) days after receiving notification of the violation, the City Attorney with the name and address of the person who had care, custody or control of the vehicle at the time of the violation." 
"(c) No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except during the necessary and expeditious loading and unloading of merchandise or freight. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property." 
(13)  Part 14, Section 1408 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of subsection (4) as follows: 
"Section 1408 (4). Traffic Regulations in Parklands. 
"(4) (a) It shall be unlawful for any person operating a vehicle in or upon park lands as established in 090.030.010 of the Municipal Code to fail or refuse to obey all traffic signs or other traffic-control devices regulating the operation, stopping or parking of vehicles. 
"(b) It shall be unlawful for other than authorized personnel to park or drive on lawns, fields or any other places other than upon roadways and parking areas clearly constructed and established for such purposes within the park lands. 
"(c) All traffic ordinances adopted pursuant to this article shall have full application and effect within all park and recreation areas." 
(14)  Part 18, Section 1409 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by deleting subsection (9). 
(15)  Part 18 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended, as follows: 
"Section 1801. Authority to Impound Vehicles: 
"Whenever any police officer finds a motor vehicle, vehicle, cargo or debris, attended or unattended, standing upon any portion of a street or highway right-of-way in such a manner as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or proper street or highway maintenance, such officer is authorized to cause the motor vehicle, vehicle, cargo or debris to be moved to eliminate any such obstruction; and neither the officer, nor anyone acting under the direction of such officer, shall be liable for any damage to such motor vehicle, vehicle, cargo or debris occasioned by such removal. The removal process is intended to clear the obstruction, but such activity should create as little damage as possible to the vehicle or cargo or both. 
"Any police officer who finds a motor vehicle, which officer has reasonable grounds to believe has been abandoned upon any portion of a street or highway right-of-way within the municipality in such a manner or under such conditions as to interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic or proper street or highway maintenance, or left unattended and presumed to be abandoned shall require such motor vehicle to be removed or cause the same to be removed and placed in any impound lot designated or maintained by the City of Glenwood Springs. 
"A motor vehicle shall be considered to be abandoned under the following conditions: 
"(a) Any motor vehicle left unattended on public property, including any portion of a highway right-of-way, within the limits of any incorporated town or city for a period longer than any limit prescribed by any local ordinance concerning the abandonment of motor vehicles or, if there is no such ordinance, for a period of seventy-two hours or longer; 
"(b) Any motor vehicle stored in an impound lot at the request of its owner or the owner's agent or a law enforcement agency and not removed from the impound lot according to the agreement with the owner or agent or within seventy-two hours of the time the law enforcement agency notifies the owner or agent that the vehicle is available for release upon payment of any applicable charges or fees. 
"Section 1802. Impoundment of Vehicles. 
"(a) Notice. Whenever a police officer orders the towing of a vehicle pursuant to C.R.S. § 42-4-1803, the Police Department shall follow the procedures for determination and notification of the owner as set forth in C.R.S. § 42-4-1804. Notification of the owner shall be made upon forms supplied by the Colorado Department of Motor Vehicles pursuant to C.R.S. § 42-4-1804(5), and shall include the following statement: 
"A Police Officer has ordered the towing of your vehicle. If you feel that the impoundment of your vehicle is improper, you have ten (10) days from the date of this notice to file a written request with the Glenwood Springs Municipal Court located at 101 W. 8th Street, for a hearing regarding the propriety of this impoundment. Such hearing shall be scheduled within three (3) days, excluding Saturday, Sunday and City holidays, of the date your written request is received by the Glenwood Springs Municipal Court. The Court shall be empowered to waive the towing and storage fees if it is found that the impoundment was improper. The retrieval of your vehicle from impoundment does not waive your right to a subsequent hearing and reimbursement. In conjunction with a request for a hearing, you are encouraged to also contact the Police Department of the City of Glenwood Springs for purposes of resolving a dispute concerning the impoundment of your vehicle without the necessity of having a formal hearing. 
"(b) Hearing. A hearing shall be conducted before the Glenwood Springs Municipal Court within three (3) days of receipt of a written demand therefor from the person seeking the hearing, unless such person waives the right to a speedy hearing in writing. Saturdays, Sundays and City holidays are to be excluded from the calculation of the three-day period. The sole issue before the Court shall be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. 
"'Probable cause to impound' shall mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that there was sufficient breach of law to grant legal authority for the removal of the vehicle. 
"The Court shall conduct the hearing in an informal manner and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. The person demanding the hearing shall carry the burden of establishing that such person has the right to possession of the vehicle. The City shall carry the burden of establishing that there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. The burden of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. Failure of the registered or legal owner or their agent to request or attend a scheduled post-seizure hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. 
"(c) Reimbursement for Improper Towing. Upon a determination by the court that the subject vehicle was improperly towed, the City shall either fully reimburse the owner of the impounded vehicle for all towing and storage fees paid by the owner or directly pay the towing and storage company for accrued fees. 
"(d) Applicability. The hearing and reimbursement provisions contained in this section shall only be applicable to vehicles which have been impounded by order of a police officer. 
"(e) Compliance with Time Requirements. The requirements contained within this section relating to compliance with time periods are directory in nature. Failure of the City to strictly comply with said time periods shall not cause an automatic forfeiture of the City's rights pursuant to this section. 
"(f) Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles. Vehicles removed from streets or highways and other public property within this municipality and placed in storage as provided in Section 1802(a) shall be disposed of in accordance with one or more of the following methods: 
"(1) By Sealed Bid. The City Manager or his/her designee may sell abandoned vehicles after first advertising them for sale in the official newspaper of the City. 
"All bids shall be sealed and shall be opened in public at a designated time and place. The City Manager or his/her designee may reject all bids and advertise and give notice again. If sold, a vehicle shall be sold for cash, money order or cashier's check to the highest responsible bidder. 
"(2) By Auction. After giving notice as described in paragraph 1802(f)(1), the City Manager or his/her designee may conduct a public auction for the sale of abandoned vehicles. Each vehicle, if sold, shall be for cash, money order or cashier's check to the highest bidder." 
(16)  The Appendix of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition Part H, as follows: 
"Appendix Part H Schedules Adopted. 
"Pursuant to C.R.S. § 42-4-111, the following traffic schedules, as amended from time to time at the discretion of the traffic engineer, are hereby adopted and the noted sections are added to said Model Traffic Code. 
"(Traffic Schedules Available from the Traffic Engineer)" 
(17)  Part 19, Section 1903 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of Subsection (8): 
"(8) Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be subject to doubling of the respective fine." 
(5-96 § 2; 12-97 §§ 1-4; 33-97 § 1; 21-98 § 1; 31-98 § 18; 7-02 § 1; 2-11, § 2; 16-03 § 2) 
120.040.030 - Penalties. 
    The following sections of the Model Traffic Code, as adopted in this article, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Article 1, Part 17, Section 1701 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of subsection (5) as follows: 
"Section 1701. Traffic Offenses Classified - Schedule of Fines. 
"(5) (a) It is a traffic infraction for any person to violate any of the provisions of the Model Traffic Code as adopted and amended herein except for the following Sections which shall remain misdemeanors: 
"(1) 707, Certain vehicles must stop at railroad grade crossings; 
"(2) 1903, School buses - stops - signs - passing; 
"(3) 1101 and 1102, Driving 25 to 39 miles per hour in excess of the reasonable and prudent speed; 
"(4) 1101 and 1102, Driving 40 or more miles per hour over the maximum lawful speed limit; 
"(5) 1105, Speed contest; 
"(6). 1401, Reckless Driving; 
"(7) 1402, Careless Driving; 
"(8) 607, Interference with Official Devices; 
"(9) 1409, Compulsory Insurance; 
"(10) 1413, Eluding or Attempting to Elude a Police Officer; 
" A traffic infraction shall constitute a civil matter. The procedures set forth herein for traffic infractions shall replace and supersede those procedures set forth in Part 17 of the Model Traffic Code. 
"(b) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, traffic infractions shall be subject to a minimum penalty of $15.00 and a maximum penalty of $100.00 which is authorized upon entry of judgment against the defendant. 
"(c) Except as provided in paragraph (d)(3) of this section, every person who is convicted of, who admits liability for, or against whom a judgment is entered for commission of a traffic infraction shall be fined or penalized as set forth in the fee schedule established by City Council; or, if no penalty is specified, the penalty shall be fifteen dollars. Penalties shall apply whether the defendant acknowledges guilt, is found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction or has judgment entered against him/her by the municipal court. 
"The penalty schedule shall not apply when the provisions of paragraph (d)(3) prohibit the issuance of a penalty assessment notice. 
"(d) (1) At any time that a person is charged with the commission of a traffic infraction, the police officer shall, except when the provisions of paragraph (d)(3) prohibit it, give a penalty assessment notice to the defendant. Such penalty assessment notice shall contain all the information required by Section 1709. The police officer shall advise the person cited of the points to be assessed in accordance with applicable state law. The penalty specified in subsection (c) for the violation charged may be paid at the office of the Municipal Court Clerk, either in person or by postmarking such payment within twenty days from the date the penalty assessment notice is served upon the defendant. Acceptance of a penalty assessment notice and payment of the prescribed penalty thereon to the Municipal Court shall be deemed a complete satisfaction for the violation, and the defendant shall be given a receipt which so states when such penalty thereon is paid in currency or other form of legal tender. Checks tendered by the defendant to and accepted by the Municipal Court and on which payment is received by the municipal court shall be deemed sufficient receipt. 
"(2) Should the defendant charged with a traffic infraction accept the notice but fail to post the prescribed penalty thereon within twenty days thereafter, he/she shall be allowed to pay such penalty and surcharge thereon, plus court costs, to the Clerk of the Municipal Court prior to the time for appearance as specified in the notice. If the penalty is not timely paid, the case shall thereafter be heard in the Municipal Court in accordance with applicable Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. In such case, the maximum penalty which may be imposed shall not exceed the penalty set forth in the applicable penalty schedule. (A 11-09 §2) 
"(3) The penalty schedule shall not apply to traffic infractions specified in said schedule when it appears that: 
"a. The alleged violation has caused, or contributed to the cause of, an accident resulting in appreciable damage to property of another or an injury or death to any person; or 
"b. The defendant has, in the course of the same transaction, violated one of the provisions of the Model Traffic Code set forth in said schedule and has also violated one or more provisions of the Model Traffic Code not so specified, and the police officer charges such defendant with two or more violations, any one of which is not specified in said schedule. 
"(4) In all cases where paragraph (d)(3) prohibits the issuance of a penalty assessment notice, the penalty contained in the penalty assessment schedule shall be inapplicable. 
"(e) (1) If a person receives a penalty notice for a violation under Section 1701 herein and such person pays the fine and surcharge for the violation on or before the date the payment is due, the points assessed for the violation are reduced as follows: 
"a. For a violation having an assessment of three or more points, the points are reduced by two points; 
"b. For a violation having an assessment of two points, the points are reduced by one point." 
(2)  Part 17, Section 1705 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of Section 1705, as follows: 
"Section 1705. Traffic Infractions - Municipal Court Jurisdiction. 
"(a) Every hearing upon a traffic infraction shall be held before the Municipal Court pursuant to applicable Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. Whenever an infraction and a misdemeanor are charged in the same summons and complaint, all charges may be adjudicated simultaneously as a criminal matter by the Municipal Court and the Municipal Court Rules and Procedures shall apply. 
"(b) When the Municipal Court determines that a person charged with a misdemeanor is guilty of a lesser included traffic infraction, the court may enter a judgment as to such lesser charge. 
"(c) The burden of proof shall be upon the people, and the Municipal Court shall enter judgment in favor of the defendant unless the people prove the liability of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. The City Attorney may, in his/her discretion, engage in plea discussions and shall represent the City at trials conducted by the Municipal Court on traffic infraction matters. 
"(d) Appeals from judgments of the Municipal Court on traffic infraction matters shall be made in accordance with the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. 
"(e) (1) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, no person against whom a judgment has been entered for a traffic infraction shall collaterally attack the validity of that judgment unless such attack is commenced within six months after the date of entry of the judgment. 
"(2) In recognition of the difficulties attending the litigation of stale claims and the potential for frustrating various statutory provisions at repeat offenders, former offenders and habitual offenders, the only exceptions to the time limitations specified in paragraph (1) of this section shall be: 
"a. A case in which the court entering judgment did not have jurisdiction over the subject matter of the alleged infraction; 
"b. A case in which the court entering judgment did not have jurisdiction over the person of the violator; 
"c. Where the court hearing the collateral attack finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the failure to seek relief within the applicable time period was caused by an adjudication of incompetence or by commitment of the violator to an institution for treatment as a mentally ill person; or 
"d. Where the court hearing the collateral attack finds that the failure to seek relief within the applicable time period was the result of circumstances amounting to justifiable excuse or excusable neglect." 
(3)  Part 17, Section 1709 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended, as follows: 
"Section 1709. Penalty Assessment Notice for Traffic Offenses - Violations of Provisions by Officer - Driver's License. 
"(a) Whenever a penalty assessment notice for a traffic infraction is issued pursuant to Section 1701, the penalty assessment notice which shall be served upon the defendant by the police officer shall contain: 
"(1) The name and address of the defendant; 
"(2) The license number of the vehicle involved, if any; 
"(3) The number of the defendant's drivers license, if any; 
"(4) A citation of the ordinance alleged to have been violated; 
"(5) A brief description of the traffic infraction; 
"(6) The date and approximate location thereof; 
"(7) The amount of the penalty prescribed for such infraction; 
"(8) The number of points, if any, prescribed for such traffic infraction pursuant to C.R.S. § 42-2-127; and 
"(9) The date the penalty assessment notice is served on the defendant. 
"The penalty assessment notice shall direct the defendant to appear in the Municipal Court at a specified time and place, in the event such penalty thereon is not paid. The penalty assessment notice shall be signed by the peace officer. The penalty assessment notice shall contain a place for the defendant to elect to execute a signed acknowledgment of liability and an agreement to pay the penalty prescribed therein within twenty days, as well as such other information as may be required by law to constitute such penalty assessment notice to be a summons and complaint, should the prescribed penalty not be paid within the time allowed in Section 1705. 
"(b) A penalty assessment notice issued and served pursuant to subsection (a) of this section on a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall also contain or be accompanied by a document containing: 
(1) A preprinted declaration stating that the minor's parent or legal guardian has reviewed the contents of the penalty assessment notice with the minor; 
(2) Preprinted signature lines following the declaration on which the reviewing person described in paragraph (1) of this subsection (b) shall affix his or her signature and for a notary public to duly acknowledge the reviewing person's signature; and 
(3) An advisement to the minor that: 
(I) the minor shall, within seventy-two (72) hours after service of the penalty assessment notice, inform his or her parent or legal guardian that the minor has received a penalty assessment notice; 
(II) the parent or legal guardian of the minor is required by this Code to review and sign the penalty assessment notice and to have his or her signature duly acknowledged by a notary public; and 
(III) noncompliance with the requirement set forth in subparagraph (II) of this paragraph (3) shall result in the minor and the parent or legal guardian of the minor being required to appear in court pursuant to sections 1710(b) and 1710(c)." 
"(c) One copy of said penalty assessment notice shall be served upon the defendant by the police officer and one copy sent to the Chief of Police and such other copies sent as may be required by the Municipal Court and the City Attorney. 
"(d) The time specified in the summons portion of said penalty assessment notice must be at least twenty-one days but not more than ninety days after the date such penalty assessment notice is served, unless the defendant shall demand an earlier hearing. 
"(e) Whenever the defendant refuses to accept service of the penalty assessment notice, tender of such notice by the police officer to the defendant shall constitute service thereof upon the defendant. 
"(f) Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, penalty assessment notices for parking infractions as set forth in Part 12 of the Model Traffic Code shall require the defendant to pay the applicable fine or appear at the Municipal Court within seven days of issuance. If the defendant fails to pay or appear as required, the Municipal Court Clerk shall proceed to notify and summons the defendant as more fully set forth in the Model Traffic Code." 
(4)  Part 17, Section 1710 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended, as follows: 
"Section 1710. Failure to Pay Penalty for Traffic Infractions - Procedures. 
"(a) Unless a person who has been cited for a traffic infraction pays the penalty assessment, the person shall appear at a hearing date on the date and time specified on the citation and answer the complaint against him/her. 
"(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section, a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be required to appear at the hearing on the date and time specified in the citation and answer the complaint if the penalty assessment was timely paid but not signed and notarized in the manner required by section 1709(b)." 
"(c) If a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years is required to appear at a hearing pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the minor shall so inform his or her parent or legal guardian, and the parent or legal guardian shall also be required to appear at the hearing." 
"(d) If the violator answers that he/she is guilty, or if the violator fails to appear for the hearing, judgment shall be entered against him/her. 
"(e) If the violator denies the allegations in the complaint, a final hearing on the complaint shall be held subject to the provisions regarding a speedy trial which are contained in the Municipal Court Rules of Procedure. If the violator is found guilty or liable at such final hearing or if the violator fails to appear for a final hearing, judgment shall be entered against the violator. 
"(f) lf judgment is entered against the violator, he/she shall be assessed an appropriate penalty plus applicable court costs. The penalty shall be no more than the amount specified in the penalty assessment notice. 
"(g) A defendant's failure to appear upon a penalty assessment notice for a traffic infraction shall not constitute a criminal offense." 
(5)  Part 17, Section 1700 of the Model Traffic Code is hereby amended by the addition of Section 1718 as follows: 
"Section 1718. Violations of Title. 
"Except as otherwise provided in Section 1701 of the Model Traffic Code, any person violating any provision of this title punishable as a misdemeanor shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction for same, shall be punished in accordance with the provision of Section 010.020.080 of the Glenwood Springs Municipal Code, unless a different penalty is expressly provided for in this title." 
(5-96 § 3; 5-96 § 3; 2-98 § 1; 19-00 § 1; 32-05, § 2; 11-09 § 2; 2-11, § 2) 
ARTICLE 120.050 - VIOLATIONS 

120.050.010 - Violations of Title. 
    Except as otherwise provided in Section 120.040.030, any person violating any provision of this Title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction of the same, shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 010.020.080 unless a different penalty is provided in this Title for violation of a particular provision. 
(9-90 § 7) 
MUNICIPAL CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1971 CODE PROVISIONS TO 1983 CODE PROVISIONS[1] 
1971 
Code 
Number 1983 
Code 
Number 1971 
Code 
Number 1983 
Code 
Number 1-1 010.020.010. 2-64.2 020.020.030. 1-2 010.020.020. 2-65 020.020.030. 1-3 010.010.010. 2-65.1 020.020.030. 1-3 010.010.020. 2-67 020.020.040. 1-4 010.010.020(a) 2-68 020.020.060. 1-5 010.020.050. 2-76 020.030.010. 1-6 010.020.060. 2-77 020.030.020. 1-7 010.020.070. 2-78 020.030.040. 1-8 010.020.080. 2-79 020.030.030. 1-9 010.010.020.I. 2-80 020.030.050. 1-10 030.030.110. 2-81 020.030.070. 1-15 020.030.060. 2-82 020.030.080. 1-17 010.020.040. 2-83 020.030.070. 1-18 010.030.020. 2-84 020.030.090. 1-19 010.030.010. 2-85 020.030.090. 2-1 010.020.030. 2-86 020.030.100. 2-2 030.010.020(a) to (f) 2-87 020.030.090. 1-2.6 030.010.030. 2-88 020.030.110. 2-3 030.020.020(b)3(c) 21/2-1 090.010.010. 2-4 020.040.040. 21/2-2 090.010.020. 2-14 Deleted 21/2-3 090.010.030. 2-15 030.010.020(g) 21/2-4 090.010.040. 2-16 030.010.020(h) 3-1 100.020.110. 2-17 030.010.020.I. 3-2 100.020.030. 2-18 030.010.020.J. 3-3 100.020.120(a) 2-19 020.040.010. 3-4 100.020.120(b) 2-30 020.040.020. 3-5 100.020.020. 2-31 020.040.050. 3-6 100.020.140(a) 2-32 020.040.030. 3-7 100.020.140(b) 2-33 010.050.200. 3-8 100.020.140(c) 2-43 010.050.090. 3-18 100.020.010. 2-44 010.050.070. 3-19 Deleted 2-45 010.050.070. 3-20 100.020.060(a) 2-46 010.050.090(d) 3-21 100.020.060(c) 2-47 010.050.090(e) 3-22 100.020.060(d) 2-48 010.050.090(f) 3-23 100.020.060(b) 2-61 020.020.010. 3-24 100.020.060(e) 2-62 020.020.020. 3-25 100.020.090. 2-63 020.020.040. 3-26 100.020.100(a) 2-64 020.020.040. 3-27 100.020.100(b) 2-64 020.020.050. 3-28 100.020.050(a) 2-64.1 020.020.030. 3-29 100.020.050(b) 3-30 100.020.050(c) 4-65 060.060.020(c) 3-31 100.020.050(d) 4-66 Deleted 3-32 100.020.050(e) 4-67 060.060.040(a) 3-33 100.020.120(c) 4-68 060.060.040(b) 3-34 100.020.040. 4-69 060.060.040(c) 3-35 100.020.070. 4-75 020.020.010(d) 3-35 100.020.080. 4-76 Deleted 3-36 100.020.130(a) 4-77 020.020.020(d) 3-37 100.020.130(b) 4-78 020.020.030(d) 3-38 100.020.130(c) 4-79 Deleted 3-39 100.020.150. 4-80 Deleted 4-1 RE 3-83, §1 4-86 050.040.030(a)1. 4-17 060.020.010. 4-87 050.010.030. 4-18 060.020.020. 4-88 Deleted 4-19 RE 3-83, §4 4-90 050.040.010(c) 4-19.1 060.020.030. 4-91 Deleted 4-20 060.110.040. 4-92 050.040.030(b) 4-21 060.020.040. 4-93 050.040.010(e) 4-22 Deleted 4-93 050.010.050. 4-23 060.020.050. 4-94 050.040.030(a)2. 4-27 060.050.010. 4-105 060.100.020. 4-28 060.050.020. 4-106 060.100.040(a) 4-31 050.040.020(a) 4-107 060.100.040(b) 4-32 050.040.020(b)1 to 5. 4-108 050.040.010(c) 4-33 050.040.020(c) 4-108 050.040.010(d) 4-34 050.040.060. 4-109 060.100.090(a) 4-34 050.040.020(c) 4-110 060.100.040(c) 4-34 050.040.020(b)7. 4-111 060.100.040(e) 4-40(a) 050.040.020(c) 4-112 RE 14-83, §5 4-40(b) 050.040.020(b)7. 4-113 RE 14-83, §5 4-40(c) 050.040.050(b)6. 4-114 RE 14-83, §5 4-40(d) 050.040.010(a) & (b). 4-115 RE 14-83, §5 4-41 050.010.030 4-116 RE 14-82, §5 4-42 050.040.020(d) 4-117 060.010.090(b) 4-43 050.040.010(e) 4-118 060.100.010. 4-43 050.010.050. 4-119 RE 4-83, §5 4-44 050.040.010(c) 4-120 RE 14-83, §5 4-45 050.040.010(d) 4-121 RE 14-83, §5 4-46 050.010.060. 4-122 RE 14-83, §5 4-47 050.040.070. 4-123 060.100.050(c) 4-48 050.040.080. 4-124 RE 14-83, §5 4-59 060.060.010. 1-125 RE 14-83, §5 4-60 060.060.010. 4-126 RE 14-83, §5 4-61 030.010.020(d) 4-127 060.100.050(d) 4-62 060.060.030. 4-128 060.100.070(b) 4-63 060.060.020(a) 4-129 RE 14-83, §5 4-64 060.060.020(b) 4-130 RE 14-83, §5 4-131 RE 14-83, §5 4-203 060.010.050. 4-132 RE 14-83, §5 4-209 050.040.050(a) 4-133 RE 14-83, §5 4-210.2 050.040.050(a) 4-134 RE 14-83, §5 4-210.1 050.040.050(c) 4-135 060.100.070(a) 4-210.2 050.040.050(d) 4-136 060.100.080(a) 4-211 050.010.030. 4-137 060.100.080(b) 4-212 Deleted 4-138 060.100.060(b) 4-213 050.040.010(e) 4-139 060.010.030. 4-213 050.010.050. 4-140 060.100.040(d) 4-214 050.040.010(c) 4-141 RE 14-83, §5 4-215 050.040.010(d) 4-142 RE 14-83, §5 4-216 050.040.010(b) 4-143 060.100.050(b) 4-222 RE 14-83, §5 4-144 060.100.050(a) 4-223 060.080.030. 4-145 060.100.060(a) 4-224 RE 14-83, §5 4-146 RE 14-83, §5 4-225 RE 14-83, §5 4-147 RE 14-83, §5 4-230 020.020.010(m) 4-153 Deleted 4-230 020.020.020(m) 4-154 Deleted 4-231 Deleted 4-155 020.020.030.M. 4-232 020.020.030(m) 4-161 050.040.040(a) 4-233 Deleted 4-162 050.010.030. 4-241 060.090.010. 4-163 050.040.010(c) 4-242 060.090.020. 4-164 050.040.010(d) 4-251 Deleted 4-165 050.040.040(b) 4-252 Deleted 4-166 050.040.010(e) 4-253 Deleted 4-166 050.010.050. 4-254 060.030.090. 4-167 050.040.010(f) 41/2-1 090.020.010. 4-168 050.040.070. 5-1 110.030.010. 4-174 060.100.030(a) 5-2 110.030.020. 4-175 060.100.030(b) 5-3 110.030.030. 4-176 060.100.030(c) 5-4 110.030.040. 4-177 060.100.030(d) 5-5 110.030.050. 4-178 060.100.030(e) 6-1 Deleted 4-179 060.100.030(e) 6-2 110.020.130. 4-180 RE 14-83, §5 6-3 110.020.100. 4-181 060.100.030(f)1. 6-4 110.020.110. 4-182 060.100.030(f)2. 6-5 110.020.120. 4-193 060.080.010. 6-6 110.020.080. 4-194 060.080.020. 6-7 110.020.090. 4-195 060.080.010(c) 6-8 Deleted 4-196 060.080.040(a) 6-11 110.020.140(a) 4-197 060.080.040(b) 6-12 110.020.140(b) 4-198 060.080.050(c) 6-13 110.020.140(c) 4-199 060.080.050(d) 6-27 110.020.010. 4-200 060.010.040. 6-28 110.020.020. 4-201 060.080.050(a) 6-29 Deleted 4-202 060.080.050(b) 6-30 Deleted 6-31 Deleted 9-55 040.010.020(b) 6-32 110.020.070. 9-56 040.040.020(b) 6-33 110.020.060. 9-57 Deleted 6-34 110.020.100. 9-63 050.020.010(a) 6-35 110.020.050. 9-63 050.020.010(b) 6-36 Deleted 9-64 050.010.030. 6-37 110.020.030. 9-64 050.010.050. 6-47 060.040.010. 9-65 050.020.030(b) 6-48 060.040.050. 9-66 050.020.030(a) 6-49 060.040.020. 9-66 050.020.030(c) 6-50 060.040.030. 9-66 050.010.060. 6-51 060.040.040. 9-67 050.010.020. 6-51.1 060.040.060. 9-68 050.020.050(a) 6-51.2 060.040.070. 9-69 050.020.050(b) 6-51.3 060.040.080. 9-70 050.020.010(c) 6-52 060.040.150. 9-71 050.020.020. 7-1 100.010.020. 9-76 040.020.010. 7-2 100.010.030. 9-77 040.020.020. 7-3 100.010.060(a) 9-78 040.020.030. 7-4 100.010.060(b) 9-79 040.010.030(a) 7-6 100.010.060(c) 9-80 040.020.050. 7-8 100.010.060(d) 9-81 040.020.060. 7-9 100.010.060(e) 9-82 040.020.070. 7-10 100.010.060(f) 9-83 040.020.080. 7-11 100.010.060(g) 9-84 040.020.090. 7-12 Deleted 9-85 040.020.100. 8-1 100.010.010(a) 9-86 040.020.110. 8-2 100.010.010(b) 9-87 040.010.030(b) 8-3 100.010.010(c) 9-88 040.030.020. 8-4 100.010.010(e) 9-89 040.030.010. 8-5 Deleted 9-90 040.040.020(b) 8-16 100.016.030(e) 9-91 040.040.020(c) 8-17 Deleted 9-92 040.040.020(f)2. 8-18 Deleted 9-93 040.040.020(f)3. 9-1 050.010.030. 9-94 040.040.020(f)4. 9-2 050.020.030(a) 9-95 040.010.060. 9-3 050.020.040. 9-96 040.010.080. 9-4 050.010.060. 9-97 040.010.090. 9-4 050.020.030(b) 9-98 040.010.070. 9-5 050.020.050(a) 9-99 040.040.030(b) 9-6 040.050.010. 9-100 040.040.050(b)1. 9-7 050.050.030. 9-101 040.040.050(b)2. 9-10 050.010.050. 9-102 040.040.030(d)1. 9-11 050.050.020. 9-103 040.040.030(d)4. 9-52 040.010.010. 9-105 040.040.030(d)2. 9-53 040.010.010. 9-106 040.040.030(d)3. 9-54 040.010.020(a) 9-107 040.020.130 9-108 040.020.140. 11-29 120.010.060. 9-109 040.020.150. 11-30 050.060.040. 9-110 040.020.120. 11-31 120.040.050. 9-111 040.040.030(c) 11-32 120.010.010. 9-112 040.040.060(a) 11-33 120.010.020. 9-113 040.040.060(b) 11-34 120.010.030. 9-114 040.040.050(b)3. 11-35 120.010.040. 9-115 040.040.030(c)3. 13-1 030.030.010. 9-116 040.040.040(a) 13-2 030.030.020. 9-117 Deleted 13-3 030.030.030. 9-118 040.040.040(e) 13-4 030.030.050. 9-119 Deleted 14-1 100.010.030(d) 9-120 040.040.040(f)1. 14-2 100.010.040(b) 9-121 040.040.040(f)2. 14-3 100.010.040(c) 9-122 040.040.010(a) 14-4 100.010.050. 9-123 040.010.040. 15-1 090.030.010. 9-124 040.010.050. 15-2 020.020.010(j) 9-125 Deleted 15-2 020.020.030(j) 9-126 040.020.040. 15-3 020.020.020(j) 9-127 040.010.100. 15-4 Deleted 9-128 040.010.120. 15-5 090.030.020. 9-129 040.040.010(b) 15-5 090.030.030. 9-130 040.020.160. 15-6 090.030.050. 10-1 050.060.010. 15-7 090.030.040. 11-1 120.030.010. 15-8 120.040.040. 11-2 120.030.020. 15-9 090.030.060. 11-3 120.030.050. 16-3 050.060.020(a) 11-4 120.030.060. 16-4 050.060.020(b) 11-8 120.030.040. 16-5 050.060.020(c) 11-9 Deleted 17-1(a) 050.060.030(a) 11-10 120.030.120. 17-1(b) 050.030.020(a) 11-11 120.010.110. 17-1(c) 050.060.030(c)a. 11-12 120.020.010. 17-2 050.030.020(b) 11-14 120.030.100. 17-3 050.030.020(c) 11-16 120.030.070. 17-4 050.030.020(d) 11-17 120.030.080. 17-5(a) 050.030.020(e)1. 11-17.1 120.030.030. 17-5(b) 050.030.020(e)2. 11-18 120.020.030. 17-5(c) 050.030.010. 11-19 120.020.070. 17-5(d) 050.060.030(c)2. 11-20 120.020.090. 17-5(e) 050.030.020(e)3. 11-21 120.030.090. 17-6(a) 050.030.040. 11-22 120.020.020. 17-6(b) 050.030.030. 11-24 120.020.050. 17-7 050.030.010. 11-25 120.020.080. 18-1 110.010.010. 11-26 120.020.060. 18-2 110.010.020. 11-27 120.020.110 18-3 110.010.030. 11-28 100.010.030.(f) 18-5 110.010.040. 18-6 110.010.050. 22-17 030.010.020(d) 19-1 010.020.060(g) 22-18 030.010.020(d) 19-2 060.110.020. 22-19 080.010.020(a) 19-3 Deleted 22-20 070.030.130. 19-4 090.040.010. 22-21 Deleted 19-5 090.040.080. 22-25 080.050.010(a) 19-6 090.040.020. 22-26 Deleted 19-9 060.110.010(a) 22-28 Deleted 19-10 060.110.010(b) 22-29 Deleted 19-11 060.110.010(c) 22-30 Deleted 19-12 060.110.010(d) 22-31 080.010.050(a) 19-13 060.110.010(e) 22-32 080.020.020. 19-14 090.040.010. 22-45 080.030.010(a) 19-15 090.040.030. 22-46 080.030.010(c) 19-18 090.040.090. 22-47 080.030.040. 19-19 090.040.100. 22-48 080.030.020(a) 19-20 060.110.030. 22-51 080.030.030(a) 19-29 050.040.020(b)6. 22-52 Deleted 19-30 Deleted 22-53 Deleted 19-31 RE 9-84, §1 22-54 080.030.020(b) 19-32 RE 9-84, §1 22-55 Deleted 19-33 090.040.040. 22-56 080.030.020(d) 19-34 090.040.050. 22-57 080.030.030(b) 19-35 RE 9-84, §1 22-58 080.030.030(c) 21-1(a) 120.040.010(a) 22-59 080.030.030(d) 21-1(a) 120.040.010(g) 22-60 080.030.010(e) 21-1(b) 120.040.020. 22-61 080.030.050. 21-1(b) 120.040.030. 22-62 080.010.020(a) 21-1(c) 120.040.010(f) 22-63 080.040.010(c) 21-1(d) 120.040.010(b) 22-64 080.040.010(d) 21-1(e) Deleted 22-64 080.040.010(e) 21-1(f) 120.040.010(c) 22-65 080.040.050. 21-1(g) 120.040.010(d) 22-66 080.040.060. 21-1(h) 120.040.010(e) 22-67 080.040.080. 21-2 Deleted 22-68 080.040.040. 22-1(a) 080.010.060(a) 22-69 080.040.030(a) 22-1(b) 080.010.060(b) 22-70 080.040.030(c) 22-1(b) 080.010.060(f) 22-71 080.040.030(d) 22-1(c) 080.010.060(c) 22-72 080.040.070. 22-1(d) 080.010.060(d) 22-73 080.040.020(a) 22-1(e) 080.010.060(e) 22-81(a) 080.060.010. 22-2(a) 080.010.100(b) 22-81(a) 080.060.020. 22-2(b) 080.010.100(c) 22-81(a) 080.060.030. 22-3(a) 080.010.020(b) 22-81(b) 080.050.020. 22-3(b) 080.010.030(a) 22-81(b) 080.050.030. 22-3(b) 080.010.030(c) 22-81(c) Deleted 22-16 Deleted 22-81(d) 080.060.030. 22-81(e) 080.040.020(c) 22-81(f) 080.010.050(a) 22-81(g) 080.010.100(a) 22-81(h) 080.060.010(b) 22-81(h) 080.060.010(c) 22-81(h) 080.060.040. 22-81(i) 080.050.060. 22-81(j) 080.060.070. 22-81(k) 080.050.050. 22-81(l) 080.060.050.  
1983 
Code 
Number 1971 
Code 
Number 1983 
Code 
Number 1971 
Code 
Number 010.010.010. 1-3 020.030.050. 2-80 010.010.020. 1-3 020.030.060. 1-15 010.010.020(a) 1-4 020.030.070. 2-81 010.010.020.I. 1-9 020.030.070. 2-83 010.020.010. 1-1 020.030.080. 2-82 010.020.020. 1-2 020.030.090. 2-85 010.020.030. 2-1 020.030.090. 2-84 010.020.040. 1-17 020.030.090. 2-87 010.020.050. 1-5 020.030.100. 2-86 010.020.060. 1-6 020.030.110. 2-88 010.020.060(g) 19-1 020.040.010. 2-19 010.020.070. 1-7 020.040.020. 2-30 010.020.080. 1-8 020.040.030. 2-32 010.030.010. 1-19 020.040.040. 2-4 010.030.020. 1-18 020.040.050. 2-31 010.050.070. 2-44 030.010.020.6. 2-15 010.050.070. 2-45 030.010.020(a) to (f) 2-2 010.050.090. 2-43 030.010.020(d) 4-61 010.050.090(d) 2-46 030.010.020(d) 22-17 010.050.090(e) 2-47 030.010.020(d) 22-18 010.050.090(f) 2-48 030.010.020(h) 2-16 010.050.200. 2-33 030.010.020.I. 2-17 020.020.010. 2-61 030.010.020.J. 2-18 020.020.010(d) 4-75 030.010.030. 2-2.6 020.020.010(j) 15-2 030.020.020(b).3.c. 2-3 020.020.010(m) 4-230 030.030.010. 13-1 020.020.020. 2-62 030.030.020. 13-2 020.020.020(d) 4-77 030.030.030. 13-3 020.020.020(j) 15-3 030.030.050. 13-4 020.020.020(m) 4-230 030.030.110. 1-10 020.020.030. 2-64.1 040.010.010. 9-52 020.020.030. 2-64.2 040.010.010. 9-53 020.020.030. 2-65 040.010.020(a) 9-54 020.020.030. 2-65.1 040.010.020(b) 9-55 020.020.030(d) 4-78 040.010.030(a) 9-79 020.020.030(j) 15-2 040.010.030(b) 9-87 020.020.030(m) 4-155 040.010.040. 9-123 020.020.030(m) 4-232 040.010.050. 9-124 020.020.040. 2-63 040.010.060. 9-95 020.020.040. 2-64 040.010.070. 9-98 020.020.040. 2-67 040.010.080. 9-96 020.020.050. 2-64 040.010.090. 9-97 020.020.060. 2-68 040.010.100. 9-127 020.030.010. 2-76 040.010.120. 9-128 020.030.020. 2-77 040.020.010. 9-76 020.030.030. 2-79 040.020.020. 9-77 020.030.040. 2-78 040.020.030. 9-78 040.020.040. 9-126 050.010.050. 4-43 040.020.050. 9-80 050.010.050. 4-93 040.020.060. 9-81 050.010.050. 4-166 040.020.070. 9-82 050.010.050. 4-213 040.020.080. 9-83 050.010.050. 9-10 040.020.090. 9-84 050.010.050. 9-64 040.020.100. 9-85 050.010.060. 4-46 040.020.110. 9-86 050.010.060. 9-4 040.020.120. 9-110 050.010.060. 9-66 040.020.130 9-107 050.020.010(a) 9-63 040.020.140. 9-108 050.020.010(b) 9-63 040.020.150. 9-109 050.020.010(c) 9-70 040.020.160. 9-130 050.020.020. 9-71 040.030.010. 9-89 050.020.030(a) 9-66 040.030.020. 9-88 050.020.030(a) 9-2 040.040.010(a) 9-122 050.020.030(b) 9-4 040.040.010(b) 9-129 050.020.030(b) 9-65 040.040.020(b) 9-56 050.020.030(c) 9-66 040.040.020(b) 9-90 050.020.040. 9-3 040.040.020(c) 9-91 050.020.050(a) 9-5 040.040.020(f)2. 9-92 050.020.050(a) 9-68 040.040.020(f)3. 9-93 050.020.050(b) 9-69 040.040.020(f)4. 9-94 050.030.010. 17-5(c) 040.040.030(b) 9-99 050.030.010. 17-7 040.040.030(c) 9-111 050.030.020(a). 17-1(b). 040.040.030(c).3. 9-115 050.030.020(b). 17-2 040.040.030(d).1. 9-102 050.030.020(c). 17-3 040.040.030(d).2. 9-105 050.030.020(d). 17-4 040.040.030(d).3. 9-106 050.030.020(e).1. 17-5(a). 040.040.030(d).4. 9-103 050.030.020(e).2. 17-5(b). 040.040.040(a). 9-116 050.030.020(e).3. 17-5(e). 040.040.040(e). 9-118 050.030.030. 17-6(b). 040.040.040(f).1. 9-120 050.030.040. 17-6(a). 040.040.040(f).2. 9-121 050.040.010(a). & (b) 4-40(d) 040.040.050(b)1. 9-100 050.040.010(b) 4-216 040.040.050(b)2. 9-101 050.040.010(c) 4-44 040.040.050(b)3. 9-114 050.040.010(c) 4-90 040.040.060(a) 9-112 050.040.010(c) 4-108 040.040.060(b) 9-113 050.040.010(c) 4-163 040.050.010. 9-6 050.040.010(c) 4-214 050.010.020. 9-67 050.040.010(d) 4-45 050.010.030. 4-41 050.040.010(d) 4-108 050.010.030. 4-87 050.040.010(d) 4-164 050.010.030. 4-162 050.040.010(d) 4-215 050.010.030. 4-211 050.040.010(e) 4-93 050.010.030. 9-1 050.040.010(e) 4-43 050.010.030. 9-64 050.040.010(e) 4-166 050.040.010(e) 4-213 060.040.050. 6-48 050.040.010(f) 4-167 060.040.060. 6-51.1 050.040.020(a) 4-31 060.040.070. 6-51.2 050.040.020(b)1 to 5. 4-32 060.040.080. 6-51.3 050.040.020(b)6. 19-29 060.040.150. 6-52 050.040.020(b)7. 4-34 060.050.010. 4-27 050.040.020(b)7. 4-40(b) 060.050.020. 4-28 050.040.020(c) 4-33 060.060.010. 4-59 050.040.020(c) 4-34 060.060.010. 4-60 050.040.020(c) 4-40(a) 060.060.020(a) 4-63 050.040.020(d) 4-42 060.060.020(b) 4-64 050.040.030(a)1. 4-86 060.060.020(c) 4-65 050.040.030(a)2. 4-94 060.060.030. 4-62 050.040.030(b) 4-92 060.060.040(a) 4-67 050.040.040(a) 4-161 060.060.040(b) 4-68 050.040.040(b) 4-165 060.060.040(c) 4-69 050.040.050(a) 4-209 060.080.010. 4-193 050.040.050(b)6. 4-40(c) 060.080.010(c) 4-195 050.040.050(c) 4-210.1 060.080.020. 4-194 050.040.050(d) 4-210.2 060.080.030. 4-223 050.040.060. 4-34 060.080.040(a) 4-196 050.040.070. 4-47 060.080.040(b) 4-197 050.040.070. 4-168 060.080.050(a) 4-201 050.040.080. 4-48 060.080.050(b) 4-202 050.050.020. 9-11 060.080.050(c) 4-198 050.050.030. 9-7 060.080.050(d) 4-199 050.060.010. 10-1 060.090.010. 4-241 050.060.020(a) 16-3 060.090.020. 4-242 050.060.020(b) 16-4 060.100.010. 4-118 050.060.020(c) 16-5 060.100.020. 4-105 050.060.030(a) 17-1(a) 060.100.030(a) 4-174 050.060.030(c)1. 17-1(c) 060.100.030(b) 4-175 050.060.030(c)2. 17-5(d) 060.100.030(c) 4-176 050.060.040. 11-30 060.100.030(d) 4-177 060.010.030. 4-139 060.100.030(e) 4-178 060.010.040. 4-200 060.100.030(e) 4-179 060.010.050. 4-203 060.100.030(f)1. 4-181 060.020.010. 4-17 060.100.030(f)2. 4-182 060.020.020. 4-18 060.100.040(a) 4-106 060.020.030. 4-19.1 060.100.040(b) 4-107 060.020.040. 4-21 060.100.040(c) 4-110 060.020.050. 4-23 060.100.040(d) 4-140 060.030.090. 4-254 060.100.040(e) 4-111 060.040.010. 6-47 060.100.050(a) 4-144 060.040.020. 6-49 060.100.050(b) 4-143 060.040.030. 6-50 060.100.050(c) 4-123 060.040.040. 6-51 060.100.050(d) 4-127 060.100.060(a) 4-145 080.040.010(d) 22-64 060.100.060(b) 4-138 080.040.010(e) 22-64 060.100.070(a) 4-135 080.040.020(a) 22-73 060.100.070(b) 4-128 080.040.020(c) 22-81(E) 060.100.080(a) 4-136 080.040.030(a) 22-69 060.100.080(b) 4-137 080.040.030(c) 22-70 060.100.090(a) 4-109 080.040.030(d) 22-71 060.100.090(b) 4-117 080.040.040. 22-68 060.110.010(a) 19-9 080.040.050. 22-65 060.110.010(b) 19-10 080.040.060. 22-66 060.110.010(c) 19-11 080.040.070. 22-72 060.110.010(d) 19-12 080.040.080. 22-67 060.110.010(e) 19-13 080.050.010(a) 22-25 060.110.020. 19-2 080.050.020. 22-81(B) 060.110.030. 19-20 080.050.030. 22-81(B) 060.110.040. 4-20 080.050.050. 22-81(K) 070.030.130. 22-20 080.050.060. 22-81(I) 080.010.020(a) 22-19 080.060.010. 22-81(A) 080.010.020(a) 22-62 080.060.010(b) 22-81(H) 080.010.020(b) 22-3(a) 080.060.010(c) 22-81(H) 080.010.030(a) 22-3(b) 080.060.020. 22-81(A) 080.010.030(c) 22-3(b) 080.060.030. 22-81(A) 080.010.050(a) 22-31 080.060.030. 22-81(D) 080.010.050(a) 22-81(F) 080.060.040. 22-81(H) 080.010.060(a) 22-1(a) 080.060.050. 22-81(L) 080.010.060(b) 22-1(b) 080.060.070. 22-81(J) 080.010.060(c) 22-1(c) 090.010.010. 2.5-1 080.010.060(d) 22-1(d) 090.010.020. 2.5-2 080.010.060(e) 22-1(e) 090.010.030. 2.5-3 080.010.060(f) 22-1(b) 090.010.040. 2.5-4 080.010.100(a) 22-81(G) 090.020.010. 4.5-1 080.010.100(b) 22-2(a) 090.020.010. 4.5-1 080.010.100(c) 22-2(b) 090.030.010. 15-1 080.020.020. 22-32 090.030.020. 15-5 080.030.010(a) 22-45 090.030.030. 15-5 080.030.010(c) 22-46 090.030.040. 15-7 080.030.010(e) 22-60 090.030.050. 15-6 080.030.020(a) 22-48 090.030.060. 15-9 080.030.020(b) 22-54 090.040.010. 19-4 080.030.020(d) 22-56 090.040.010. 19-14 080.030.030(a) 22-51 090.040.020. 19-6 080.030.030(b) 22-57 090.040.030. 19-15 080.030.030(c) 22-58 090.040.040. 19-33 080.030.030(d) 22-59 090.040.050. 19-34 080.030.040. 22-47 090.040.080. 19-5 080.030.050. 22-61 090.040.090. 19-18 080.040.010(c) 22-63 090.040.100. 19-19 100.010.010(a) 8-1 100.020.140(c) 3-8 100.010.010(b) 8-2 100.020.150. 3-39 100.010.010(c) 8-3 110.010.010. 18-1 100.010.010(e) 8-4 110.010.020. 18-2 100.010.020. 7-1 110.010.030. 18-3 100.010.030. 7-2 110.010.040. 18-5 100.010.030(d) 14-1 110.010.050. 18-6 100.010.030(f) 11-28 110.020.010. 6-27 100.010.040(b) 14-2 110.020.020. 6-28 100.010.040(c) 14-3 110.020.030. 6-37 100.010.050. 14-4 110.020.050. 6-35 100.010.060(a) 7-3 110.020.060. 6-33 100.010.060(b) 7-4 110.020.070. 6-32 100.010.060(c) 7-6 110.020.080. 6-6 100.010.060(d) 7-8 110.020.090. 6-7 100.010.060(e) 7-9 110.020.100. 6-3 100.010.060(f) 7-10 110.020.100. 6-34 100.010.060(g) 7-11 110.020.110. 6-4 100.016.030(e) 8-16 110.020.120. 6-5 100.020.010. 3-18 110.020.130. 6-2 100.020.020. 3-5 110.020.140(a). 6-11 100.020.030. 3-2 110.020.140(b). 6-12 100.020.040. 3-34 110.020.140(c). 6-13 100.020.050(a). 3-28 110.030.010. 5-1 100.020.050(b). 3-29 110.030.020. 5-2 100.020.050(c) 3-30 110.030.030. 5-3 100.020.050(d) 3-31 110.030.040. 5-4 100.020.050(e) 3-32 110.030.050. 5-5 100.020.060(a) 3-20 120.010.010. 11-32 100.020.060(b) 3-23 120.010.020. 11-33 100.020.060(c) 3-21 120.010.030. 11-34 100.020.060(d) 3-22 120.010.040. 11-35 100.020.060(e) 3-24 120.010.060. 11-29 100.020.070. 3-35 120.010.110. 11-11 100.020.080. 3-35 120.020.010. 11-12 100.020.090. 3-25 120.020.020. 11-22 100.020.100(a) 3-26 120.020.030. 11-18 100.020.100(b) 3-27 120.020.050. 11-24 100.020.110. 3-1 120.020.060. 11-26 100.020.120(a) 3-3 120.020.070. 11-19 100.020.120(b) 3-4 120.020.080. 11-25 100.020.120(c) 3-33 120.020.090. 11-20 100.020.130(a) 3-36 120.020.110. 11-27 100.020.130(b) 3-37 120.030.010. 11-1 100.020.130(c) 3-38 120.030.020. 11-2 100.020.140(a) 3-6 120.030.030 11-17.1 100.020.140(b) 3-7 120.030.040. 11-8 120.030.050. 11-3 120.030.060. 11-4 120.030.070. 11-16 120.030.080. 11-17 120.030.090. 11-21 120.030.100. 11-14 120.030.120. 11-10 120.040.010(a) 21-1(a) 120.040.010(b) 21-1(d) 120.040.010(c) 21-1(f) 120.040.010(d) 21-1(g) 120.040.010(e) 21-1(h) 120.040.010(f) 21-1(c) 120.040.010(g) 21-1(a) 120.040.020. 21-1(b) 120.040.030. 21-1(b) 120.040.040. 15-8 120.040.050. 11-31  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The 1971 Code includes all ordinances amending the 1971 Code through Ordinance No. 42, Series of 1982. RE means the provision was repealed after Ordinance No. 42, Series of 1982 but before the adoption of the 1983 Code. Deleted means the 1971 Code provision was eliminated when the 1983 Code was adopted. All other changes to the 1971 Code from Ordinance No. 42, Series of 1982 to the adoption of the 1983 Code, which was adopted by Ordinance No. 17, Series of 1984, have been noted in the historical reference to the individual provisions in the 1983 Code. 

ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
Ord. No. Subject Ord. § Action Disposition 1-61 Rocky Mountain Gas occupancy and license tax 16 A 040.050.030 1-83 Application of use tax, administration of tax ordinance 1 Ad 040.030.010 040.040.010 3-83 Conflicts 3 A 060.010.060 5-83 Property and transactions taxed 2 A 040.020.010 Exempt items and transactions 3 A 040.020.020 Amount of sales and use tax levied 5 A 040.010.030 Tax added to sales price 6 A 040.020.050 Duty to remit excess collections 7 A 040.020.110 Purpose of tax, use of proceeds 9 A, Ad 040.010.040 Exempt items and transactions 11 A 040.020.020 7-83 Zoning provisions 1 A 070.040.020 District regulations R, Re 070.040.030 14-83 International plumbing code 1, 3 A 060.110.010 16-83 Uniform fire code 1 A 060.080.010 Enforcement of uniform fire code 2 A 060.080.070 Uniform fire code 3 A 060.080.020 Violations, fire code 6 A 060.080.090 17-83 Cemeteries; rules and regulations 1, 2 A 090.020.010 22-83 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 2 Ad 070.010.010 23-83 Electric rates by tariff 1, 2 A, Ad 080.050.010 Utilities definitions 2 Ad 080.010.010 Electrical services rules, regulations 3 Ad 080.020.010 33-83 Licensing of commercial tree cutters 5 Ad 090.050.050 Commercial tree cutters 6 Ad 050.050.010 35-83 Issuance of bad check 1 Ad 120.020.040 42-83 Development review fee schedule, permits 2 Ad 070.010.040 070.020.020 43-83 Retail sales tax license 2[a] A 050.020.010 Special event sales tax license 3 Ad 050.020.020 44-83 Contractors 1 A 050.040.020 Construction trades license requirements 2-10 A 050.040.010 46-83 Penalty for violations of Code 1 A 010.020.080 47-83 National electrical code 1, 2 A 060.090.010 4-84 City Council meetings; places and dates 1 A 020.030.010 8-84 National electrical safety code 1 Ad 060.100.010 National electrical safety code, penalties 2 Ad 060.100.020 9-84 Streets and sidewalks 1 A 090.040.040- 090.040.060 Ad 090.040.070 Sidewalk, curb, gutter construction permit 060.140.040 10-84 Zoning variance 1 R, Re 070.040.050 12-84 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1 Ad 070.010.010 Classification of developments 2 Ad 070.020.130 18-84 Classification for payment of system improvement fees 1 A 080.060.020 System improvement fee due 2 R, Re 080.060.050 Review of EQR level 3 R, Re 080.060.030 20-84 Alcoholic beverage licensing, elimination of 500-ft rule 1 Ad 050.060.041 23-84 Local preference 1 R 010.050.080 24-84 Park and recreation areas established 1 A 090.030.010 26-84 Boards and Commissions 1 Ad 020.020.010 020.020.020 3 Ad 020.020.030 27-84 Construction of new sidewalks, curbs, gutters 1 A 090.040.060 2 R, Re 090.040.060 32-84 Construction of new sidewalks, curbs, gutters 1 A 090.040.060 33-84 Bid security, performance bonds 2 Ad 010.050.050 40-84 Low-income utility assistance programs Ad 080.010.120 1-85 District regulations 1 Ad 070.040.030 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 2 Ad 070.010.010 6-85 District regulations 1 Ad 070.040.030 10-85 Amount of sales and use tax levied 2 [B, C] A, Ad 040.010.030 Purpose of tax, use of proceeds 2 [D] Ad 040.010.040 Property and transactions taxed 3 A 040.020.010 Payment of tax by retailer 4 A 040.020.030 Tax added to sales price 5 A 040.020.050 Duty to remit excess collections 6 A 040.020.110 23-85 Public health definitions 1 R, Re 100.010.020 Littering, dumping, weed control, junkyards 2 R, Re 100.010.030 Abatement of nuisances 3 A 100.010.050 24-85 Bulk water rates 1 R, Re 080.050.040 25-85 Fluoridation 1 Ad 080.040.061 30-85 Unauthorized habitation, camping, sleeping Ad 120.020.100 32-85 Voting wards 1 R, Re 010.030.010 36-85 Acts prohibited within park lands R, Re 090.030.050 40-85 City Council, compensation 1 A 020.010.020 43-85 Development permits 1 R, Re 070.020.020 52-85 Petty theft 1 A 120.020.030 Criminal mischief 2 A 120.020.070 Issuance of bad check 3 A 120.020.040 53-85 False reporting to authorities 1 Ad 120.030.130 56-85 Application of use tax 1[B] R 040.030.010 Items, transactions exempt from use tax 2 Ad 040.030.020 Credit for tax paid to another municipality 3 Ad 040.020.021 Credit for taxes previously paid to another municipality 4 Ad 040.030.021 Items, transactions exempt from use tax 5 Ad 040.030.020 Period of limitations 7 A 040.010.050 Procedure for determination of exemption disputes 8 Ad 040.040.020 Interest and penalties 9 R, Re 040.040.050 Administrative procedures 10 R, Re 040.040.040 Administration of tax ordinance 11 A 040.040.010 Administrative procedures 12 Ad 040.040.040 10-86 General fund contingencies 1 Ad 010.040.060 13-86 Unmetered water and wastewater rates 1 A 080.050.030 Minimum water, wastewater charges 2 A 080.050.060 18-86 Connection fee, wasting water A 080.010.040 080.040.060 30-86 Metered water and wastewater rates 1 A 080.050.020 Unmetered water and wastewater rates 2 A 080.050.030 Minimum water, wastewater charges 3 A 080.050.060 31-86 Vandalism prevention 1 Ad 090.060.010 32-86 Amount of sales and use tax levied 1, 2 A 040.010.030 34-86 Conduct of meetings R 020.030.090 Voting A 020.030.100 56-86 Penalty assessment tickets 1 A 030.030.030 61-86 Special review 2 Ad 070.040.040 Number of parking spaces required 3 Ad 070.050.060 62-86 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1 A 070.010.010 District regulations, special review 2 R, Re 070.040.030 070.040.040 Special review 4 A 070.040.040 Development review fee schedule 5 A 070.010.040 4-87 Airport restrictions 1 Ad 090.010.050 5-87 Signs, definitions R, Re 070.060.080 18-87 Special review 1 Ad 070.040.040 Recreation vehicle parks 2 Ad 070.110.010- 070.110.080 21-87 Fireworks 1, 2 A 110.020.150 23-87 Electric rates by tariff 1 R 080.050.010 25-87 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1, 2 Ad 070.010.010 District regulations 3-13 A 070.040.030 27-87 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1 R, Re 070.010.010 2 Ad 070.010.010 District regulations 3 A 070.040.030 Special review 4, 6 A 070.040.040 Special review 5 R 070.040.040 Development review fee schedule 7 A 070.010.040 31-87 Conflicts of interest 1 Ad 020.040.010- 020.040.080 34-87 Wood stoves, coal furnaces 1 A 100.030.010 100.030.020 100.030.080 35-87 Zoning variance 1 A 070.040.050 36-87 District regulations 1-3 A 070.040.030 39-87 City Council meetings; places and dates 1 A 020.030.010 40-87 Administrative departments 1 A 030.010.020 42-87 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1, 2 A 070.010.010 District regulations 3 A 070.040.030 51-87 Amount of sales and use tax levied 2 A 040.010.030 Payment of tax by retailer 2[B] A 040.020.030 55-87 Simplified procedure for minor subdivisions Ad 070.020.091 58-87 Classification of developments R, Re 070.020.030 59-87 Review of EQR level 1 R, Re 080.060.030 System improvement fee due 2 R, Re 080.060.050 5-88 Sales and use tax rebate 1, 2 A 040.020.160 6-88 Fireworks 1 R, Re 110.020.150 12-88 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1 Ad 070.010.010 District regulations 2 A 070.040.030 Special review 3 Ad 070.040.040 15-88 Littering, dumping, weed control, junkyards 1, 2 Ad 100.010.030 19-88 Development review fee schedule 1 Ad 070.010.040 20-88 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1 A 070.010.010 Minor development review 2 A 070.020.050 Major development review 3 A 070.020.060 Suitability of land for development 4 A 070.030.030 Permits, director of Community Development, 5 A 070.090.110- Variance procedure, standards 070.090.140, 070.090.160 21-88 District regulations 2 A 070.040.030 22-88 District regulations 1 Ad 070.040.030 25-88 License requirements; applicability 1 A 050.010.010 License requirements; term, renewal 2 A 050.010.050 050.010.060 Construction trades license requirements 3 A 050.040.010 Contractors, Gas fitters 4 A 050.040.020 050.040.040 Electrical contractors 5 A 050.040.030 R, Re 050.040.030 Plumbing contractors 6 A 050.040.050 R, Re 050.040.050 Signs, definitions 7 A 070.060.080 Wastewater regulations, work performed 8 A 080.030.040 Water line extensions 9 A 080.040.030 Conflicts 11 A 060.010.060 Uniform fire code 16 R, Re 060.080.010 Uniform fire code 17 A 060.080.020 Enforcement of uniform fire code, appeals 20 A 060.080.070 060.080.080 Violations, fire code 060.080.090 Code for the abatement of dangerous buildings 21 A 060.030.010 National electrical code 23 A 060.090.010 National electrical code, work permit 24 A 060.090.020 National electrical code, inspectors 25 A 060.090.030 National electrical safety code 26 A 060.100.010 National electrical safety code, penalties 27 A 060.100.020 International plumbing code 28 A 060.110.010 30-88 Smoking in public places 1 Ad 100.040.010- 100.040.080 32-88 Metered water and wastewater rates 1 R, Re 080.050.020 Minimum water, wastewater charges 2 A 080.050.060 35-88 Development in areas of geologic hazard 1, 2 R, Re 070.100.020 3 R 070.100.020 4 A 070.100.020 Geologic hazards district regulations 5, 6 A 070.100.030 Variance 7 A 070.100.040 Appeal of decision 8 Ad 070.100.041 45-88 Voting wards 1 A 010.030.010 50-88 Metered water and wastewater rates 1 A 080.050.020 R, Re 080.050.020 Unmetered water and wastewater rates 2 R, Re 080.050.030 Minimum water, wastewater charges 3 R, Re 080.050.060 52-88 Park and recreation areas established 1 Ad 090.030.010 53-88 Amount of system improvement fee 1 R, Re 080.060.040 56-88 Flood damage prevention 1 A 070.090.010- 070.090.060, 070.090.080- 070.090.170 Compliance with flood regulations 1 Ad 070.090.070 8-89 Fee schedule for Glenwood Springs airport 1 A 090.010.010 Obligation for fees 2 A 090.010.020 Collection of fees 3 A 090.010.030 Liens 4 A 090.010.040 11-89 Removal of snow 1 R, Re 090.040.080 19-89 Boards and Commissions 1 R 020.020.010 020.020.020 3 R 020.020.030 Purpose of tax, use of proceeds 4 A 040.010.040 25-89 District regulations 1 Ad 070.040.030 33-89 Restrictions on use of park lands 1 R, Re 090.030.060 34-89 Municipal airport 1 A 090.010.010- 090.010.030 42-89 Write-in candidates, cancellation of election 1 R, Re 010.030.020 47-89 Administration of tax ordinance 1, 2 A, Ad 040.040.010 Repealed 3 R 040.020.040 9-90 Penalty assessment tickets 2 R, Re 030.030.030 Criminal provisions, violations 7 A 120.050.010 10-90 Motorized watercraft prohibited 1 Ad 100.050.010 12-90 Boards and Commissions 1 R 020.020.010- 020.020.030 18-90 District regulations 1 A 070.040.030 20-90 Flood damage prevention definitions 1, 3, 7 A 070.090.040 2, 4-6 Ad 070.090.040 Specific standards 8 R, Re 070.090.160 22-90 District regulations 1 A 070.040.030 Special review 2 Ad 070.040.040 32-90 System improvement fees, required 1 Ad 080.060.010 37-90 Water meter equipment 1 R, Re 080.040.020 38-90 Administrative departments 1 A, Ad 030.010.020 Fire department 3 A 110.020.010 110.020.020 110.020.040 110.020.060 39-90 Metered water and wastewater rates 1, 2 A 080.050.020 Unmetered water and wastewater rates 3 A 080.050.030 Minimum water, wastewater charges 4 A 080.050.060 54-90 Boards and Commissions 1 Ad 020.020.010 020.020.020 3 Ad 020.020.030 4-91 Idling of motor vehicle engines 1 Ad 100.060.010- 100.060.030 8-91 Administrative departments 1 R, Re 030.010.020 12-91 Incentives for affordable housing projects 1 Ad 070.010.061 18-91 Trash services 1 R 080.050.080 24-91 Write-in candidates, cancellation of election 1 A 010.030.020 27-91 Taxation 1 A 040.010.030 040.010.040 040.020.021 040.020.030 040.030.021 Exempt items and transactions 1, 2 A 040.020.020 Property and transactions taxed 2 A 040.020.010 29-91 Boards and Commissions 1 Ad 020.020.010 020.020.020 32-91 License requirements; term 1 A 050.010.050 Retail sales tax license 3 Ad 050.020.010 37-91 Appointment of counsel 1 A 030.030.050 38-91 Taxation, definitions 1 R, Re 040.010.010 Exemptions from tax ordinance 2 A 040.010.020 Amount of sales and use tax levied 2, 3 A 040.010.030 Property and transactions taxed 4 R, Re 040.020.010 Exempt items and transactions 5 A 040.020.020 R, Re 040.020.020 Application of use tax 6, 7 A 040.030.010 Items, transactions exempt from use tax 8 A 040.030.020 Administration of tax ordinance 9 A 040.040.010 Determination and assessment of tax 10 Ad 040.040.030 Intercity claims for recovery 11 Ad 040.040.021 Administrative procedures 12 A 040.040.040 39-91 Boards and Commissions 3 Ad 020.020.030 41-91 Metered water and wastewater rates 2 A 080.050.020 8-92 District regulations 1 A 070.040.030 11-92 Disposition of unclaimed property 1 Ad 010.040.070 13-92 Development permits 1 R, Re 070.020.020 Vested property rights 2 Ad 070.020.120 15-92 Petty theft 1 A 120.020.030 Issuance of bad check 2 A 120.020.040 Criminal mischief 3 A 120.020.070 16-92 Utility service; confidentiality of information 1 R, Re 080.010.090 18-92 Special event sales tax license 1 A 050.020.020 Vested property rights 2 Ad 070.020.120 24-92 Cemeteries; rules and regulations 3 A 090.020.010 25-92 Emergency medical services 1 A 110.040.010- 110.040.080 29-92 Regulation of noise 1 Ad 100.070.010- 100.070.040 30-92 Residential construction activities prohibited 1 Ad 060.150.010 Residential construction activities prohibited, violations 060.150.020 31-92 Imposition of court costs 1 A 030.030.070 Petty theft 2 A 120.020.030 Possession of open containers 3 R, Re 120.030.080 32-92 Littering, dumping, weed control, junkyards 1 Ad 100.010.030 34-92 Assurance for completion of public improvements 1, 2 R, Re 070.030.190 3 A 070.030.190 4 Ad 070.030.190 35-92 Animal control and maintenance definitions 1 A 100.020.010 Dog licenses 2 A 100.020.050 Animals running at large 3 A 100.020.120 Impoundment of animals 4, 6 A 100.020.130 Cruelty to animals 5 A 100.020.140 37-92 System improvement fee due 1 A 080.060.050 1-93 Administrative departments 1 A 030.010.020 2-93 Resisting arrest 1 A 120.030.060 Obstructing a police officer 2 Ad 120.030.061 3-93 Utility deposits 1 R, Re 080.010.030 4-93 Littering, dumping, weed control, junkyards 1 R, Re 100.010.030 5-93 (Reserved) 1 R Art. 030.030 8-93 Qualifications for bids, proposals 1 A 010.050.040 9-93 Water line extensions 1 R 080.040.030 10-93 Boards and Commissions 1 A 020.020.010 020.020.020 2 A 020.020.030 15-93 Change orders 1 A 010.050.180 17-93 Utility enterprise, legislative declaration, definitions 1 Ad 080.070.010- 080.070.050 19-93 Fee schedule for Glenwood Springs airport 1 A 090.010.010 22-93 City Council, compensation 1 A 020.010.020 23-93 Payment of utilities, short check 1 A 080.010.070 City, Court payments; insufficient funds 2 Ad 120.010.120 28-93 Park and recreation areas established 1 Ad 090.030.010 29-93 Boards and Commissions 1 Ad 020.020.010 020.020.020 3 Ad 020.020.030 Imposition of court costs 4 R, Re 030.030.070 30-93 Code for the abatement of dangerous buildings 5 A 060.030.010 National electrical code 8 A 060.090.010 National electrical safety code 10 A 060.100.010 31-93 Uniform fire code 2 A 060.080.010 33-93 International plumbing code 1 Ad 060.110.010 2-94 Local preference 1 R, Re 010.050.080 5-94 Incentives for affordable housing projects 1, 2 A 070.010.061 7-94 Boards and Commissions 1 Ad 020.020.010 020.020.020 3 Ad 020.020.030 9-94 Harassment 1 A 120.020.020 10-94 Uniform fire code 1 A 060.080.020 Flammable, combustible liquids Ad 060.080.040 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 3 R, Re 070.010.010 Special review 4 Ad 070.040.040 11-94 Plea agreements 1 A 030.030.060 12-94 Forfeiture of weapons 1 Ad 120.030.021 16-94 1 A 070.030.210 Incentives for affordable housing projects 2 Ad 070.010.061 17-94 Boards and Commissions 1 A 020.020.030 18-94 Reporting disorderly conduct 1 Ad 120.030.071 19-94 Major development review, P.U.D. review 1 A 070.020.060 070.070.040 Subdivision review with development plan 2 A 070.020.080 P.U.D. review 3 A 070.070.040 21-94 Possession of, selling tobacco to minors 1 Ad 120.030.092 22-94 Control of drug paraphernalia 1 Ad 120.030.091 23-94 Boards and Commissions 1 Ad 020.020.010 020.020.020 3 Ad 020.020.030 Appeals 5 R, Re 070.010.050 Zoning variance 6 A 070.040.050 Special review, off-street parking, signs, 7 A 070.040.040 Appeal of administrative decision 070.050.050 070.060.080 070.100.041 29-94 Connection to wastewater system 1, 2 A 080.030.010 Connection to water system 3, 4 A 080.040.010 Amount of system improvement fee 5 A 080.060.040 30-94 Dedications 1 A 070.030.150 31-94 Amount of tax levied, payment of tax by retailer 2 A 040.010.030 040.020.030 36-94 Major development review 1 A 070.020.060 Subdivision review without development plan 2 A 070.020.090 Annexation 3 A 070.020.110 Rezoning 4 A 070.040.060 39-94 Metered water and wastewater rates 1 A 080.050.020 Unmetered water and wastewater rates 2 A 080.050.030 Bulk water rates 3 A 080.050.040 Wastewater surcharge rates 4 A 080.050.050 Minimum water, wastewater charges 5 A 080.050.060 2-95 Assault, fighting 1 Ad 120.020.011 120.020.012 6-95 Boards and Commissions 1 A 020.020.040 10-95 Boards and Commissions 1 Ad 020.020.010 020.020.020 3 Ad 020.020.030 11-95 City council; powers A 020.010.010 Boards and Commissions A 020.020.030 13-95 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1 Ad 070.010.010 Off-street parking, applicability 1 A 070.050.040 19-95 Boards and Commissions 1, 2 R, Re 020.020.010 020.020.020 3 R, Re 020.020.030 24-95 Classification of developments 1 R, Re 070.020.030 31-95 Cemeteries; rules and regulations 4 A 090.020.010 37-95 Purpose of tax, use of proceeds 1 Ad 040.010.040 40-95 Boards and Commissions 1 R, Re 020.020.010 020.020.020 41-95 City Council, compensation 1 A 020.010.020 43-95 Wood stoves, coal furnaces 1 R, Re 100.030.010- 100.030.080 46-95 Boards and Commissions 1 Ad 020.020.030 48-95 Possession of open containers 1 A 120.030.080 55-95 Boards and Commissions 1 A 020.020.030 59-95 District regulations 1 A 070.040.030 5-96 Model Traffic Code 1 R, Re 120.040.010 Modifications to Model Traffic Code 2 A 120.040.020 Model Traffic Code, penalties 3 Ad 120.040.030 R, Re 120.040.030 6-96 Approval of legal instruments 1 A 010.040.010 7-96 Duties of police officers 1 A 110.010.030 9-96 Reports of Fire Chief 1 A 110.020.060 Authority to respond to alarms 2 A 110.020.050 Fire department; alarms, interference, regulations 3 R 110.020.110- 110.020.140 Authority to respond to calls outside city 4 A 110.040.040 12-96 Construction building codes, regulations 1 R, Re 060.010.030- 060.010.060 One- and two- family dwelling code 060.060.010 Energy efficiency standards 060.070.010 060.070.040- 060.070.060 National electrical code 060.090.010- 060.090.040 National electrical safety code 060.100.010 National electrical safety code, penalties 060.100.020 International plumbing code 060.110.010 Uniform mechanical code applications manual 060.120.040 Gas conversions 060.130.070 Miscellaneous permits 060.140.010- 060.140.050 Residential construction activities prohibited 060.150.010 Residential construction activities prohibited, violations 060.150.020 13-96 Uniform fire code 1 A 060.080.010 15-96 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1 A 070.010.010 16-96 Use of parking 1 A 070.050.070 17-96 Exempt items and transactions 1 Ad 040.020.020 Repealed R 050.060.030 Temporary sales and structures, permits 2 R, Re 050.030.010- 050.030.045 18-96 Park and recreation areas established Ad 090.030.010 22-96 Zoning variance 1 A 070.040.050 26-96 Animals running at large 1 A 100.020.120 31-96 Drinking in public areas 1 A 120.030.070 Possession of open containers 2 A 120.030.080 35-96 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1, 2 Ad 070.010.010 Dedications 1 A, Ad 070.030.150 36-96 Possession, use of marijuana 1 Ad 120.030.090 Control of drug paraphernalia 2 A 120.030.091 41-96 Amount of sales and use tax levied 1 A 040.010.030 Credit for tax paid to another municipality 2 A 040.020.021 Payment of tax by retailer 3 A 040.020.030 42-96 Senior discount on utility service 1 R 080.050.070 43-96 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1 A 070.010.010 44-96 City Council, compensation 1 A 020.010.020 46-96 Permit application requirements 1 A 050.030.012 Permit review criteria 2 A 050.030.015 Time limits 3 A 050.030.025 48-96 Disorderly conduct 1 R 120.020.010 1-97 Construction trades licenses R, Re 050.040.010- 050.040.080 5-97 Adult entertainment establishments, definitions Ad 050.070.010- 050.070.020 050.070.030- 050.070.185 Signs, definitions 2 R, Re 070.060.080 District regulations 4, 5 A 070.040.030 Special review 6 A 070.040.040 7-97 Signs 1 R, Re 070.060.010- 070.060.070 12-97 Modifications to Model Traffic Code 1-4 Ad 120.040.020 13-97 Classification for payment of system improvement fees 1, 2 R, Re 080.060.020 3 A 080.060.020 14-97 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1 Ad 070.010.010 District regulations 2, 3 A 070.040.030 17-97 Restrictions on use of park lands 1 A, Ad 090.030.060 27-97 Petty theft 1 A 120.020.030 28-97 Boards and Commissions 1 Ad 020.020.010 020.020.020 3 Ad 020.020.030 29-97 Boards and Commissions 1 Ad 020.020.010 020.020.020 Licensing of commercial tree cutters 1, 2 R, Re 090.050.050 Boards and Commissions 5 Ad 020.020.030 30-97 Dog licenses 1 A 100.020.050 31-97 Special review, zoning variance 1 A 070.040.040 070.040.050 32-97 Boards and Commissions 1 A 020.020.030 33-97 Modifications to Model Traffic Code 1 Ad 120.040.020 1-98 Rezoning 1 A 070.040.060 Zoning variance 2 A 070.040.050 2-98 Model Traffic Code, penalties 1 Ad 120.040.030 3-98 District regulations 1 A 070.040.030 5-98 Minor development review 1 A 070.020.050 Major development review 2 A 070.020.060 Rezoning 3 A 070.040.060 Subdivision review without development plan 3, 4 A 070.020.090 Appeals 5 A 070.010.050 Rezoning 6 A 070.040.060 P.U.D. review 7 A 070.070.040 6-98 Imposition of court costs 1 A 030.030.070 Incarceration of certain offenders 2 A 030.030.110 8-98 Alcoholic beverage licensing, elimination of 500-ft rule 1 A 050.060.041 10-98 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 1 Ad 070.010.010 District regulations 2 A 070.040.030 11-98 District regulations 1, 2 A 070.040.030 12-98 Design of parking areas 1 A 070.050.100 14-98 Local preference 1 A 010.050.080 15-98 District regulations 1, 2 A 070.040.030 16-98 District regulations 1, 2 A 070.040.030 18-98 Health officer 1 A 100.010.010 Public health definitions 2 A 100.010.020 Littering, dumping, weed control, junkyards 3 A 100.010.030 Animal littering prohibited 4 A 100.020.040 Rabies vaccination 5 A 100.020.060 Vicious animal 6 A 100.020.070 Animal bites 7 A 100.020.090 Animals running at large 8 R 100.020.120 Cruelty to animals 9 A 100.020.140 Exceptions; idling of motor vehicle engines 10 A 100.060.030 19-98 Newsracks 1 Ad 090.070.010- 090.070.080 21-98 Modifications to Model Traffic Code 1 Ad 120.040.020 25-98 Bridges, jumping prohibited 1 Ad 090.040.105 26-98 1 R 070.030.210 27-98 Uniform fire code A, Ad 060.080.010- 060.080.090 28-98 Gas fitters A 050.040.040 Construction building codes, regulations 060.010.010- 060.010.060 Uniform building code 060.020.010- 060.020.40 Abatement of dangerous buildings code 060.030.010 060.030.020 Code for building conservation 060.040.010 Uniform housing code 060.050.010 One- and two-family dwelling code 060.060.010 Energy efficiency standards 060.070.010-060.070.110 29-98 International plumbing code A 060.110.010- 060.110.060 Uniform mechanical code 060.120.010- 060.120.040 Gas regulations 060.130.010- 060.130.090 31-98 Issuance of bad check 1 A 120.020.040 Throwing of objects 2 A 120.020.06 Criminal mischief 3 A 120.020.07 Criminal tampering 4 Ad 120.020.075 Damaging city property 5 A 120.020.080 Trespass 6 A 120.020.090 Illegal weapons 7 Ad 120.030.015 Discharge of weapons 8 A 120.030.020 Forfeiture of weapons 9 A 120.030.021 Impersonating a police officer 10 A 120.030.040 Reporting disorderly conduct 11 A 120.030.071 Possession of open containers 12 A 120.030.080 Possession, use of marijuana 13 A 120.030.090 Control of drug paraphernalia 14 A 120.030.091 Possession of, selling tobacco to minors 15 A 120.030.092 Loitering, prohibited acts in or about schools 16 A 120.030.110 False reporting to authorities 17 A 120.030.130 Modifications to Model Traffic Code 18 Ad 120.040.020 33-98 Purpose of tax, use of proceeds 1 A 040.010.040 35-98 Classification of developments 1, 2 A 070.020.030 District regulations 3 A 070.040.030 37-98 District regulations 1 A 070.040.030 40-98 Accessory dwelling units 1 Ad 070.040.090 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 2 Ad 070.010.010 District regulations 4-7 A 070.040.030 46-98 Right-of-way encroachments 1 Ad 090.040.085 6-99 Landfill enterprise 1 Ad 080.080.010- 080.080.050 7-99 Format of final submissions 1 Ad 070.020.105 8-99 Sidewalks 1 A, Ad 070.030.080 9-99 District regulations 1 A 070.040.030 13-99 District regulations 1 A 070.040.030 16-99 Authority to respond to alarms 2 A 110.020.050 17-99 Temporary sales and structures, time limits 1 A 050.030.025 21-99 Metered water and wastewater rates 1 A 080.050.020 Unmetered water and wastewater rates 2 Ad 080.050.030 Water meter equipment 3 Ad 080.040.020 Minimum water, wastewater charges 4 R 080.050.060 26-99 Administrative departments 1, 2 A 030.010.020 Adult entertainment - investigation of application, 2 A 050.070.030 Inspection 050.070.080 Uniform building code amendments 060.020.020 Uniform fire code 060.080.020 Hazardous materials 060.080.030 Uniform fire code amendments 060.080.060 Enforcement of uniform fire code 060.080.070 National electrical code, inspections 060.090.040 Water distribution 2 A 070.030.110 070.040.040 070.080.030 Special review 2 A 110.020.010- 110.020.070 110.020.090 Mobile home park 2 A 110.020.100 110.020.150 Fire department 2 A 110.040.010 Fireworks 2 A 110.040.020 Emergency medical services 2 A 110.040.050- 110.040.080 Uniform fire code 060.080.010 28-99 Off-street parking, variance 1, 2 Ad 070.050.100 29-99 Historic preservation 1 Ad 070.120.005- 070.120.265 31-99 Disposition of unclaimed property 1 A 010.040.070 32-99 Garbage and trash collection 1 A 100.010.060 33-99 Connections to raw water irrigation system 1 Ad 080.040.015 34-99 Dedications 1 Ad 070.030.150 37-99 Accessory dwelling units 1 A 070.040.090 41-99 Minor development review 1 A 070.020.050 8-00 Business licenses 1 Ad 050.011.010- 050.011.0130 9-00 Taxation, definitions 1 A, Ad 040.010.010 Credit for tax paid to another municipality 2 A 040.020.021 Exempt items and transactions 3 A 040.020.020 Amount of sales and use tax levied 4 A 040.010.030 Application of use tax 5 A 040.030.010 Items, transactions exempt from use tax 6 A 040.030.020 Credit for taxes previously paid to another municipality 7 A 040.030.021 Retail sales tax license 8 A 050.020.010 Special event sales tax license 9 A 050.020.020 10-00 False reporting to authorities 1 Ad 120.030.062 14-00 Dedications 1 A 070.030.150 Requirements for design improvements, dedications 1 Ad 070.030.155 Planned unit development; purposes 2 A 070.070.030 15-00 District regulations 1 Ad 070.040.030 17-00 District regulations 1 R, Re 070.040.030 19-00 Model Traffic Code, penalties 1 A 120.040.030 20-00 Right-of-way encroachments 1 A 090.040.085 28-00 Purpose of tax, use of proceeds 1 Ad 040.010.040 29-00 Amount of sales and use tax levied 1 A, R 040.010.030 34-00 Water meter equipment 1 A 080.040.020 35-00 Special review 1 A 070.040.040 42-00 Boards and Commissions 1 A 020.020.030 1-01 Boards and Commissions 1 A 020.020.020 8-01 Business licenses 1 A 050.011.010 12-01 Restrictions on use of park lands 1, 2 A, Ad 090.030.060 15-01 District regulations 1 Ad 070.040.030 Subdivision, development, use of land definitions 2 Ad 070.010.010 18-01 Downtown design standards 1 Ad 070.030.158 19-01 Uniform fire code amendments 1 R 060.080.060 24-01 Requirements for community housing 1 Ad 070.130.010- 070.130.100 28-01 False reporting to authorities 2 Ad 120.030.130 29-01 Amount of sales and use tax levied 2 A 040.010.030 Application of use tax 3 A, Ad 040.030.010 36-01 Erosion, sediment control, stabilization, revegetation 1 A 070.030.050 38-01 Competitive bidding 1 Ad 010.050.090 42-01 Utility enterprise, definitions 1 A 080.070.020 47-01 Amendments to building code 1 A 060.020.020 51-01 Exterior lighting standards 1 Ad 070.140.010- 070.140.190 56-01 Amendments to building code 1 A 060.020.020 Swimming pools 060.020.030 Abatement of dangerous buildings 060.030.020 Energy efficiency standards 060.070.110 Uniform fire code 060.080.010 060.080.020 Hazardous materials 060.080.030 Uniform fire code amendments 060.080.060 Enforcement of uniform fire code 060.080.070 Appeals 060.080.080 International plumbing code amendments 060.110.020 Gas regulations, definitions 1 A 060.130.020 61-01 Boards and Commissions 2 A 020.020.010 020.020.020 3-5 R, Re 020.020.030 1-02 Dedications 1 Ad 070.030.150 2-02 Dedications 1 A 070.030.150 3-02 Dedications 1 A 070.030.150 4-02 Fee schedule for Glenwood Springs airport 1 A 090.010.010 5-02 Right-of-way permit application; construction standards 1 Ad 090.045.010- 090.045.060 7-02 Modifications to Model Traffic Code 1 Ad 120.040.020 8-02 Restrictions on use of park lands 1 A 090.030.060 9-02 Special review 1 A 070.040.040 District regulations 2 A, Ad 070.040.030 12-02 District regulations 1 A 070.040.030 13-02 District regulations 1 A 070.040.030 Special review 2 Ad 070.040.040 19-02 Procurement, disposition of goods, definitions 1 A 010.050.020 Bid security, performance bonds 2 A 010.050.050 Local preference 3 A, Ad 010.050.080 Competitive 4 A 010.050.090 30-02 Restrictions on use of park lands 1 A 090.030.060 31-02 Imposition of court costs 1 Ad 030.030.070 33-02 Minor, major development review; subdivision review 1 A 070.020.050 070.020.060 070.020.080 070.020.090 Special review, rezoning 2 A 070.040.040 070.040.060 Subdivision plat requirements 10 A 070.020.070 34-02 Dedications 1 A 070.030.150 35-02 Acts prohibited within park lands 1 Ad 090.030.050 36-02 Imposition of court costs 1 Ad 030.030.070 61-02 Boards and Commissions 4 A 020.020.030 4-03 Concurrent review 1 A 070.040.070  
Editor's note- As of Supplement No. 1, this table is replaced by the Code Comparative Table-Ordinances. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. Ordinances recorded prior to the 2015 republication are included in the previous comparative tables. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 8-2015  4-16-2015 2(Exh. A) 100.010.020, 
100.010.060, 
100.010.065 9-2015  5-21-2015 1(Exh. A) 090.070.025 13-2015  8- 6-2015 2(Exh. A) 070.040.110(a), (b), (d)(3) 14-2015  8- 6-2015 2(Exh. A) 070.130.050(4) 16-2015  8-20-2015 2(Exh. A) 070.010.010 3(Exh. B) 070.040.030(a)(3), 
(b)(1), (c)(1), (c)(2), 
(d)(1), (e)(1), (f)(2)c., 
(g)(1)a., 
070.040.040(a)(5)b.       Added 070.040.100(e)(9)n., o. 070.040.120(b), (c), (d)(4)       Added 070.040.120(12), (13), 
070.040.130 4(Exh. C) 
        Added   
070.050.060(b)(7a) 5(Exh. D) 040.010.010 6(Exh. E) 040.020.010(5), 
040.020.020(14) 17-2015  8-20-2015 2(Exh. A) 050.080.020, 
050.080.030(h), 
050.080.040(a)(4), (d), (e), 
050.080.060(2), 
050.080.100- 
050.080.120, 
050.090.050(c)(3), 
(e)(1), (e)(7), 
050.090.070(2)       Rpld 050.090.110 3(Exh. B) 070.010.010       Rpld 070.040.030(g)(1)b.4. 070.040.030(g)(2), 
(h)(2), (i)(2)a., 
070.040.030(j2)(1)-(3)       Added 070.040.040(a)(15) 070.040.040(b), 
070.040.040(c)(4)       Added 070.040.040(c)(5)       Rnbd 070.040.040(c)(5)       as 070.040.040(c)(6) 070.040.070 19-2015  9-17-2015 2(Exh. A) 070.060.080 
(note) 33-2015  1- 7-2016 2(Exh. A) 070.030.150(b)(5)c.3., (e)(6)a., 
080.060.040       Rpld 070.030.150(e)(8) 1-2016  2- 4-2016 1(Exh. A) 
        Added   
070.020.130 2-2016  2- 4-2016 2(Exh. A) 020.020.020(13) 7-2016  5- 5-2016 2(Exh. A) 080.060.020 11-2016  6-16-2016 2(Exh. A) 040.020.170(f) 13-2016  6-16-2016 2(Exh. A) 100.010.020 100.010.030(a), (d)       Added 100.010.035 100.010.060(a) 19-2016  7-21-2016 2       Added 090.030.050(13) 3 100.040.020 100.040.030 21-2016  8- 4-2016 2(Exh. A) 070.030.150(e)(6)a. 22-2016  8-18-2016 4 040.010.040(b) 33-2016 12-15-2016 2(Exh. A) 080.060.020(1) 36-2016  1- 5-2017 2       Added 070.130.110 38-2016  1- 5-2017 2(Exh. A) 030.010.020 39-2016  1- 5-2017 2(Exh. A) 020.030.010(a) 2-2017  2- 2-2017 4       Added 040.010.040(f) 3-2017  2-16-2017 4       Added 040.010.040(g) 9-2017  6- 1-2017 2 120.030.070 3 120.030.080(a), (b) 11-2017  6- 1-2017 2 070.130.110(c), (e) 12-2017  6- 1-2017 2       Added 010.020.071 14-2017  6- 1-2017 2 080.040.015(d) 3(Exh. A) 080.060.020 15-2017  7- 6-2017 2 100.020.010 16-2017  8-17-2017 2       Added 020.020.010(14) 3       Added 020.020.020(14)       Rnbd 020.020.020(14)       as 020.020.020(15) 4       Added 020.020.030(n) 17-2017  8-17-2017 2       Rpld 090.010.010- 
090.010.050 2(Exh. A) 
      Added 090.010.010- 
090.010.080 20-2017 11- 2-2017 2       Rpld Tit. 060 2(Exh. A) 
      Added   
Tit. 060 21-2017 11-16-2017 2       Rpld 070.130.120- 
070.130.100       Added 070.130.110 24-2017 11-16-2017 2 070.040.030 3       Rpld 070.040.040(a)(12) 4(Exh. A) 
      Added 070.045.010- 
070.045.070 25-2017 11-16-2017 1 070.040.120(b) 27-2017 12- 7-2017 2 070.140.020 3 070.140.030(a) 1-2018  1-18-2018 2       Added 070.130.110(d)(5) 2-2018  1-18-2018 2 020.020.020(14)a. 3 020.020.030(n) 5-2018  3- 1-2018 2       Rpld 050.050.020 6-2018  3- 1-2018 2 020.020.020(7)a. 3 020.020.030(g) 8-2018  4- 5-2018 2 060.020.020 9-2018  4-20-2018 2 020.020.040(a) 11-2018  6- 7-2018 2 070.040.120(e)       Added 070.040.120(i) 3 070.040.130(e)       Added 070.040.130(i) 12-2018  6- 7-2018 2 040.010.010 040.020.010(2) 040.020.020(10) 040.030.020(12) 14-2018  7-19-2018 2       Rpld 010.050.010-010.050.200       Added 010.050.010 3 010.040.010 15-2018  7- 5-2018 2 080.010.030(a), (g) 080.010.040 080.010.050(a) 080.010.060(f)(1), (g), (h) 2018-16  7-19-2018 2       Added 050.100.010-050.100.070 17-2018  7-19-2018 2       Rpld 090.030.010(b)(9) 18-2018  7-19-2018 2 040.020.170(f) 19-2018  8-2-2018 2(Exh. A)       Rpld 070.010.010-070.010.090, 070.020.010-070.020.130, 070.030.010-070.030.200, 070.040.010-070.040.130, 070.045.010-070.045.070, 070.050.010-070.050.110, 070.060.010-070.060.080, 070.070.010-070.070.040, 070.080.010-070.080.080, 070.090.010-070.090.230, 070.100.010-070.100.050, 070.110.010-070.110.080, 070.120.005-070.120.265, 070.130.110, 070.140.010-070.140.190, 070.150.010-070.150.120, 070.160.010-070.160.100       Added 070.010.010-070.010.080, 070.020.010-070.020.190, 070.030.010-070.030.050, 070.040.010-070.040.120, 070.050.010-070.050.060, 070.060.010-070.060.080, 070.070.010-070.070.030 3 010.020.071(a) 4 050.030.012(5) 050.030.015(a)(10) 050.030.040 050.070.015(a) 050.080.020 5       Rpld 090.040.085 6 100.020.020 100.040.030(b) 21-2018  9-20-2018 2 020.020.020(3)d., e. 3 020.020.030(c)(1) 3 060.090.020 3-2019  1-31-2019 2(Exh. A) 070.030.020(e) 070.030.040(d)(1)g.1. 070.040.040(c)(4)d. 070.040.050(b)(2)a., b. 070.040.050(c)(2) 070.040.050(f)(2)a.2., 3. 070.040.050(f)(3)c.3. 070.040.060(b)(3)a. 070.040.100(f)(9)a. 070.040.110(i) 070.060.020 070.060.030(c)(3) 070.060.040(a)(3)e.2. 070.060.040(c)(3)c.       Rpld 070.060.050(a)(2)d.2.iii. 070.060.050(a)(4)b. 070.060.050(c)(2)b. 070.060.060(e)(2)a., b. 5-2019  2-21-2019 2       Rpld 010.020.071 8-2019  4- 4-2019 2 100.010.020 3 100.010.030(c) 4 100.010.040(a) 5 100.010.050(a) 14-2019  4- 4-2019 2 020.030.010(a) 15-2019  4- 4-2019 2 070.040.060(c)(1)a.  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
Colorado 
Revised 
Statutes (C.R.S.) Section 
this Code 2-12-101 et seq. 120.040.020 11-35-101(1) 040.040.040 tit. 11, art. 56, pt. 1 080.070.040 080.080.040 tit. 12, art. 22, pt. 3 050.070.050 tit. 24, art. 6, pt. 4 100.040.020 tit. 30, art. 20, pt. 3 080.080.040 tit. 31, art. 16, 
pts. 1, 2 120.040.010 tit. 31, art. 35, pt. 4 080.070.040 12-4-112 060.030.020 12-22-303 120.030.090 12-23-101 et seq. 060.100.020 12-25-303 060.020.020 tit. 12, art. 43.3 050.080.010 050.080.020 12-43.3-104(8)-(10) 050.080.020 12-43.3-402- 
12-43.3-404 050.080.020 12-43.3-404(11), (12) 050.080.020 tit. 12, art. 43.4 050.020.010 050.080.010 050.080.020 050.090.010 050.090.020 tit. 12, arts. 46-48 020.020.030 tit. 12, art. 46 120.030.093 12-46-106.5 020.020.030 tit. 12, art. 47 100.040.020 120.030.092 12-47-101 et seq. 070.070.020 12-47-103 120.030.070 12-47-106.5 020.020.030 12-47-301 020.020.030 12-47-301(11) 050.100.010 050.100.050 050.100.060 12-47-313 050.060.041 12-47-421 120.030.080 12-47-909 050.100.060 12-58-101 et seq. 080.030.040 080.040.030 13-10-103 030.030.080 16-4-101 et seq. 030.030.040 16-7-301 et seq. 030.030.060 18-7-208 050.070.035 18-7-301 050.070.035 18-18-106(7) 120.030.090 18-18-406(10) 120.030.090 18-18-406(11) 120.030.090 22-32-101 et seq. 070.060.050 tit. 24, art. 68 070.060.030 24-65.5-103 070.060.030 24-72-201 et seq. 030.010.020 050.080.090 25-1-114(h) 080.040.010 25-5-410(1)(i)(II) 120.030.093 25-14-103.5 100.040.030 27-10.5-101 et seq. 070.070.020 28-2-107 Art. 110.030 29-2-106.1 040.040.040 29-20-101 et seq. 070.010.040 30-20-101(6) 080.080.020 30-20-101(8) 080.080.020 30-28-110 070.060.050 tit. 31, art. 21, pt. 2 010.040.040 31-12-101 et seq. 070.060.040 31-21-211(8) 010.040.040 31-23-201 et seq. 070.060.080 31-23-301 et seq. 070.010.040 31-23-305 070.060.040 31-25-107 050.070.020 070.030.030 tit. 31, art. 35, pt. 4 080.070.050 38-20-106 090.010.050 38-20-107 et seq. 090.010.050 38-20-116 090.010.050 38-45-101 et seq. 070.030.030 38-51-101 et seq. 060.020.020 060.030.020 39-1-102 100.040.040 39-21-110.5 040.040.050 39-28.8-101 et seq. 040.010.040 42-2-127 120.040.030 41-2-204 090.010.050 42-3-103 120.040.020 42-4-111 120.040.020 42-4-111(a) 120.040.020 42-4-1803 120.040.020 42-4-1804 120.040.020 42-4-1804(5) 120.040.020 43-2-147 070.040.070 tit. 122, art. 43.3 070.070.020 tit. 122, art. 43.4 070.070.020  
