CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF LAFAYETTE, COLORADO 
____________ 
CHARTER 
and 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted August 4, 1981 
Effective October 12, 1981 
____________ 
Republished in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
OF THE 
CITY OF LAFAYETTE, COLORADO 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Bob L. Burger 
Mayor 
____________ 
Phyllis Thieme 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Alex Ariniello 
James Colt 
John Drennen 
Larry Ferris 
Lee Roy Munger 
City Council 
____________ 
Ronald J. Cohen 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Beverly A. Smith 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Lafayette of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1963 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the governing body. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1963 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations setting forth their location within the Code volume is included at the back of this volume. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Table also appearing in the back of the volume, any ordinance included herein can be readily found in the Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the second section of chapter 5 is 5-2. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 1-2 and 1-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 1-2.1, 1-2.2 and 1-2.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 20 and 25 it will be designated as chapter 23. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters in maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in section 6 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Adriana Sousa, Editor, and Emily Generes, Proofreader, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
June, 2018 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 922 
INTRODUCED BY Councilman Ariniello 
An Ordinance of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, Adopting and Enacting, by Reference, a Code of Ordinances for Lafayette, Colorado, Compiling and Revising the Ordinances of a General and Permanent Nature Entitled the Code of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, as Said Ordinances Existed and Were Effective on December 16th, 1980; Repealing Certain Ordinances Not Contained Therein; Providing Penalties; Adopting Secondary Codes; Providing for the Amendment of Said Codes; and Providing for the Sale of Copies of Said Code. The City of Lafayette, Colorado, Ordains: 
    Section 1. Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Colorado Revised Statutes and by Section 7.8 of the Charter of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, there is hereby adopted that certain code, entitled the "Code of the City of Lafayette, Colorado", together with all secondary codes duly described in said Code of Ordinances and incorporated therein by reference, excluding however, any provisions in the said Code that are inconsistent with the provisions of ordinances adopted by the City of Lafayette subsequent to December 16, 1980, and in full force and effect on the effective date of this Ordinance. 
    Section 2. The following secondary codes are incorporated in the Code of Ordinances, City of Lafayette, Colorado: 
(a)  Uniform Building Code, 1976 Edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California; 
(b)  Uniform Mechanical Code, 1976 Edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California; 
(c)  Uniform Fire Code, 1976 Edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California; 
(d)  Uniform Plumbing Code, 1976 Edition, promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, Los Angeles, California; 
(e)  National Electrical Code, 1978 Edition, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, Boston, Massachusetts; 
(f)  Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1976 Edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California; 
(g)  Colorado Model Energy Efficiency Construction and Renovation Standards for Non-residential Buildings, 1978 publication, promulgated by the Office of State Planning and Budgeting, Board for Energy Efficient Non-residential Building Standards, Denver, Colorado; 
(h)  Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities, 1977 Edition, promulgated by the State Department of Highways, Denver, Colorado; 
(i)  Life Safety Code, 1976 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, Boston, Massachusetts; 
(j)  Uniform Housing Code, 1976 Edition, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, Whittier, California. 
    The above codes are adopted as amended by ordinance. Copies thereof are available for inspection at the office of the City Clerk. Penalties for the violation of such codes are provided in Section 5 of this Ordinance. 
    Section 3. All provisions of said Code of Ordinances shall be in full force and effect sixty (60) days from the date of publication of this Ordinance, excepting those provisions of the said Code inconsistent with ordinances adopted by the City of Lafayette subsequent to December 16, 1980 and in effect on the effective date of this Ordinance. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Lafayette in legal effect on or before December 16, 1980, and not in said Code of Ordinances or recognized or continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
    Section 4. The repeal provided for in Section 3 of this Ordinance shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment or decree rendered prior to said effective date; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance: 
(a)  Promising, guaranteeing or authorizing the payment of money by or for the City. 
(b)  Authorizing the issuance of bonds or other evidence of indebtedness. 
(c)  Regarding any right or franchise conferred or granted prior to the effective date hereof. 
(d)  Establishing or relating to the compensation of City officers or employees. 
(e)  Levying taxes, making appropriations or adopting a budget. 
(f)  Relating to any specific local improvement. 
(g)  Relating to any special assessment. 
(h)  Vacating, accepting, naming, establishing, locating, relocating or opening any street or public way. 
(i)  Affecting the corporate limits of the City. 
(j)  Regulating traffic or parking at specific locations, not inconsistent herewith. 
(k)  Regulating trailers or trailer parks. 
(l)  Relating to zoning. 
(m)  Relating to subdivision regulations. 
    Section 5. Said Code of Ordinances contains the following penalty: 
    Section 1-10. General penalty; continuing violations; injunction. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse or fail to comply with or resist the enforcement of any provision of this Code, or commit any act or omission declared to be a misdemeanor, and where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provisions of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Unless otherwise indicated, each day or portion thereof that any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the above penalties and fines, the City may obtain enforcement of its ordinances by seeking injunctive relief in a court of proper jurisdiction. 
    Section 6. Any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Lafayette, Colorado," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section 7. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized by him or her to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may from time to time be repealed by the City Council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
    Section 8. Violations of said Code shall be punished as provided therein or as set out in Section 5 of this Ordinance. 
    Section 9. In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 1-10 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 10. If any section, subsection or provision of this Code of Ordinances, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any competent court, such invalidity shall not affect the other sections, subsections, provisions or applications of this Code if they can be given effect without the invalid sections, subsections, provision or application. 
    Section 11. At least three (3) copies of the Code of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, and each secondary code adopted therein, all certified by the Mayor and City Clerk to be true copies of such codes as they were adopted by this Ordinance, shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk available for public inspection. One copy of each such code shall be kept in the office of the Chief Enforcement Officer thereof rather than in the office of the Clerk. 
    Section 12. The City Clerk shall maintain a reasonable supply of copies of this Code to be available for purchase by the public at a moderate price. 
    INTRODUCED AND PASSED ON FIRST READING AND PUBLIC NOTICE ORDERED THIS 7th DAY OF JULY, 1981. 
    PASSED ON SECOND AND FINAL READING AND PUBLIC NOTICE ORDERED THIS 4th DAY OF AUGUST, 1981. CITY OF LAFAYETTE, COLORADO 
/s/ Bob L. Burger 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Beverly A. Smith 
City Clerk 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    Adding to this table with each supplement helps users of this Municipal Code gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Legislation Include/Omit Supp. No. 2017-32 Included 1 2017-33 Included 1 2018-17 Included 1 2018-25 Included 1 2018-30 Included 1 2019-01 Included 1 2019-06 Included 1 2019-08 Included 2  
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Charter of the City of Lafayette was approved by the voters of the city in a special city election held on April 1, 1958. The charter provisions appear here as originally adopted and as subsequently amended. A historical citation follows each section that has been amended. Any addition made by the editor for purposes of clarity appears in brackets [ ]. 
Editor's note- Question No. 2D of Res. No. 2006-33, adopted Sept. 5, 2006, and approved by the electorate on Nov. 7, 2006, provided for amending by editing to gender neutralize the entire Charter. 

PREFATORY SYNOPSIS 
    In conformity with the provisions and under the authority granted to cities by Article XX of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, the twenty-one (21) delegates elected by the citizens of Lafayette, have formulated and submit herewith this Charter to meet the special needs of the City of Lafayette. 
    Since its organization on January 2, 1958, the Lafayette Charter Convention and its Committee have worked earnestly and unceasingly at the very difficult task assigned to them. In this process, the opinions and views of the people have been secured, public hearings held, suggestions and advice invited at all times, and detailed studies of a large number of charters have been made. 
    The Convention submits the results of its effort in the form of a proposed Charter for the consideration of the voters of Lafayette at a special city election to be held on April 1, 1958. 
    Under provisions of this Charter, a Strong-Council form of government is established. The Council is composed of seven (7) members, to be elected from the city at large. Provision is made for the overlapping terms with a majority of the Council to be elected every two (2) years. 
    The Council is the policy determining body or overall governing agent of the city, having power to pass ordinances, determine policy and appoint department heads. Such department heads shall report directly to the City Council. The Charter is designed in such a manner as to permit provision for a Chief Administrative Officer with a minimum of Charter amending. 
    The Charter is designed to provide the maximum of teamwork among members of the Council. The Council selects its own team leader, the Mayor, to preside at meetings and represent the city at ceremonial functions. 
    The organization of the city government has been drawn to assure maximum flexibility in organizational arrangements so that it will be possible for government of the city to readily adjust to new demands and changing circumstances as our community grows and prospers. 
    The Charter includes modern provisions for proper budgeting, fiscal control, and auditing. Many provisions have been included to assure economical and business-like fiscal procedures. 
    The direct techniques of initiative, referendum and recall have been included in the Charter. Such provisions provide the means by which the people can, if necessary, directly control the policies of their city government at all times, enact or reject legislation as they see fit, and rid themselves of an elected official who fails to perform his/her duties properly. In addition, other safeguards have been included in the Chapter [Charter] to prevent abuse of any office in the city government. 
    The Charter may be amended, if desirable, in accordance with provisions in the Constitution. Every section has been written, insofar as possible, in accordance with sound and well established principles of good government and administration with the best interest of the citizens of Lafayette in mind. 
PREAMBLE 
    We the people of Lafayette, Colorado, under the authority of the Constitution of the State of Colorado, do ordain, establish, and adopt this Charter for our municipal government. 
Chapter I NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.1. - Name and boundaries. 
    The municipal corporation heretofore existing as the "Town of Lafayette" in Boulder County of Colorado shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate and under this Charter shall be known as the "City of Lafayette" with the same boundaries until changed in a manner authorized by law. 
State Law reference- Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, § 31-12-101 et seq., C.R.S. 1973. 
Chapter II MUNICIPAL POWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Exercise of municipal powers, C. R. S. § 31-15-101 et seq. 

Sec. 2.1. - Powers, rights and liabilities. 
    By the name of the City of Lafayette the municipal corporation shall have perpetual succession; shall own, possess and hold all property, real and personal heretofore owned, possessed and held by the Town of Lafayette and does assume and shall manage and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities and shall acquire all benefits and does assume and shall pay all bonds, obligations and indebtedness of said Town or City of Lafayette; may, by the name of the City of Lafayette sue and defend, plead and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters and proceedings; may purchase, receive, hold and enjoy, or sell and dispose of real and personal property; may have and use a common seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
    The city shall have all the power of local self-government and home rule and all power possible for a city to have under the Constitution of the State of Colorado. The city shall also have all powers that now or hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the laws of the State of Colorado, and the enumeration of particular powers in this Charter is not exclusive of others. All such powers shall be exercised in the manner prescribed in this Charter or, if not provided for herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance of the Council of the city. All ordinances of the Town or City of Lafayette in force at the time this Charter goes into effect shall continue in force except insofar as they may conflict with the provisions of this Charter or shall be amended or repealed by ordinances enacted under the authority of this Charter. 
State Law reference- Home rule for cities and towns, Art. Idaho Code, § 6, Colo. Const.; Municipal Home Rule Act of 1971, C. R. S. § 31-2-201 et seq. 
Sec. 2.2. - [Form of government.] 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "Strong Council Government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution and by this Charter all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective Council. 
Sec. 2.3. - Community Bill of Rights and obligations-The protection of these rights by prohibiting natural gas and oil extraction. 
    The rights secured here are not mere privileges; they are obligations justly placed on government and on each member of the community to respect freedoms held individually and collectively by every member of the community. The protection of these rights constitutes the highest and best use of the police powers that this municipality possesses. 
    Throughout this Section, the term "ecosystem" shall include, but not be limited to, air, soil, independent (non-corporate centrally controlled or contracted) agriculture, naturally occurring plants, animals, wetlands, streams, rivers, aquifers, and other water systems. 
    All rights secured by this Charter and this Section shall be self-executing. These rights shall be enforceable against private and public entities. The rights specifically enumerated by this Community Bill of Rights Section are enforceable exclusively with regard to the extraction of natural gas and oil, as prohibited by this charter provision. The expansion of protections of the rights herein enumerated, and the further enumeration of rights, as well as additional prohibitions against rights-denying behavior, through citizen use of the initiative process, is hereby encouraged. The Community Bill of Rights and Obligations is law, as follows: 
a.  Right to community self-government. All residents of the City of Lafayette possess the fundamental and unalienable right to a form of governance where they live which recognizes that all power is inherent in the people, that all free governments are founded on the people's authority and consent, and that corporate entities and their directors and managers shall not enjoy special privileges or powers under the law which make community majorities subordinate to them. 
b.  People as sovereign. The City of Lafayette shall be the governing authority responsible to, and governed by, the residents of the City. Use of the "City of Lafayette" municipal corporation by the sovereign people of the City to make law shall not be construed to limit or surrender the sovereign authority or immunities of the people to a municipal corporation that is subordinate to them in all respects at all times. The people at all times enjoy and retain an unalienable and indefeasible right to self-governance in the community where they reside. 
c.  Right to clean water. All residents and ecosystems in the City of Lafayette possess a fundamental and unalienable right to sustainably access, use, consume, and preserve water drawn from natural water cycles that provide water necessary to sustain life-free from toxins, carcinogens, particulates, nucleotides, hydrocarbons and other substances introduced into the environment. 
d.  Right to clean air. All residents and ecosystems in the City of Lafayette possess a fundamental and unalienable right to breathe air untainted by toxins, carcinogens, particulates, nucleotides, hydrocarbons and other substances introduced into the environment. 
e.  Right to be free from chemical trespass. All residents and ecosystems within the City of Lafayette possess a fundamental and unalienable right to be free from involuntary chemical trespass including toxins, carcinogens, particulates, nucleotides, hydrocarbons and other substances introduced into the environment. 
f.  Right to peaceful enjoyment of home. Residents of the City of Lafayette possess a fundamental and unalienable right to the peaceful enjoyment of their homes, free from interference, intrusion, nuisances or impediments to access and occupation. 
g.  Rights of ecosystems. Ecosystems possess unalienable and fundamental rights to exist and flourish within the City of Lafayette. Residents of the City shall possess legal standing to enforce those rights on behalf of those ecosystems. 
h.  Right to a sustainable energy future. All residents in the City of Lafayette possess a right to a sustainable, healthy energy future, which includes, but is not limited to, the development, production, and use of energy from renewable, healthy, and sustainable fuel sources, exclusive of fossil and nuclear fuels, and the right to establish local sustainable energy policies to further secure this right. 
i.  Securing and protecting rights. To further secure and protect the rights enumerated by the Community Bill of Rights: 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any corporation or any person using a corporation to engage in the extraction of gas or oil within the City of Lafayette, with the exception of wells active and producing at the time this Charter Provision is enacted, and with the restriction and prohibition against the activation of inactive wells and the prohibition against the use of extraction technologies not in use in existing and producing wells at the time of enactment of this Charter provision. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any corporation or any person using a corporation to deposit, store or transport waste water, "produced" water, "frack" water, brine or other materials, chemicals or by-products used in or resulting from the extraction of gas or oil, within, upon or through the land, air or waters of the City of Lafayette. 
3.  It shall be unlawful for any corporation, or person using a corporation, to engage in the creation of fossil fuel, nuclear or other non-sustainable energy production and delivery infrastructures, such as pipelines, processing facilities, compressors, or storage and transportation facilities that support or facilitate industrial activities related to the extraction of natural gas and oil. 
4.  It shall be unlawful for any corporation or person using a corporation to extract water from surface or sub-surface sources in the City of Lafayette for use in the extraction of gas or oil. 
5.  Corporations and persons using corporations to engage in gas or oil extraction in a neighboring municipality, county or state shall be strictly liable for all harms caused to natural water sources, ecosystems, people and human communities within the City of Lafayette. 
6.  Corporations in violation of the prohibition against gas and oil extraction, or seeking to engage in gas or oil extraction shall not have the rights of "persons" afforded by the United States and Colorado constitutions, nor shall those corporations be afforded the protections of the commerce or contracts clauses within the United States Constitution or corresponding sections of the Colorado Constitution. 
7.  Corporations engaged in the extraction of gas or oil shall not possess the authority or power to enforce State or federal preemptive law against the people of the City of Lafayette, or to challenge or overturn municipal ordinances or Charter provisions. 
8.  No permit, license, privilege or charter issued by any State or federal agency, Commission or Board to any person or any corporation operating under a State charter, or any director, officer, owner, or manager of a corporation operating under a State charter, which would violate the prohibitions of this Charter provision or deprive any City resident(s) or ecosystem of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by this Charter, the Colorado Constitution, the United States Constitution, or other laws, shall be deemed valid within the City of Lafayette. 
9.  Any person, corporation, or other entity that violates any prohibition of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay the maximum fine allowable under State law for that violation, and shall be subject to imprisonment to the extent allowed by law. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation occurs and for each section of this Ordinance found to be violated. Enforcement of this article may be initiated by the Lafayette Police Department, the Director of Public Safety, or other designee of City Council. Lafayette may also enforce this Ordinance through an action in equity. In such an action, Lafayette shall be entitled to recover damages and all costs of litigation, including, without limitation, expert and attorney's fees. 
10.  Any City resident shall have the authority to enforce this Ordinance through an action in equity. In such an action, the resident shall be entitled to recover damages and all costs of litigation, including, without limitation, expert and attorney's fees. Any person who brings an action to secure or protect the rights of ecosystems within Lafayette shall bring that action in the name of the ecosystem in a court of competent jurisdiction. Damages shall be measured by the cost of restoring the ecosystem to its pre-damaged state, and shall be paid to Lafayette or other applicable governmental entity, to be used exclusively for the full and complete restoration of the ecosystem. 
11.  The provisions of this section are severable. If any court of competent jurisdiction decides that any sub-section, clause, sentence, part, or provision of this section is illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any of the remaining sub-sections, clauses, sentences, parts, or provisions of this Community Bill of Rights and its prohibitions. The People of the City of Lafayette hereby declare that in the event of such a decision, and the determination that the court's ruling is legitimate, they would have enacted this amendment even without the sub-section, clause, sentence, part, or provision that the court decides is illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional. 
Editor's note- (Approved at election held Nov. 5, 2013) 
Editor's note- In August of 2014, in the case of Colorado Oil and Gas Association vs. City of Lafayette, Colorado (Case No. 13 CV 3174), the District Court for Boulder County, Colorado found this Section 2.3 to Chapter II of the Lafayette City Charter to be invalid as being pre-empted by state law, and permanently enjoined this section. The District Court's order became final with no appeal being filed. 
Chapter III ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Election Code, C. R. S. § 31-10-101 et seq. 

Sec. 3.1. - Applicability of State Constitution. 
    The Council shall provide by ordinance for the manner of holding City elections and such additional regulations in respect to elections not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or the State Constitution as may be necessary to accomplish the intent of this chapter [Charter]. 
    The provisions of any and all state laws now or hereafter in force, except as herein provided or as the Council may otherwise by ordinance provide, shall govern all municipal elections. 
State Law reference- Suffrage and elections, Art. VII, Colo. Const. 
Sec. 3.2. - Elective officers and terms of office. 
    The elective officers of the city shall be seven (7) Councilors, all of whom shall be nominated and elected from the city at large. 
    At each regular City election there shall be elected four (4) Councilors and such additional number as may be required to fill vacancies pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.6. The three (3) receiving the highest number of votes shall each be elected for a term of office of four (4) years, the one receiving the fourth highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of office of two (2) years, and a number equal to the number of vacancies being filled (if any) who shall receive the next highest number of votes in order shall each be elected for a term of office of two (2) years. The terms of office of Councilors shall commence at the next regular council meeting following the certification of the election. 
(Res. No. 2006-33, § 1(2A), 9-5-06) 
Editor's note- Resolution No. 2006-33, adopted Sept. 5, 2006, amending § 3.2, was approved at referendum on Nov. 7, 2006. 
Sec. 3.3. - Wards and precincts. 
    The City of Lafayette shall consist of one ward. The election precincts of the city shall remain as they exist on the effective date of this Charter, until altered by the Council as hereinafter provided. The Council shall by resolution from time to time establish convenient election precincts in accordance with the Charter and statutes. 
State Law reference- Establishment of precincts, C. R. S. § 31-10-502. 
Sec. 3.4. - Election date. 
    A regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday in November in odd-numbered years commencing in the year 1995. Special elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 7-15-75; Ord. No. 965, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 1986-26, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 1993-34, § 1, 8-17-93; Res. No. 2006-33, § 1(2A), 9-5-06) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 965, adopted Jan. 4, 1983, amending § 3.4 was approved at a referendum held Feb. 22, 1983. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1986-26, approved by the electorate on Nov. 4, 1986, further amended such section to read as herein set out. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1993-34, approved by the electorate on Nov. 2, 1993, further amended this section to read as herein set out. Subsequently, Res. No. 2006-33, approved by the electorate on Nov. 7, 2006, further amended this section to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 3.5. - Special elections. 
    Special City elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council at least thirty (30) days in advance of such election, or when required by this Charter or statute. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. 
Sec. 3.6. - Notice of election. 
    The City Clerk shall prepare, in accordance with the election laws of the State of Colorado, a list of candidates whose names are entitled to appear on the ballot, with the name of the office to be filled, and shall publish the same, along with the text of any ballot question lawfully to appear on the ballot. 
(Ord. No. 1993-34, § 1, 8-17-93) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-34, adopted Aug. 17, 1993, amending § 3.6, was approved at referendum on Nov. 2, 1993. 
Sec. 3.7. - Voting hours. 
    The polls shall be kept open on election day from 7:00 o'clock a.m. to 7:00 [o'clock] p.m. 
Sec. 3.8. - Nominations. 
    Any person who is qualified for the office to be filled may be nominated for an elective office by petition. A petition for this purpose shall be signed by not less than twenty-five (25) registered electors for each candidate to be elected. A registered elector may sign petitions for as many persons as there are offices to be filled by election. The signatures on the nominating petition need not all be subscribed on one (1) page, but to each separate page of the petition there shall be attached a signed statement of the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers on each page of the petition, and that each signature thereon was made in his/her presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Following each signature on the petition of nomination shall be written the residence address of the signer. The nominating petition shall be obtained from the City Clerk. 
(Res. No. 2006-33, § 1(2A), 9-5-06) 
Editor's note- Resolution No. 2006-33, adopted Sept. 5, 2006, amending § 3.8, was approved at referendum on Nov. 7, 2006. 
Sec. 3.9. - Acceptance of nomination. 
    No nominating petition shall be accepted unless accompanied by a verified acceptance. 
    The City Clerk shall forthwith examine all petitions submitted. If a petition is found to be signed by fewer persons than the number certified by the circulator, the signatures shall be accepted unless void on other grounds. If a petition is found to be signed by more persons than the number of signatures certified, the last signature in excess of the number certified shall be disregarded. Within five (5) days after the filing of the nominating petition the City Clerk shall notify the candidate and the person who filed the petition whether or not it is found to be signed by the required number of qualified electors. If a petition is found insufficient the City Clerk shall return it immediately to the person who filed it, with a statement certifying wherein the petition is found insufficient. Within the regular time for filing petitions, such a petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition, in which case the time of the first filing shall be disregarded in determining the validity of signatures thereon, or a different petition may be filed for the same candidate. The petition of each person nominated shall be preserved by the election authorities until the expiration of the term of office for which the person has been nominated. All nominating papers comprising a petition shall be filed as one (1) instrument with the City Clerk in accordance with the election laws of the State of Colorado. The City Clerk shall make a record of the exact time at which each petition is filed and shall take and preserve the name and address of the person by whom it is filed. A person who has been nominated may, not later than twenty (20) days before the day of election, withdraw by filing with the City Clerk a request therefor in writing. No name so withdrawn shall be placed upon the ballot, provided that if the election is conducted as part of a coordinated election, the name of any person who has been nominated shall remain on the ballot unless such person files a timely request for withdrawal in accordance with the deadline therefor contained in the election laws of the State of Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 1993-34, § 1, 8-17-93) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-34, adopted Aug. 17, 1993, amending § 3.9, was approved at referendum on Nov. 2, 1993. 
Sec. 3.10. - Form of ballots. 
    The election laws of the state of Colorado shall determine the form of ballots. 
State Law reference- Voting machine ballots, C.R.S. § 31-10-703; electronic system ballots, C.R.S. §§ 31-10-803, 31-10-806; paper ballots, C.R.S. § 31-10-901 et seq. 
Sec. 3.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Resolution No. 2006-33, adopted Sept. 5, 2006, and approved at referendum on Nov. 7, 2006, repealed § 3.11, which pertained to election procedure. 
Sec. 3.12. - Canvass of vote. 
    The canvass of vote shall be conducted to conform to the State statutes. 
State Law reference- Canvass of votes, § 31-10-1201 et seq., C.R.S. 1973. 
Sec. 3.13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Resolution No. 2006-33, adopted Sept. 5, 2006, and approved at referendum on Nov. 7, 2006, repealed § 3.13, which pertained to judges and clerks. 
Sec. 3.14. - Compensation of judges and clerks. 
    Judges and clerks of election and other election personnel shall receive such compensation as may be set in advance of an election by the Council. 
Sec. 3.15. - Informalities. 
    No informalities in conducting City elections shall invalidate the same, if they have been conducted fairly and in substantial conformity with the requirements of this Charter. 
Sec. 3.16. - Registration. 
    The registration of all voters shall conform to the State Statutes. 
State Law reference- Qualifications and registration of electors, C. R. S. § 31-10-201 et seq. 
Sec. 3.17. - Recall. 
    Any incumbent of an elective office may be removed from office by the qualified electors of the city after he/she has held office for six (6) months. 
    A petition demanding the recall of the officer sought to be removed and signed by qualified electors equal in number to at least twenty-five (25) per centum of the total number of votes cast for the office that is being recalled, to conform with Article XXI of the Constitution, shall be addressed to the Council and delivered to the City Clerk not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after the affidavit making charges against said officer has been filed. Each elector signing the petition shall write his/her home address after his/her name. Said petition may be in sections of one or more sheets fastened securely at the top, and upon each section of the petition shall be written or printed a copy of the charges previously filed with the City Clerk. One of the electors signing each section shall append thereto his/her affidavit that each signature written thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be and that the affiant has not and will not receive any compensation for obtaining the signatures. All sections of the petition shall be filed as one instrument, with the endorsement of the names of three (3) persons designated as filing the same. Provided, however, that prior to the filing of any recall petition one or more qualified electors shall file with the City Clerk an affidavit of not more than three hundred (300) words stating the reasons for the recall of the officer sought to be removed. The City Clerk shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the filing of said affidavit, mail a copy by registered mail to the officer sought to be recalled who may file with the City Clerk a sworn statement in defense of charges made against him/her. 
    Within ten (10) days of the filing of said petition the City Clerk shall ascertain by examination of the petition and the registration books whether the petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified electors and shall attach thereto his/her certificate showing the result of such examination. If the petition is insufficient he/she shall forthwith in writing, notify one or more of the persons designated on the petition as filing the same. The petition may be withdrawn and amended within twenty (20) days from the filing of the certificate. The City Clerk, within five (5) days after such amendment, shall make like examination of the amended petition and attach thereto his/her certificate of the result. If the petition is still insufficient, he/she shall return it to one of the persons designated thereon as filing it, without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same person. 
    Any qualified elector desiring to become a candidate at the recall election shall do so by petition as required by the article on the elections hereof, which petition if presented to the City Clerk at least twenty (20) days before said election shall entitle him/her to have his/her name placed on the ballot. Notice of election shall be given as provided in the article of this Charter relating to elections. 
    If the petition or amended petition is found sufficient, the City Clerk shall submit the same with his/her certificate to the Council without delay and the Council, if the officer sought to be removed does not resign within five (5) days thereafter, shall order an election. There shall be printed on the official ballot as to every officer whose recall is to be voted on, the words "Shall (name of person against whom the recall petition is filed) be recalled from the office of (_______)?" Following such question shall be the words "Yes" and "No" on separate lines, with a blank space at the right of each, in which the voter shall indicate, by marking a cross (x), his/her vote for or against such recall. 
    On such ballots, under the questions, there shall be printed the names of those persons who have been nominated as candidates to succeed the person sought to be recalled; but no vote cast shall be counted for any candidate for such office, unless the voter also voted for or against the recall of such person sought to be recalled from said office. The foregoing sentence or instructions shall be printed on the ballot. The name of the person against whom the petition is filed shall not appear on the ballot as a candidate for the office. 
    If the majority of those voting on said question of the recall of any incumbent from office shall vote "NO," said incumbent shall continue in said office; if a majority shall vote "YES," such incumbent shall thereupon be deemed removed from such office upon the qualification of his/her successor. Such election shall be held on a Tuesday fixed by the Council not less than forty-five (45) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date that the City Clerk's said certificate was filed; provided that if any other city election is to occur within ninety (90) days from the date of the City Clerk's certificate, the Council shall postpone and consolidate the recall election with such other city elections. 
    If a vacancy occurs in said office after a recall election has been ordered, the election to fill the vacancy shall nevertheless proceed as in this article provided. 
    No person who has been recalled or has resigned while recall proceedings were pending against him/her shall serve the city in any capacity within two (2) years after such removal or resignation. 
    No person shall receive any compensation whatsoever for canvassing for signatures to a petition for recall of any official. 
Chapter IV ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 4.1. - The city council. 
    The City Council shall consist of seven (7) members, one of whom shall serve as Mayor. The Council shall constitute the legislative and governing body of the city and shall have power and authority except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by the Constitution of the State of Colorado, to exercise all powers conferred upon or possessed by the city, and shall have the power and authority to adopt such laws, ordinances and resolutions as it shall deem proper in the exercise thereof. 
Sec. 4.2. - Qualifications of councilors. 
    Members of the Council shall meet the eligibility requirements contained in Section 5.1. of this Charter. The Council shall be sole judge of the election and qualifications of its own members, subject only to review by the court. 
Sec. 4.3. - Compensation of mayor and councilors. 
    The members of the Council shall receive such compensation as the Council shall by ordinance prescribe; provided, however, they shall neither increase nor decrease the compensation of any member during his/her term of office, except members of the Council whose terms do not expire at the next regular city election, who shall receive the same salary as that provided for incoming members for the remainder of their term of office. The Mayor and Councilors may, upon order of the Council, be paid such necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the city as are authorized and itemized. 
    In the absence of such an ordinance, the monthly compensation for members of the Lafayette City Council shall, without further action by the City Council be increased or decreased, in all even-numbered years, by the same collective percentage rates as the budgeted compensative adjustments provided to the general employees of the City for the immediate two calendar years. 
(Ord. No. 2017-33, § 1, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 4.4. - Election of mayor; mayor pro tem. 
    The Council shall, at its first meeting, following the certification of each regular city election, and after the newly elected members take office, elect one of its members to serve as Mayor and one to serve as Mayor Pro Tem, both for a term expiring at the first regular Council meeting following the certification of the regular election for Council members. 
    Such election shall be by written ballot and by majority of the members of the Council in office at the time. 
    In the event of absence or disability of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem, the Council may designate another of its members to serve as Acting Mayor during such absence or disability. 
(Res. No. 2007-38, § 1(2C), 9-4-07) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2C of Res. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2007. 
Sec. 4.5. - Duties of mayor. 
(a)  Insofar as required by statute, and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be the executive head of the city. He/she shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the Council equal with that of other members of the Council but shall have no veto power. He/she shall be the presiding officer of the Council. 
(b)  The Mayor shall be a conservator of the peace, and in emergencies may exercise within the city the powers conferred by the Governor of the State of Colorado for purposes of military law, and shall have authority to command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the ordinances of the city and to suppress riot and disorder. 
(c)  The Mayor shall execute and authenticate by his/her signature such instruments as the Council, this Charter or any statutes of the State of Colorado or laws of the United States shall require. 
(d)  Except as may be required by statute, the Mayor shall exercise only such power as this Charter or the Council shall specifically confer upon him/her. 
State Law reference- Governor as commander-in-chief of militia, Art. IV, § 5, Colo. Const. 
Sec. 4.6. - Administrative service. 
    The administrative officers of the city shall be the City Administrator, Attorney, Clerk and Treasurer, and such additional administrative officers as may be created by ordinance. The Council may by ordinance create additional administrative offices and may by ordinance combine any administrative offices in any manner it deems necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the city. 
    As employees of the city, the treasurer (Finance Director) and the Clerk shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the City Administrator in regards to day-to-day operations. Compensation for the City Administrator and Attorney shall be fixed contractually by the Council. 
    The City Administrator, Attorney, Treasurer and Clerk shall be appointed by the Council for an indefinite period, and shall have fiduciary responsibility to the Council. Except as may be otherwise required by this Charter, the Council shall establish by ordinance such departments of the city as it deems necessary or advisable and shall prescribe therein, the functions of each department and the duties, authorities and responsibilities of the officers of each department. 
    The Council may require the City Administrator, if not a resident at the time of appointment or employment, to become a resident of the city within the time set by the Council and so remain throughout the tenure of office or employment. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2E), 8-16-05) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2E of Ord. No. 2005-25, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2005. 
Sec. 4.7. - Clerk; functions and duties. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall keep a permanent journal of its proceedings in the English language. 
(b)  The Clerk shall be custodian of the city seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. He/she shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the city, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for. 
(c)  The Clerk shall certify by his/her signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Council. 
(d)  The Clerk shall provide and maintain in his/her office a supply of forms for all petitions required to be filed for any purpose by the provisions of this Charter. 
(e)  The Clerk shall have power to administer oaths of office. 
(f)  The Clerk shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him/her by this Charter, or by the Council. 
Sec. 4.8. - Treasurer; functions and duties. 
(a)  The Treasurer shall have the custody of all monies of the city, and bond pertaining solely to the Clerk and all evidences of indebtedness belonging to the city or held in trust by the city. 
(b)  The Treasurer shall collect all monies of the city, the collection of which is not provided for elsewhere by charter or ordinance or by statute. He/she shall receive from other officers and employees of the city all money belonging to and receivable by the city that may be collected by such officers and employees, including fines, license fees, taxes, assessments and all other charges. All moneys shall be turned over to the Treasurer after collection or receipt. 
(c)  The Treasurer shall keep and deposit all monies or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine and shall report the same in detail to the City Council. 
(d)  The Treasurer shall disburse all city funds in accordance with the provisions of statute, this Charter and procedures to be established by the Council. 
(e)  The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him/her by this Charter or by the Council. 
(f)  The office of Treasurer may be held by the same person who is serving in the capacity of City Clerk. 
Sec. 4.9. - Attorney; functions and duties. 
(a)  The Attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and be attorney and counsel for, the Council and shall be responsible solely to the Council. He/she shall advise any officer or department head of the city in matters relating to his/her official duties when so requested. 
(b)  The Attorney shall prosecute ordinance violations when requested and he/she shall conduct for the city cases in court and before other legally constituted tribunals. He/she shall file with the Clerk copies of such records and files relating thereto as the Council may direct. 
(c)  The Attorney shall prepare or review all ordinances, contracts, bonds and other written instruments which are submitted to him/her by the Council and shall promptly give his/her opinion as to the legal consequences thereof. 
(d)  The Attorney shall call to the attention of the Council all matters of law, and changes or developments therein, affecting the city. 
(e)  The Attorney shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter, by the Council, or the City Administrator, so long as consistent with duties prescribed by the Charter or City Council. 
(f)  Upon the recommendation of the Attorney, or upon its own initiative, the Council or the City Administrator may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has an interest, or to assist and counsel with the Attorney therein. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2E), 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2011-30, § 1(5), 8-16-11) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2E of Ord. No. 2005-25, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2005. Amending Question No. 5 of Ord. No. 2011-30, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2011. 
Sec. 4.10. - Compensation of attorney and special counsel. 
    The compensation of the Attorney shall be set by the council. No compensation to special legal counsel shall be paid except in accordance with an agreement between the Council and the Attorney or Special Counsel made before the service for which such compensation is to be paid has been rendered. 
Sec. 4.11. - Fire department. 
    The City Council shall provide for and maintain a Department of Fire, the head of which shall be the Fire Chief, appointed by the City Administrator and ratified by City Council. The department shall consist of a Fire Chief, and such other employees of such ranks and grades that may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2D), 8-16-05) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2D of Ord. No. 2005-25, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2005. 
Sec. 4.12. - Police department. 
    The City Council shall provide for and maintain a police department the director of which shall be the Chief of Police, who shall have special knowledge and experience in law enforcement, to be under the appointment and supervision of the City Administrator, which appointment shall be ratified by City Council. 
(a)  The department shall be responsible for the preservation of public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights of persons and property, and the enforcement of this Charter and the ordinances of the city, and such other duties as prescribed for the public peace and safety and the protection of property, including the property of the city within and without the corporate limits. 
(b)  The Chief of Police shall command the department and shall assign its members to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties. He/she shall make rules and regulations concerning the operation of the department and the conduct of its employees. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the employees and for the care and custody of all property used by the department and its employees. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2D), 8-16-05) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2D of Ord. No. 2005-25, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2005. 
Sec. 4.13. - Boards and commissions. 
    All existing boards and commissions shall continue, except as otherwise provided by amendments to the Charter and except as otherwise provided by ordinance. Except for the Planning Commission as provided for in Section 4.14 of the Charter, the City Council may, by ordinance, establish, consolidate or abolish any board or commission for any public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2A), 8-16-05) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2A of Ord. No. 2005-25, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2005. 
Sec. 4.13-1. - Boards and commissions-Procedures. 
(a)  The Council may also provide by ordinance that boards and commissions shall be advisory or quasi-judicial in structure and character. The selection, term, responsibilities, policies and duties concerning each board and commission, except the Planning Commission, shall be as established by ordinance. 
(b)  The appointment or removal of any board or commission member who is required by ordinance to be appointed by the City Council shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Council. A member appointed by the City Council shall serve at the pleasure of Council. 
(c)  The members of each board and commission shall serve without compensation, but may be paid authorized expenses actually incurred in the performance of the duties of the office. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2A), 8-16-05) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2A of Ord. No. 2005-25, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2005. 
Sec. 4.14. - City planning commission. 
    The City Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the City Council after appropriate interviews conducted by a committee of three (3) Council members. No member of the City Council may also serve as a member of the Planning Commission. Planning Commission members shall serve terms of four (4) years, and their terms shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than two (2) members of the Planning Commission shall expire at any one time. 
    The Commission shall elect its chairman from among the appointed members and create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman shall be for one year, with eligibility for re-election. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month. It shall adopt rules for resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
    The Planning Commission is hereby charged with the duty, as organized, of drawing up a suitable zoning ordinance to be presented to the City Council. 
    The Planning Commission will be charged with the preparation of a proposed master plan; the commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the municipality with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the municipality and its environs, which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. The Planning Commission shall recommend the adoption of the master plan to the City Council, who shall adopt the same by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1(2C), 9-4-01; Ord. No. 2011-30, § 1(5), 8-16-11) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2C of Ord. No. 31-2001, adopted Sept. 4, 2001, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2001. Amending Question No. 5 of Ord. No. 2011-30, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2011. 
Sec. 4.15. - Building code. 
    The Council shall within ninety (90) days after the adoption of this Charter appoint a temporary committee of five (5) members for the purpose of drafting a building code ordinance for the City of Lafayette to be presented to the Council for consideration. 
Sec. 4.16. - City Administrator; functions and duties 
(a)  The City Administrator shall be responsible for the day-to-day operations of all city departments. The Administrator shall supervise all employees and contractual workers including municipal court employees, but excluding the Municipal Judge and the City Attorney, except as permitted in Section 4.9 of this Section of the Charter. The Administrator may direct the Attorney to the extent permitted by and not in conflict with directions of the City Council, including the special legal counsel. 
(b)  The City Administrator shall perform such other duties as prescribed by this Charter and the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2E), 8-16-05) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2E of Ord. No. 2005-25, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2005. 
Sec. 4.17. - Youth Advisory Board. 
    There is hereby created a Youth Advisory Board. The selection, term, responsibilities, policies and duties of the Youth Advisory Board shall be as established by ordinance. The provisions of Section 5.1 of this Charter notwithstanding, individuals under the age of eighteen who have been residents of the city for at least one year, or individuals 18 years of age or younger who attend a school located in the city, may be appointed to the Youth Advisory Board. Any appointed member of the board who turns eighteen years of age during his/her tenure of office shall register to vote as a Lafayette elector within ninety (90) days after his/her eighteenth birthday to remain in office. 
(Ord. No. 2011-30, § 1(2), 8-16-11) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2 of Ord. No. 2011-30, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, adding § 4.17, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2011. 
Chapter V GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL OF THE CITY 

Sec. 5.1. - Eligibility for office and employment in city. 
    No person shall hold any elective office of the city unless he/she has been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately prior to the last day for filing original petitions for such office or prior to the time of his/her appointment to fill a vacancy. No person shall hold any elective office unless he/she is a qualified and registered elector of the city on such last day for filing or at such time of appointment and throughout his/her tenure of office. 
    No person shall be eligible for any elective or appointive city office who is in default to the city or to any other governmental unit of the state. The holding of office by any person who is in such default shall create a vacancy unless such default shall be eliminated within thirty (30) days after written notice thereof by the Council or unless such person shall in good faith be contesting the liability for such default. 
    Each candidate for elective office shall file with his/her petition his/her affidavit that he/she possesses the qualifications for such office provided in this section. Failure to file such affidavit shall invalidate his/her petition. 
    Each member of a city board or commission created by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately prior to the day of his/her appointment and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the city on such day and throughout his/her tenure of office. 
    All officers of the city shall be United States citizens. 
    No elective officer, under this Charter, may be appointed to any office or be employed by the city while serving his/her term of office. 
    City employees shall be appointed by the Council for an indefinite period and shall be responsible to and serve at the pleasure of the City Council and shall have their compensation fixed by the Council. 
    The Council may by ordinance, require residence in the City of Lafayette as a condition of employment of full time appointive officers. 
(Ord. No. 1984-03, 2-21-84; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2A), 8-16-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1984-03, adopted Feb. 21, 1984, provided that § 5.1 of the charter be amended to read as herein set out. Such amendment was adopted by the electorate at a referendum held April 3, 1984. Subsequently, amending Question No. 2A of Ord. No. 2005-25, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2005. 
Sec. 5.2. - Vacancies in elective office. 
    Any elective city office shall be declared vacant by the Council upon occurrence of any of the following events before the expiration of the term of such offices: 
(a)  For any reason specified by statute or by this Charter as creating a vacancy in office; 
(b)  If no person is elected to, or qualifies for, the office at the election at which such office is to be filled; 
(c)  If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent tribunal of any act constituting misconduct in office under the provisions of this Charter; 
(d)  If the officer shall be convicted of crime involving moral turpitude; 
(e)  If the officer shall absent himself/herself continuously from the city for more than thirty (30) consecutive days in any one year without the permission of the Council; 
(f)  In the case of any members of the Council, if such officer shall miss four (4) consecutive regular meetings of the Council or twenty-five (25) percent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absences shall be excused by the Council and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings of the Council at the time of such absence; 
(g)  If the officer is removed from office by the Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.4. 
Sec. 5.3. - Vacancies in boards and commissions. 
    Vacancies in boards and commissions may be determined by the Council. 
Sec. 5.4. - Removals from office. 
    Removals by the City Council of elective officers shall be made for either of the following reasons: (a) for any reason specified by statute for removal of city officers, (b) for any act declared by this Charter to constitute misconduct in office. Such removals by the Council shall be made only after hearing, of which such officer has been given notice in writing by the Clerk at least ten (10) days in advance, either personally or by delivering the same at his/her last known place of residence. Such notice shall include a copy of the charges against such officer. The hearing shall afford an opportunity to the officer, in person or by attorney, to be heard in his/her defense, to cross examine witnesses and to present testimony. If such officer shall neglect to appear at such hearing and answer such charges, his/her failure to do so may be deemed cause for his/her removal. A majority vote of the members of the Council in office at the time, exclusive of any member whose removal is being considered, shall be required for any such removal. The procedures for removal of appointed members of boards and commissions shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-30, § 1(4), 8-16-11) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 4 of Ord. No. 2011-30, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2011. 
Sec. 5.5. - Resignations. 
    Resignations of elective officers shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk and shall be acted upon by the Council at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the Clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made in writing to either the City Clerk, or to any member of the officer's board or commission, which member shall forward such resignation to the City Clerk. The resignation of appointed officers shall be effective immediately upon receipt and verification by the City Clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2011-30, § 1(4), 8-16-11) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 4 of Ord. No. 2011-30, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2011. 
Sec. 5.6. - Filling vacancies in appointive offices. 
    Vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled in the manner provided for making the original appointment. In the case of members of boards and commissions appointed for a definite term, such appointments shall be for the unexpired term. 
Sec. 5.7. - Filling vacancies in elective offices. 
(a)  Any vacancy which occurs in the Council more than ninety (90) days before the next regular city election shall be filled within thirty (30) days by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council, said appointee to hold office until the next regular Council meeting following certification of the next election, at which election such vacancy shall be filled as provided in Section 3.2 for any balance of the unexpired original term. 
(b)  If any vacancy in the office of Councilor which the Council is authorized to fill is not so filled within thirty (30) days after such vacancy occurs, or if three (3) or more vacancies exist simultaneously in the office of Councilor, such vacancies shall be filled for the respective unexpired terms at a special election. 
(Res. No. 2007-38, § 1(2C), 9-4-07) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2C of Res. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2007. 
Sec. 5.8. - Oath of office and bond. 
    Every officer, elected or appointed before entering upon the duties of his/her office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by Section 7, of Article XII of the Constitution of the State and shall file the same with the Clerk, together with any bond required by this Charter, or by the Council. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten (10) days from the date of his/her election or appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such office shall thereupon become vacant unless the Council shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth. 
Sec. 5.9. - Surety bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all officers of the city whose duties involve the custody of public property or the handling of public funds, either by way of receipt or disbursement or both, and all other officers and employees so required by the Council shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, file with the city an official bond, in such form and amount as the Council shall direct and approve. Such official bond of every officer and employee shall be conditioned that he/she will faithfully perform the duties of his/her office, and will on demand deliver over to his/her successor in office, or other proper officer or an agent of the city, all books, papers, monies, effects and property belonging thereto, or appertaining to his/her office, which may be in his/her custody as an officer or employee; and such bonds may be further conditioned as the Council shall prescribe. The official bond of every officer whose duty it may be to receive or pay out money, besides being conditioned as above required, shall be further conditioned that he/she will, on demand, pay over or account for to the city, or any proper officer or agent thereof, all monies received by him/her as such officer or employee. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by the purchase of one or more appropriate blanket surety bonds covering all, or a group of, city employees and officers. 
    All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. The Clerk shall be custodian of all bonds of all officers or employees, except that the Treasurer shall be custodian of any bonds pertaining solely to the Clerk. 
Sec. 5.10. - Delivery of office. 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment for any reason whatsoever, he/she shall within five (5) days or sooner on demand, deliver to his/her successor in office or to his/her superior all books, papers, monies and effects in his/her custody as such officer or employee. Any officer violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under the statute. Any employee found guilty by a competent tribunal of violating this provision may be punished by fine or imprisonment, or both, as determined by the Court. 
Sec. 5.11. - Ethics. 
    The City Council shall enact or amend by ordinance a code of ethics to establish requirements for the ethical standards of conduct for City officials. For purposes of this Section 5.11, "City officials" are defined to include elected and appointed officials. 
(Res. No. 2007-38, § 1(2E), 9-4-07) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2E of Res. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2007. 
Sec. 5.12. - Compensation of employees and officers. 
(a)  The compensation of all employees and officers of the city whose compensation is not provided for herein shall be fixed by the City Council within the limits of budget appropriations and in accordance with any pay plan adopted by the Council. 
(b)  The respective salaries and compensation of officers and employees, as fixed by, or pursuant to, this Charter shall be in full for all official services of such officers or employees, commissions and other compensation receivable by such officers or employees for their services. 
    Such fees, commissions and compensations shall belong to the city and shall be collected and accounted for by such officers or employees, and be paid into the city treasury and a statement thereof filed periodically with the City Clerk. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the city. 
Chapter VI THE COUNCIL: PROCEDURE AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES 

Sec. 6.1. - Regular meetings. 
    The Council shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two (2) regular meetings each month. An organizational meeting shall be held at the next regular council meeting following the certification of the election for Council members. 
(Res. No. 2007-38, § 1(2B), 9-4-07) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2B of Res. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2007. 
Sec. 6.2. - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk on the written request of the Mayor, or any two (2) members of the Council on at least twenty-four (24) hours written notice to each member of the Council, served personally or left at his/her usual place of residence; but a special meeting may be held on shorter notice if all members of the Council are present or have waived notice thereof in writing. 
Sec. 6.3. - Business at special meetings. 
    No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting. However, any business which may lawfully come before a regular meeting may be transacted at a special meeting if all the members of the Council present consent thereto and all the members absent file their written consent. 
Sec. 6.4. - [Public meetings.] 
    All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard under such rules and regulations as the Council may prescribe. 
Sec. 6.5. - Quorum; adjournment of meeting. 
    A majority of the members of the Council in office at the time shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all Council meetings, but in the absence of a quorum a lesser number may adjourn any meeting to a later time or date, and in the absence of all members the Clerk may adjourn any meeting for not longer than one week. 
Sec. 6.6. - Compulsory attendance and conduct at meetings. 
    Any two (2) or more members of the Council may by vote either request or compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the city at any meeting of the Council. Any member of the Council or other officer who when notified of such request for his/her attendance fails to attend such meeting for reasons other than confining illness or absence from the city shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office unless excused by the Council. The presiding officer shall enforce orderly conduct at meetings and any member of the Council or other officer who shall fail to conduct himself/herself in an orderly manner at any meeting shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. 
    Any police officer designated by the presiding officer of the meeting shall serve as the Sergeant-at-Arms of the Council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
Sec. 6.7. - Organization and rules of the council. 
    The Council shall determine its own organization, rules and order of business subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  A journal of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept in the English language by the Clerk and shall be signed by the presiding officer and clerk of the meeting. 
(b)  A vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" or "No" vote and entered upon the records, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall only be necessary to so state. 
(c)  No member of the Council shall vote on any question in which he/she has a financial interest, other than the common public interest, or on any question concerning his/her own conduct, but on all other questions each member who is present shall vote when his/her name is called unless excused by the unanimous consent of the remaining members present. Any member refusing to vote except when not so required by this paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
(d)  In all roll call votes the names of the members of the Council shall be called in alphabetical order and the name to be called first shall be advanced one position alphabetically in each successive roll call vote. 
(e)  The proceedings of the Council, or a brief summary thereof, shall be published within ten (10) days following each meeting. Any such summary shall be prepared by the Clerk and approved by the Mayor and shall show the substance of each separate proceeding of the Council. 
Sec. 6.8. - Investigations. 
    The Council or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office or officer and to make investigations as to matters in which the municipality has an interest. The Council, for the purpose stated herein, may summon witnesses, administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other evidence. 
    Failure on the part of any officer to obey such summons or to produce books, papers and other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. Failure on the part of any employee or other person to obey such summons or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this Charter and such person when found guilty of such violation by a competent tribunal may be punished by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both in the discretion of the court. 
Sec. 6.9. - Providing for public health and safety. 
    The Council shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health, and for safety of persons and property. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2A), 8-16-05) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2A of Ord. No. 2005-25, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2005. 
Sec. 6.10. - Residential Growth Management. 
    The Council shall by resolution annually determine the number of new dwelling units to be built in that calendar year and the anticipated number to be built in the next calendar year. The total number of new dwelling units between January 1, 2019 and January 1, 2025, shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200). City Council shall adopt an ordinance setting out criteria it will utilize in determining the annual number of new dwelling units that are allowed to be built in any such year, which will address allocation of permits for new dwelling units over the entire six-year period. 
    No building permits issued by the city in any calendar year shall allow a number of new dwelling units exceeding the number set by the resolution. 
    Single-family residences, duplexes, triplexes or four-plexes on lots existing prior to May 23, 1995, or on lots that result from subdivision of lots, existing prior to May 23, 1995, into no more than two (2) parcels, along with all industrial and commercial construction, shall be exempt from the above limitations. Dwelling units located within mixed use building complexes within the Urban Renewal Area - Lafayette Old Town, as that Area existed as of January 1, 2000, shall also be exempt from the above limitations. Dwelling units located within mixed use building complexes within the Countryside Village Shopping Center and the 4 acres of vacant land owned by Boulder County, a portion of the Urban Renewal Area - South Boulder Revitalization Area, as that Area existed as of January 1, 2006, shall also be exempt from the above limitations; subject however, to conditions which shall be enacted by ordinance of Council regarding duration of the exemption and limits of the number of dwelling units. 
    Those developments within the City for which City Council, prior to November 6, 2012, had determined and assigned by resolution a priority classification and building permit allocation pursuant to the City's Residential Growth Management Program that was in place prior to November 6, 2012, shall be exempt from the above limitation and may receive such building permits without regard to the calendar year for which their permits were allocated, but only to the extent that such properties are developed substantially in compliance with the approved preliminary plan upon which their allocations are based. 
    Those properties within the City that, prior to November 6, 2012, were eligible to be in the category of "otherwise entitled to priority," pursuant to the City's Residential Growth Management Program, by reason of commitments made by the City that existed prior to May 23, 1995, with respect to annexation, shall be exempt from the above limitation. 
    In addition to the dwelling units authorized by this section, the Council may authorize the construction of up to fifty (50) permanently affordable dwelling units per year, and developments for which the PUD overall development plan or final plan restricts at least 40% of the total number of units as permanently affordable dwelling units. "Permanently affordable dwelling unit" shall mean a dwelling unit that is deed restricted for perpetuity to permit persons whose household income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the then-current Boulder County area median income, as may be adjusted from time to time, to qualify to purchase or rent the dwelling unit. Unissued building permits for permanently affordable dwelling units may not be carried forward from year to year, but the Council may approve the issuance of building permits for more than fifty (50) permanently affordable dwelling units in a single calendar year if the number of building permits for permanently affordable dwelling units approved in the following year is reduced by an equal amount. 
    Nothing in this amendment shall be construed to alter any legally binding agreement or commitment of the City of Lafayette, existing prior to May 23, 1995, under then existing ordinances, explicitly requiring the issuance of a given number of permits for a subdivision or planned unit development. The City Council may by majority vote award the minimum number of additional permits in excess of the maximum number of permits otherwise allowed under the terms of this amendment necessary to meet such agreements or commitments, provided the additional number of dwelling units is included within the maximum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) dwelling units authorized between January 1, 2019 and January 1, 2025. Any transferee, grantee, or assignee of any applicant's interest in any such agreement or commitment shall be subject to the terms and conditions under which the permits for the project were originally allocated. 
    If construction authorized by any building permit has not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) day[s] after it is issued, the permit shall become void and may be re-issued by the city on a first come, first served basis, up to the permit maximum for that year. 
(11-7-95; Ord. No. 2000-11, § 1, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1(2A), 9-4-01; Res. No. 2006-33, § 1(2C), 9-5-06; Res. No. 2007-38, § 1(2A), 9-4-07; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1, 8-21-12; Ord. No. 2017-32, § 1, 8-15-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-11, adopted Aug. 15, 2000, amending § 6.10, was approved by the electors on Nov. 7, 2000. 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2A of Ord. No. 31-2001, adopted Sept. 4, 2001, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2001. 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2C of Res. No. 2006-33, was approved by the electorate on Nov. 7, 2006. 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2A of Res. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2007. 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2B from Ord. No. 2012-22, adopted Aug. 21, 2012, was approved by the registered electors on Nov. 6, 2012. 
Sec. 6.11. - Referendum on annexations. 
    No land which is annexed by the City of Lafayette shall be zoned until sixty (60) days following the date of final approval by the City Council of the annexation. If within that time, a petition signed by at least three percent of the registered electors of the city, as of the date of the last city election, requesting that such annexation be repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors, then no permit or other development approval shall be issued for development on the annexed land until approved by the voters in a referendum. 
(11-7-95) 
Sec. 6.12. - Amendments to comprehensive plan. 
    The Lafayette Comprehensive Plan shall provide for an average growth rate of not greater than three (3) percent per year in the Lafayette Comprehensive Planning Area. The Lafayette Comprehensive Plan shall also contain an urban growth boundary map that identifies the city's urban growth boundary. No new development or annexation may occur outside of the urban growth boundary. After adoption, the urban growth boundary may not be changed except by an affirmative vote of not less than six (6) members of the Council. 
(11-7-95; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1(2A), 9-4-01; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1, 8-21-12) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2A of Ord. No. 31-2001, adopted Sept. 4, 2001, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2001. 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2B from Ord. No. 2012-22, adopted Aug. 21, 2012, was approved by the registered electors on Nov. 6, 2012. 
Sec. 6.13. - Standing to sue. 
    Any resident of the City of Lafayette shall have standing to enforce the provisions of this amendment or to defend any part of it against suit by any person. 
(11-7-95) 
Sec. 6.14. - Sunset clause. 
    At, or before, the last general election prior to the expiration of the limits herein [November 2024], these provisions, in their entirety, shall be presented to the voters of Lafayette in a referendum for extension, and all dates referenced herein shall be adjusted for an additional six-year period. 
(11-7-95; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1(2A), 9-4-01; Res. No. 2007-38, § 1(2A), 9-4-07; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1, 8-21-12; Ord. No. 2017-32, § 1, 8-15-17) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2A of Ord. No. 31-2001, adopted Sept. 4, 2001, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2001. 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2A of Res. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2007. 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2B from Ord. No. 2012-22, adopted Aug. 21, 2012, was approved by the registered electors on Nov. 6, 2012. 
Sec. 6.15. - Limitations on legally binding building commitments. 
    Until after the election provided for in Section 6.14, no agreement or commitment, by itself or with any other such agreements or commitments, may be made that commits the city to issue building permits for more than two hundred (200) dwelling units per year to be built after December 31, 2025. 
(11-7-95; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1(2A), 9-4-01; Ord. No. 2012-22, § 1, 8-21-12; Ord. No. 2017-32, § 1, 8-15-17) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2A of Ord. No. 31-2001, adopted Sept. 4, 2001, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2001. 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2B from Ord. No. 2012-22, adopted Aug. 21, 2012, was approved by the registered electors on Nov. 6, 2012. 
Chapter VII LEGISLATION 

Sec. 7.1. - Prior city legislation. 
    All valid bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city which are not inconsistent with this Charter and which are in force and effect at the time of the effective date of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. If any such ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation provides for the appointment of any officers or any members of any board or commission by the Mayor, such officers or members of any board or commission shall, after the effective date of this Charter, be appointed by the Council. 
    Those provisions of any effective, valid bylaw, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation which are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 7.2. - Ordinances, resolutions and motions. 
(a)  The Council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion. All legislative enactments shall be in the form of ordinances. All other actions, except as provided in this Charter, may be in the form of resolutions or motions. A copy of every ordinance and resolution adopted shall be numbered and recorded in the records of the City. 
(b)  In addition to such acts of the Council that are required by other provisions of this Charter to be done by ordinance, every act creating indebtedness, authorizing borrowing of money, levying a tax or tax increase, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property shall be by ordinance. 
(Res. No. 2007-38, § 1(2B), 9-4-07) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2B of Res. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2007. 
Sec. 7.3. - Enactment, amendment, repeal and effective date of ordinances. 
    Subject to the statutes and to the exceptions which follow hereafter, (a) ordinances may be enacted by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the members elect of the Council, (b) no ordinance shall be amended or repealed except by an ordinance adopted as aforesaid, (c) no ordinance shall be enacted at the meeting at which it is introduced nor until after publication of the proceedings or summary thereof of such meeting (which proceedings or summary shall include a statement of its title and purpose), and (d) the effective date of all ordinances shall be prescribed therein but the effective date shall not be earlier than ten (10) days after enactment nor before publication thereof. 
    It is provided, however, that an ordinance which is declared therein to be an emergency ordinance which is immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health or safety may be enacted at the meeting at which it is introduced or before publication of the proceedings of the meeting at which it is introduced, or may be given earlier effect than ten (10) days after its enactment, or all three (3), by six (6) affirmative votes if six (6), or seven (7) members of the Council are present at the meeting at which it is enacted or by four (4) affirmative votes if four (4) or five (5) members of the Council are present at the meeting at which it is enacted. 
    In case an ordinance is given effect earlier than ten (10) days after its enactment, the requirements for publication before such ordinance become operative may be met by posting copies thereof in conspicuous locations in three (3) public places in the city, other provisions of this Charter notwithstanding; and the Clerk shall, within three (3) days after such posting, enter in the Ordinance Book under the record of the ordinance a certificate under his hand stating the time and place of such publication by posting of the ordinance, but the failure to so record and authenticate such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. Such ordinance shall also be published in accordance with Section 7.4 but not as a requirement for the effectiveness thereof. 
    No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, but the revised sections of the ordinance, as amended, shall be re-enacted and published in full. However, an ordinance or section thereof may be repealed by reference to its title and ordinance or code number only. 
    All ordinances prior to introduction and prior to enactment shall be read by title only, however, publication shall conform to Section 7.4. 
(Ord. No. 1986-26, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 2011-30, § 1(5), 8-16-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1986-26, was approved by the voters on Nov. 4, 1986. Such ordinance added provisions re reading of ordinance by title prior to introduction and enactment. Amending Question No. 5 of Ord. No. 2011-30, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2011. 
State Law reference- Ordinance adoption procedures, C. R. S. § 31-16-101 et seq. 
Sec. 7.4. - Publication and recording of ordinances. 
    Each ordinance shall be published within ten (10) days after its enactment. Publication of the title of each enacted ordinance in accordance with Section 16.5 of this Charter, together with a statement that the full text of the ordinance is available for public inspection and acquisition in the office of the City Clerk and in posting locations established by City Council, shall constitute sufficient publication. 
    All ordinances shall be recorded by the Clerk in a book called "The Ordinance Book" and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such records by their official signatures thereon, but the failure to so record and authenticate such ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-30, § 1(3), 8-16-11) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 3 of Ord. No. 2011-30, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2011. 
Sec. 7.5. - Penalties for violation of ordinances. 
    Any ordinance may provide for the punishment of those who violate its provisions. Penalties for violations of City ordinances shall be established by ordinance. No fine or sentence for such violations shall exceed the maximum established by applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 8-17-93; Res. No. 2007-38, § 1(2D), 9-4-07) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-35, adopted Aug. 17, 1993, amending § 7.5, was approved at referendum on Nov. 2, 1993. 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2D of Res. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2007. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-16-101. 
Sec. 7.6. - Enactment of codes by reference. 
    In accordance with statutes now or hereinafter in effect, the Council may enact technical codes, any appropriate Colorado statute or any detailed technical regulation promulgated or enacted by any municipality, state or federal agency, by reference thereto in an enacting ordinance, and without publishing such codes in full. 
State Law reference- Ordinance codes adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-201 et seq. 
Sec. 7.7. - Severability of ordinances. 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not effect [affect] the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. 
Sec. 7.8. - Codification of ordinances. 
    As soon as feasible after the effective date of this Charter, the Council may direct and complete the codification of all ordinances of the city and shall provide for the publication of subsequent amendments thereto so that such amendments may readily be made a part of such published code and maintained thereafter in current form. Any such codification may originally include provisions previously contained in ordinances of the city. 
    The Council shall provide for making copies of the codification available for public inspection and for distribution to the public at a reasonable charge therefor and shall publish notice of the printing and availability of such codification before the effective date thereof. Such printing and making available of the codification and notice thereof shall constitute publication of any such codification, other provisions of this Charter for publication notwithstanding. 
    The copies of the ordinances and of the codification thereof, and of provisions adopted by reference in accordance with Section 7.7. may be certified by the Clerk and, when so certified, shall be competent evidence in all courts and other legally established tribunals as to the matter contained therein. 
Sec. 7.9. - Initiative and referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an enacted ordinance may be had by petition, as hereafter [hereinafter] provided. 
Sec. 7.10. - Initiatory and referendary petition. 
    An initiatory or referendary petition shall be signed by not less than ten (10) percent of the number of persons who were registered electors of the city, as of the date of the last regular city election, and all signatures on said petition shall be obtained within twenty-one (21) days before the date of filing the petition with the Clerk. Any such petition shall be addressed to the Council and may be the aggregate of two (2) or more petition papers identical as to content and simultaneously filed by one person. An initiatory petition shall set forth in full the ordinance it proposes to initiate, and no petition shall propose to initiate more than one ordinance. A referendary petition shall identify the ordinance or part thereof, or code section it proposes to have repealed. 
    Each signer of a petition shall sign his/her name, and shall place thereon, after his/her name, the date and his/her place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signers thereof and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk who shall, within fifteen (15) days, canvass the signatures thereon. If the petition does not contain a sufficient number of signatures of qualified electors of the city, the Clerk shall notify forthwith by registered mail the person filing such petition and fifteen (15) days from such notification shall be allowed for filing of supplemental petition papers. When a petition with sufficient signatures is filed within the time allowed by this section, the Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. 
Sec. 7.11. - Council procedure on initiatory and referendary petitions. 
    Upon the presentation to the Council of an initiatory or referendary petition by the Clerk, the Council shall, within thirty (30) days, unless otherwise provided by statute either: 
(a)  Adopt the ordinance as submitted by an initiatory petition. 
(b)  Repeal the ordinance, or part thereof, referred to by a referendary petition: or 
(c)  Determine to submit the proposal provided for in the petition to the electors. 
Sec. 7.12. - Submission of initiatory and referendary ordinances to electors. 
    Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any other purpose, or in the discretion of the Council at a special election called for that specific purpose. In the case of an initiatory petition, if no election is to be held in the city for any other purpose within one hundred fifty (150) days from the time the petition is presented to the Council and the Council does not enact the ordinance, then the Council shall call a special election within ninety (90) days from such date of presentation for the submission of the initiative proposal. The result of all elections held under the provisions of this section shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2011-30, § 1(1), 8-16-11) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 1 of Ord. No. 2011-30, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2011. 
Sec. 7.13. - Ordinance suspended; miscellaneous provisions on initiatory and referendary petitions. 
    The presentation to the Council by the Clerk of valid and sufficient referendary petition containing a number of signatures equal to ten (10) percent of the number of persons who were registered electors of the city as of the date of the last regular city election, which signatures have been obtained within sixty (60) days before the date of filing the petition with the Clerk, shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending repeal by the Council or final determination by the electors. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed for a period of six (6) months after the date of the election at which it was adopted, and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be re-enacted for a period of six (6) months after the date of the election at which it was repealed; provided however, that any ordinance may be adopted, amended or repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiatory procedure in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this chapter or if submitted to the electorate by the Council on its own motion. 
    If two (2) or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall govern. 
Editor's note- Annotation- The authority granted in section 7.13 of the city charter for a referendum to repeal any ordinance applies to an emergency ordinance enacted for the preservation of the public health, peace and safety. Burks v. Lafayette, 142 Colo. 61, 349, P.2d 692 (1960) 
Chapter VIII GENERAL FINANCE-BUDGET, AUDIT 

Sec. 8.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city and all its agencies shall begin on the first day of January of each year and end on the thirty-first day of December of the same year. 
Sec. 8.2. - Budget procedures. 
    The Budget Officer as designated by the Council shall prepare and submit to the Council on or before the twentieth day of September of each year the recommended budget covering the next fiscal year, and shall include therein at least the following information: 
(a)  Detailed estimates with his/her supporting explanation of all proposed expenditures for each department, office, and agency of the city, and for the court, showing the expenditures or corresponding items for the last preceding fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to September first, and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(b)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any; 
(c)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city from sources other than taxes with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to September first, and estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(d)  A statement of the estimated balance or deficit for the end of the current fiscal year; 
(e)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with any available unappropriated surplus and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures; 
(f)  Such other supporting information as the Council may request. 
Sec. 8.3. - Budget hearings. 
    A public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held before its final adoption at such time and place as the Council shall direct. Notice of such public hearing and notice that the proposed budget is on file in the office of the Clerk shall be published at least one week in advance of the hearing. The complete proposed budget shall be on file for public inspection during office hours at such office for a period not less than one week prior to such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2011-30, § 1(5), 8-16-11) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 5 of Ord. No. 2011-30, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2011. 
Sec. 8.4. - Adoption of budget. 
    No later than the last Thursday in October in each year, the Council shall by resolution adopt a budget for the next fiscal year, and shall provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes. The Council shall thereupon cause the total levy to be certified to the County Assessor, who shall extend the same upon the tax list of the current year in a separate column entitled "City of Lafayette Taxes," and shall include said city taxes in his/her general warrant to the County Treasurer for collection. On or before the last day of the current fiscal year the Council shall appropriate, by ordinance the money needed for municipal purposes during the next fiscal year of the city. The annual appropriation ordinance shall be based upon the budget as adopted. 
Sec. 8.5. - Budget control. 
    Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessment, or for other purposes not chargeable to a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city except in accordance with an appropriation thereof for such specific purposes, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation in the current fiscal year, except that money from the contingency fund may be transferred by resolution at any time during the year. At any time during the current fiscal year, the Council by resolution may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or any portion thereof from one (1) account, department, fund or agency to another. The Council may also, by resolution, transfer any excess earnings of any city-owned utility or enterprise to any other fund of the city, providing, however, that any such transfer be restored to such fund with interest, prior to any rate increase by the transferring utility or enterprise. The imposition of or any increase in administrative and other fees reflecting cost of equipment, materials, construction, facilities or service usage provided by other departments shall not be subject to such restoration requirement. The City Treasurer may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, or portion thereof, from one (1) classification of expenditure to another within the same department, office, or agency. Report of any such transfer shall be made to the Council. 
    The Council may make additional appropriations by ordinance during the fiscal year for unanticipated expenditures required of the city, but such additional appropriations shall not exceed the amount by which actual and anticipated revenues of the year are exceeding the revenues as estimated in the budget, unless the appropriations are necessary to relieve an emergency endangering the public health, peace or safety. 
    Except in those cases where there is no logical account to which an expenditure can be charged, expenditures shall not be charged directly to the contingency fund (or other similar fund). Instead, the necessary part of the appropriation for the contingency fund (or other similar fund) shall be transferred to the logical account and the expenditure then charged to such account. At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the Council, the City Treasurer shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenue expenditures to date; and if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. Capital projects budget appropriations shall lapse upon completion of each project. All other budget appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 1993-40, § 1, 8-17-93; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2F), 8-16-05) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-40, adopted Aug. 17, 1993, amending § 8.5, was approved at referendum on Nov. 2, 1993. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2005-25, approved by the electorate on Nov. 1, 2005, further amended this section to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 8.6. - Sinking funds. 
    The Council, may by ordinance provide for sinking or special funds, to provide for monies held in trust, for depreciation and obsolescence of structures, machinery and equipment for debt service, and for local improvements. The balance in any bond sinking fund shall not revert to the general fund at the end of any fiscal period, until such time as no debt obligations remain outstanding. 
Sec. 8.7. - Depository. 
    The Council shall designate depositories for city funds and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city monies. The Council shall provide for such security for city deposits as is authorized or permitted by statute, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
Sec. 8.8. - Investments. 
    Monies remaining in any fund which the City Treasurer may determine will not be required for immediate disbursement, may, in the discretion of the City Treasurer, with the approval of the Council, be invested in one or more of the securities permitted by the Statutes of Colorado governing the investment of funds belonging to the State of Colorado, as such statutes may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. 965, 1-4-83) 
Editor's note- Sec. 8.8 was amended to read as set out herein by Ord. No. 965, adopted Jan. 4, 1983, approved at referendum held Feb. 22, 1983. 
Sec. 8.9. - Independent audit; annual report. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all city accounts at least annually, and more frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audit shall be made by Certified or Registered Public Accountants, experienced in municipal accounting, selected by the Council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-30, § 1(5), 8-16-11) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 5 of Ord. No. 2011-30, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2011. 
Chapter IX TAXATION 

Sec. 9.1. - Collection of taxes. 
    Until the Council shall otherwise provide by ordinance, the County Treasurer shall collect City taxes in the same manner and at the same time as State taxes are collected. In like manner the Council may provide for collection of special improvement assessments by said treasurer. All laws of this State for the assessment of property and the levy and collection of general taxes, sale of property for taxes, and the redemption of the same, shall apply and have as full effect in respect to taxes for the city as of such general taxes, except as modified by this Charter. The County Treasurer shall report and pay to the city the amount of tax collections of the city for the preceding month. The estimated costs of tax collections and losses shall be included in the budget. 
Sec. 9.2. - Limitation of tax powers of city. 
    No income tax, sales tax or cigarette tax shall be adopted until it shall have been approved by a majority of the electorate at a regular or special election. 
Sec. 9.3. - Authority to acquire property. 
    In addition to all other power which it has to acquire property, the City of Lafayette is hereby authorized to purchase or otherwise acquire property on which there are delinquent taxes and/or special assessments. The City may also dispose of any property acquired under this authority. 
Chapter X BORROWING POWERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1988-25, § 1, adopted Dec. 6, 1988, and approved by the voters at a special election held Jan. 17, 1989, amended Ch. X, §§ 10.1-10.4. to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 10.1. - Limits of borrowing power. 
    Indebtedness of the city shall be incurred and limited as provided in the Constitution of the State of Colorado as the same may from time to time be amended. 
    Unless otherwise provided herein, the following obligations (I) do not constitute indebtedness of the city, (II) shall be issued without a vote of the electors, and (III) shall not be included when determining the power of the city to incur indebtedness: 
(a)  The council shall have the power to issue special improvement district bonds. Where said bonds are secured solely by property benefited by any special or local improvement within any special improvement district, the voter approval required for the issuance of said bonds shall be by the owners of a majority of the property within the boundaries of said district unless the council shall provide otherwise by ordinance; except that where the owners owning one hundred (100) percent of the property within the boundaries of any special district agree in writing to waive their right to an election, the council may issue said bonds without an election. 
(b)  The council shall have the power to borrow money, issue bonds, or otherwise extend its credit for the purpose of financing the construction, acquisition, improvement, or extension of a municipally owned and operated water, electric, gas, or sewer system or other utility or income producing project, if such bonds or other obligations shall be payable solely out of the net revenue to be derived from the operation of such systems, utilities, or projects. 
(c)  The council shall have the power to borrow money, issue bonds, or otherwise extend its credit for any municipal purpose and may make such bonds or other obligations payable solely from the gross or net revenue received from any municipal occupation tax, sales tax, use tax, cigarette tax, lodging tax, or any other excise tax. Such net revenue of any municipal occupation tax, sales tax, use tax, cigarette tax, lodging tax, or any other excise tax also may be pledged as additional security for the payment of the system, utility, or project revenue bonds described in paragraph (b) hereof. 
(Ord. No. 965, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 1988-25, § 1, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 1993-39, § 1, 8-17-93) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-39, adopted Aug. 17, 1993, amending § 10.1, was approved at referendum on Nov. 2, 1993. 
Sec. 10.2. - Bonds, interest, sale. 
    The terms and interest rate of all bonds issued by the city shall be fixed by the authorizing ordinance and such bonds shall be sold by public or private sale to the best advantage of the city. All bonds may contain provisions for calling the same at designated periods prior to the final due date, with or without the payment of a prior redemption premium. 
(Ord. No. 742, § 1, 10-4-77; Ord. No. 1988-25, § 1, 12-6-88) 
Sec. 10.3. - Deferred payment contracts. 
    The City may enter into lease option contracts for the purchase of property or capital equipment. Each of such contracts shall contain a provision that the financial obligations of the city in subsequent fiscal years are contingent upon funds for the purpose under said contract being appropriated, budgeted, and otherwise made available and any such contract shall not be deemed to create any City multiple fiscal year direct or indirect debt or other financial obligation whatsoever for purposes of Section 20(4)(b) of Article X of the state constitution. 
(Ord. No. 1988-25, § 1, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 1993-36, § 1, 8-17-93) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-36, adopted Aug. 17, 1993, amending § 10.3, was approved at referendum on Nov. 2, 1993. 
Sec. 10.4. - Refunding bonds. 
    The Council shall have the power and it shall be its duty to refund all outstanding bonds and other obligations whenever the same is advantageous to the city. Subject to the limitations on indebtedness set forth in section 10.1 hereof, refunding obligations may be issued without a vote of the electors in any principal amount necessary to accomplish the refunding. 
(Ord. No. 1988-25, § 1, 12-6-88) 
Chapter XI IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 11.1. - Power to construct improvements and create improvement districts. 
    The City shall have the power to contract for, construct, or install special or local improvements of every character within designated districts of said city, and to assess the cost thereof wholly or in part upon the property especially benefitted. 
    The City Council shall by ordinance prescribe the method and manner of making such improvements, of letting contracts therefor, assessing the cost thereof; and issuing and paying bonds for cost and expenses of the organization of said districts and of construction or installation of said improvements. The creation of any local improvement district shall be subject, however to protest by the owners of a majority of the property to be assessed, except in case the city shall pay one-half or more of the total cost of the improvements made. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit the power of the City Council to otherwise act in accordance with the Constitution and statutes of Colorado in carrying out such purposes. 
Sec. 11.2. - Surplus and deficiency fund. 
    Except for such part of the costs as the city might contribute, all special or local improvements shall be paid for in public improvement bonds or by direct assessment to properties benefited by such improvements, and all monies collected on account of the assessments for any improvement shall be applied to the payment of the bonds (and interest) issued therefor until the payment of all the said bonds or all monies shall be applied to the repayment of the city for monies advanced for any improvement. When all outstanding bonds of a special or local improvement district have been paid and any monies remain to the credit of the district, they shall be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency fund and whenever there is a deficiency in any special or local improvement district fund to meet the payments of outstanding bonds and interest due thereon, the deficiency shall be paid out of said surplus and deficiency fund. Whenever a special or local improvement district has been paid and cancelled three-fourths of its bonds issued, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to take up the remaining bonds of the district and the interest due thereon, and there is not sufficient money in the special surplus and deficiency fund, then the city shall pay said bonds when due and the interest due thereon, and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due said district. 
(Ord. No. 1984-03, 2-21-84) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1984-03, adopted Feb. 21, 1984, and approved at a referendum held Apr. 3, 1984, provided for the amendment of § 11.2 to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 11.3. - Improvement district bonds-General benefit. 
    In consideration of general benefits conferred on the city at large from the construction or installation of improvements in special or local improvement districts, the City Council may levy annual taxes on all taxable property within the city at a rate not exceeding two (2) mills in one year, to be disbursed as determined by the City Council for the purpose of paying for such benefits, for the payment of any assessment levied against the city itself in connection with bonds issued for special or local improvement district, or for the purpose of advancing money to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of bonds issued for any special or local improvement district hereinafter created. The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a special fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified herein, provided however that in lieu of such tax levies, the City Council may annually transfer to such special fund any available money of the city, but in no event shall the amount transferred in any one year exceed the amount which would result from a tax levied in such year as herein limited. 
Sec. 11.4. - Review of special improvement district proceedings. 
    No action or proceeding, at law or in equity, to review any acts or proceedings, or to question the validity or enjoin the performance of any act, or the issue or collection of any bonds, or the levy or collection of any assessments, authorized by this chapter or for any other relief against any acts or proceedings done or had under this chapter, or of the city, with reference thereto, whether based upon irregularities or jurisdictional defects, shall be maintained, unless commenced within thirty (30) days after the performance of the act or the passage of the resolution or ordinance complained of, or else be thereafter perpetually barred. 
(Ord. No. 1986-26, 7-15-86) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1986-26, amended § 11.4 to read as herein set out. Such amendment was approved by the electorate on Nov. 4, 1986. 
Chapter XII PURCHASES-CONTRACTS-LEASES 

Sec. 12.1. - Purchase and sale of property; permitting the leasing of open space. 
(a)  The City Council shall be responsible for the purchase and sale of all city property. The Council may, on such terms and conditions as the Council deems appropriate and by ordinance, without the prior approval of the registered electors of the city, except as hereafter provided, lease, sell, or otherwise dispose of public buildings, real property, or water rights held or used for any municipal purpose. 
    Except as provided in subsection (b) below there shall be no sale of any real property used or held for open space or park purposes without the question of such sale being submitted to a vote of the registered electors of the city at a special or regular municipal election and a favorable vote by a majority of those registered electors voting thereon. Nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit the city from granting utility easements across, under, or over any city property held for open space or park purposes. 
    In all purchases in excess of an amount as set by City Council resolution, (a) the purchase shall be approved by the Council, (b) a minimum of three (3) bids shall be obtained, except that where the Council shall determine by unanimous resolution of those present at the meeting that the public interest will be best served by joint purchase with, or purchase from another unit of government, and (c) the requirements of Section 12.3 shall be complied with. No purchase shall be divided for the purpose of circumventing the dollar limitation as set by Council resolution. The Council may authorize the making of public improvements or the performance of any other city work by any city agency without competitive bidding. 
    Purchases shall be made from the lowest competent bidder meeting specifications and unless the Council shall determine that the public interest will be better served by accepting a higher bid, purchases and sales shall be made to the bidder whose bid is most advantageous to the city. Nothing in this section shall require competitive bidding for professional services. 
    Detailed purchasing, sales and contract procedures shall be established by ordinance. 
(b)  Real property used or held for open space may be leased for purposes such as agricultural uses without approval of the registered electors. 
(Ord. No. 965, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 1993-37, § 1, 8-17-93; Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2B), 8-16-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 965, adopted Jan. 4, 1983, provided for the amendment of § 12.1 as herein set forth. Such amendment was approved by the electorate Feb. 22, 1983. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1993-37, adopted Aug. 17, 1993, amending § 12.1, was approved at referendum on Nov. 2, 1993. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2005-25, approved by the electorate on Nov. 1, 2005, further amended this section to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 12.2. - Emergency purchases. 
    In case of emergency affecting the public peace, health or safety, the Council may waive all provisions for competitive bidding and direct the purchasing agent to purchase necessary supplies in the open market at not more than commercial prices. 
Sec. 12.3. - Contracts. 
    All contracts and leases to which the city is a party when this Charter becomes effective shall remain in full force and effect. 
    The authority to contract on behalf of the city is vested in the Council and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of statute and of this Charter. Notwithstanding this or any provision to the contrary, all contracts in an amount less than or equal to an amount set by City Council resolution may be negotiated and executed by the City Administrator on behalf of the city. 
    Any contract or agreement in an amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more, made with form or terms other than the standard city purchase order form, shall before execution be submitted to the Attorney and his/her opinion obtained with respect to its form and legality. A copy of all contracts or agreements requiring such opinion shall be filed in the office of the Clerk together with a copy of the opinion. 
(Ord. No. 1993-37, § 1, 8-17-93) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-37, adopted Aug. 17, 1993, amending § 12.3, was approved at referendum on Nov. 2, 1993. 
Chapter XIII MUNICIPAL UTILITIES 

Sec. 13.1. - Management of municipal utilities. 
    All municipally owned or operated utilities shall be administered as a regular department of the city government under the management and supervision of the City Council. 
Sec. 13.2. - Restriction on sale of utility property. 
    The City shall not sell, lease, or in any manner dispose of the utility plants or systems, nor any part thereof, unless and except the proposition for such purpose shall first have been approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the city who shall have paid a property tax therein during the preceding calendar year. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of any equipment which may be worn out or useless, or which could with advantage to the service be replaced by new or improved machinery or equipment. 
Sec. 13.3. - Control of water. 
    If at any time the water supply is greater than the immediate needs of the city and its inhabitants, the Council may authorize the sale by contract of such surplus water to consumers outside the city at such rates as the Council may prescribe; providing that no vested right shall accrue under such permits. 
Sec. 13.4. - Rates. 
    The Council shall have the power to fix from time to time such just and reasonable rates and other charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the city and others with such public utility services as the city may provide. There shall be no discrimination in such rates within any classification of users thereof, nor shall free service be permitted. Higher rates may be charged for service outside the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 13.5. - Utility rates and charges; collection. 
    The Council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public utility rates and charges of the city. Such ordinances shall provide at least: 
(a)  That the city shall have as security for the collection of such utility rates and charges a lien upon the real property supplied by such utility, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of such utility service and shall be enforced in the manner provided in such ordinance. 
(b)  The terms and conditions under which utility services may be discontinued in case of delinquency in paying such rates or charges. 
(c)  That suit may be instituted by the city before a competent tribunal for the collection of such rates or charges. 
    The rates and charges for any municipal public utility for the furnishing of water, light, heat, power, gas or sewage treatment and rubbish and garbage disposal shall be so fixed as to at least meet all the operating costs of such utility. 
    Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation of the city of each public utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts under an appropriate fund caption which shall be classified in accordance with generally accepted utility accounting practice. Charges for all service furnished to, or rendered by, other city departments or agencies shall be recorded. 
(Ord. No. 2011-30, § 1(5), 8-16-11) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 5 of Ord. No. 2011-30, adopted Aug. 16, 2011, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2011. 
Chapter XIV PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES 

Sec. 14.1. - Franchises remain in effect. 
    All franchises to which the city is a party when this Charter becomes effective shall remain in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and conditions. 
Sec. 14.2. - Granting of public utility franchises. 
    Public utility franchises and all renewals, and extensions thereof and amendments thereto shall be granted only by ordinance and no franchise shall be granted except upon the vote of the taxpaying electors. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than twenty (20) years. No franchise election shall be held until the applicant deposits the cost thereof with the City Clerk in an amount determined by the City Council. No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to the electorate before thirty (30) days after application therefor has been filed with the Council nor until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his/her unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. 
Sec. 14.3. - Compensation. 
    Every grant of a franchise shall fix the amount and manner of payment of the compensation to be paid by the grantee for the use of the same, and no other compensation of any kind shall be exacted for such use during the life of the franchise. This provision shall not exempt the grantee from any lawful taxation upon his/her or its property, nor from any license charges, or other impositions levied by the Council, not levied on account of the use granted by the franchise. 
Sec. 14.4. - Conditions of public utility franchises. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the city, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such franchise any provision within the power of the city to impose or require: 
(a)  To repeal the same for misuse, nonuse or failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e)  To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and other public places and the space above and beneath them; 
(f)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
    All franchises or privileges hereafter granted to railroads or other transportation systems shall plainly specify the particular streets, alleys[,] avenues, and other public property, or parts thereof, to which they shall apply. All other franchises may be in general terms and may apply to the city generally. 
Sec. 14.5. - Use of public places by utilities. 
    Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges and other public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such public utility may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys or other public places of the city by the city and by other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonable practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, and the arbitration award shall be final. 
Sec. 14.6. - Railroads. 
    The Council, upon some fair apportionment of the cost thereof between the railroad and the city and/or other public authority in interest, may by ordinance require any railroad company to take such measures for the protection of the public, as in the opinion of the Council the public safety or convenience may require. 
Sec. 14.7. - Reports by utilities. 
    Every person or corporation operating under a franchise or grant from the city shall annually submit to the Council a report verified by oath of the president, the treasurer, or the general manager thereof. Such reports shall be in the form, contain such detailed information, and cover the period prescribed by the Council. The Council shall have the power, either through its members or by authorized experts or employees, to examine the books and affairs of any such person, persons, or corporations, and to compel the production of books and other records pertaining to such reports or other matters. 
Sec. 14.8. - Books of record. 
    The Council shall provide and cause to be kept in the office of the City Clerk an indexed franchise record in which shall be transcribed copies of all franchises granted by the city. Said record shall be a complete history of all franchises granted by the city and shall include a comprehensive and convenient reference to actions, contests or proceedings at law affecting the same, and copies of all annual and inspection reports and such other information as the Council may require. 
Sec. 14.9. - Books of record. 
    No franchise granted by the city shall ever be leased, assigned or otherwise alienated without the express consent of the city, and no dealing with the lessee or assignee on the part of the city to require the performance of any act or the payment of any compensation by the lessee or assignee shall be deemed to operate as such consent. Any assignment or sale of such franchise without the consent of the city shall at the option of the Council operate as a forfeiture to the city of such franchise. 
Sec. 14.10. - City may acquire utilities. 
    The Council upon vote of the taxpaying electors shall have the power within or without the territorial limits of the city to construct, condemn and purchase, acquire, and lease water works, gas works, light plants[,] power plants, transportation systems, telephone systems, heating plants, and other public utilities local in use and extent, in whole or in part, and everything required therefor, for the use of the City and its inhabitants, and any such systems, plants, works, or ways, or any contracts in relation or in connection therewith which may exist and which the city may desire to acquire or purchase, in whole or in part, the same or any part thereof may be purchased by the city. 
Chapter XV MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 15.1. - Judicial department. 
    The Judicial Department shall be a "Municipal Court" whose employees shall be supervised by the City Administrator or his/her designee. The Municipal Court shall be presided over by a "Municipal Judge," vested with exclusive original jurisdiction of all causes arising under this Charter and the ordinances of the city for violation or enforcement thereof. The Council shall by ordinance establish a salary for the Municipal Judge, which shall not be a percentage of fines collected. 
    Such Municipal Judge shall be appointed by the City Council. He/she shall be a qualified elector of the State of Colorado and shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age at the time he/she shall assume the duties of his/her office. The jurisdiction and powers and procedure in such municipal court and the manner of enforcement of its orders and judgments, shall be such as is provided for under the Statutes of the State of Colorado and the present ordinances of the city, except as may be otherwise provided in this Charter or by ordinance hereafter enacted. 
(Ord. No. 2005-25, § 1(2C), 8-16-05) 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2C of Ord. No. 2005-25, adopted Aug. 16, 2005, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 1, 2005. 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, C.R.S. § 13-10-101 et seq.; effect of charter or ordinance, C.R.S. § 13-10-103. 
Sec. 15.2. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2D of Res. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2007. Said amendment deleted § 15.2, penalty for violations, as being repetitive of those provisions in § 7.5. 
Chapter XVI MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 16.1. - Vested rights continued. 
    After the effective date of this Charter, the city shall be vested with all property, monies, contracts, rights, credits, effects and the records, files, books, and papers belonging to it under and by virtue of operation under statutes governing second class towns. 
    No right or liability, either in favor of or against the city, existing at the time this Charter becomes effective and no suit or prosecution of any character shall in any manner be affected by any change, resulting from the adoption of this Charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the town shall continue to be the debts and liabilities of the city and all fines and penalties imposed at the time of such change shall be collected. 
Sec. 16.2. - Records to be public. 
    All records of the city shall be public, shall be kept in city offices except when required for official reasons or for purpose of safekeeping to be elsewhere and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
Sec. 16.3. - Interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context: 
(1)  All words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this Charter but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made herein. 
(2)  The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the singular and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
(3)  The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships as well as to individuals. 
(4)  The words "printed" and "printing" shall include reproductions by printing, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing or any similar method. 
(5)  Except in reference to signatures, the word[s] "written" and "in writing" shall include printing and typewriting. 
(6)  The word "officer" shall include the Mayor and other members of the Council, the administrative officers, [and] members of city boards and commissions created by or pursuant to this Charter. 
(7)  The word "statute" shall denote the laws of the State of Colorado in effect at the time the provision of the Charter containing the word "statute" is to be applied. 
(8)  All references to section numbers shall refer to section numbers of this Charter. 
(9)  The word "appropriation" shall mean authorized amount of funds set aside for expenditure during a specified time for a specific purpose. 
(10)  The word "City" shall mean the City of Lafayette, Colorado, a municipal corporation. 
(11)  The word "elector" shall mean a person who is entitled to vote at a particular time and includes the term "qualified" elector." 
(12)  The word "emergency" shall mean an existing condition actually arising from unforeseen contingencies which immediately endangers public property, health, peace or safety. 
(13)  The word "misdemeanor" shall mean a violation of this Charter or of any City ordinance, and it shall not have the meaning attached to it in the criminal statutes of the State of Colorado. 
(14)  The words "qualified taxpaying elector" shall mean an elector and/or spouse thereof, who, in the calendar year last preceding the time, election, or other date, shall have paid a tax upon real or personal property situated within the city and owned by and assessed to him/her on the assessment rolls and includes the term "taxpaying elector." 
(15)  The words "vote of the electors" and "vote of the qualified electors" shall mean a favorable vote by a majority of the electors voting in an election. 
(16)  The words "vote of the taxpaying electors" and "vote of the qualified taxpaying electors" shall mean a favorable vote by a majority of the taxpaying electors voting in an election. 
Sec. 16.4. - Sundays and holidays. 
    Whenever the date fixed by this Charter or by ordinance for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
Sec. 16.5. - Definition of publication, mailing of notices. 
    The requirement contained in this Charter for the publishing or publication of notices or ordinances shall be met by publishing an appropriate insertion in a newspaper published in the English language for the dissemination of news of a general character, which newspaper shall have had a general circulation at regular intervals in the city for at least two (2) years immediately preceding the time that it is used for such publication purposes. The affidavit of the printer or publisher of such newspaper, or of his/her foreman or principal clerk, annexed to a printed copy of such notice, ordinance or proceeding taken from the paper in which it was published and specifying the times of publication shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. 
    In any case in which this Charter requires the mailing of notices, the affidavit of the officer or employee responsible for such mailing that such notice was mailed shall be prima facie evidence of such mailing. 
Sec. 16.6. - City liability. 
    The City shall not be liable for damages sustained by any person whether to his/her person or property by reason of negligence of the city, its officers or employees, nor by reason of any defective highway, street, bridge, sidewalk, crosswalk or culvert, or by reason of any construction, ice, snow or other encumbrance upon such highway, street, bridge, sidewalk, crosswalk or culvert, situated in the city, unless such person shall serve or cause to be served upon the Clerk within ninety (90) days after such damages shall have occurred, a notice in writing and a statement that the person sustaining such damages intends to hold the city liable for such damages, as may have been sustained by him/her. Such notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of the damages, the manner in which they occurred, the extent of such damages as far as the same has become known, and the names and addresses of the witnesses known at the time by the claimant. No person shall bring any action against the city for any damages to person or property arising out of any of the reasons or circumstances aforesaid unless he/she shall have first presented to the Clerk his/her claim in writing and under oath setting forth particularly the nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed. By reason thereof, which claim shall be presented to the Council by the Clerk and the Council given opportunity to act thereon either by allowing or refusing to allow such claim. 
    It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to any action or proceeding for the collection or any demand or claim against the city under this section that the notice of damages and the verified proof of the claim as in this section required were not presented and filed within the time and in the manner as herein provided. 
Sec. 16.7. - Penalties for violation of charter. 
    Any violation of a provision of this Charter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and shall be tried in the Municipal Court. The fines and sentences for violation of the Charter shall be established by City Council by ordinance and shall not exceed the maximum established by applicable law. Any officer or employee of the city so convicted may be deprived of his/her office or employment and may be ineligible to any city office or employment for two (2) years thereafter. The power to suspend or remove an elected official, City Attorney, board or commission member or any other official appointed by the Council convicted under this section, shall be vested in the Council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 8-17-93; Res. No. 2007-38, § 1(2C), 9-4-07) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-35, adopted Aug. 17, 1993, amending § 16.7, was approved at referendum on Nov. 2, 1993. 
Editor's note- Amending Question No. 2C of Res. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, was approved by the registered electors at a regular municipal election held Nov. 6, 2007. 
Sec. 16.8. - Eminent domain. 
    In carrying out the powers and duties imposed upon it by this Charter or by the general statutes, the city shall have power to acquire within or without its corporate limits, lands, buildings, water, water rights and water storage rights, and other properties, and any interest in land and air rights over land, and may take the same upon paying just compensation to the owner as provided by law. 
State Law reference- Exercise of municipal powers, C. R. S. § 31-15-101 et seq. 
Sec. 16.9. - Chapter and section headings. 
    The chapter, section and subsection headings used in this Charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered as part of the Charter. 
Sec. 16.10. - Amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by the Constitution. Should two (2) or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
State Law reference- Amendment of municipal home rule charters, Art. XX, § 9, Const. of Colo. 
Sec. 16.11. - Processes against city. 
    All processes against the city shall run against the city in the corporate name thereof and may be served by leaving a true copy with the Mayor, City Clerk or City Attorney. 
Sec. 16.12. - Severability of charter provisions. 
    If any provision, section, article or clause of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the Charter which can be given effect without the invalid portion or applications provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end this Charter is declared to be severable. 
Sec. 16.13. - Enterprises. 
    The Council may, by ordinance, establish any one (1) or more of the city's water or wastewater systems, recreation center or golf course as an enterprise of the city. The Council may also, by ordinance, authorize any such city-owned enterprise, acting by and through the Council sitting as the board of the enterprise, to issue its own revenue bonds or other obligations (including refunding securities) on behalf of the city, which revenue bonds or other obligations shall be payable solely from the net revenues (including special assessments) derived from the operation of the enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations may be additionally secured by mortgages on or security interests in any real or personal property of the city used in the operation of the enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations shall be issued by ordinance of the board of the enterprise, adopted in the same manner and subject to referendum to the same extent as ordinances of the Council. 
    The Council shall not appoint any persons other than its own members to serve on the board of the enterprise or delegate to any other person or entity the powers reserved to the board of the enterprise hereunder. Neither shall the Council authorize the board of the enterprise to acquire, construct or install or hold title to or dispose of any city-owned property used in the operation of the enterprise, to impose or adjust rates, fees, tolls or charges for the use of any such property or for any service or commodity furnished by the enterprise, to levy special assessments or to exercise any power reserved to the Council or other city officials by this Charter or otherwise (other than the power to issue revenue bonds and other obligations). 
(Ord. No. 1993-38, § 1, 8-17-93) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-38, adopted Aug. 17, 1993, adding § 16.13, was approved at referendum on Nov. 2, 1993. 
Chapter XVII TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 17.1. - Status of transitional provisions. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for an orderly transition from the old government of Lafayette to a new government under provisions of this Charter. Such chapter shall constitute a part of this Charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish that end. 
Sec. 17.2. - Continuation of appointed officers and employees. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date of this Charter, all appointive officers and all employees of the city shall continue in that City office or employment which corresponds to the town office or employment which they held prior to the effective date of the Charter as though they had been appointed or employed in the manner provided in this Charter, and they shall in all respects be subject to the provisions of this Charter, except that any officer or employee who holds a position which this Charter provides be held at the pleasure of the appointing officer or body shall hold such position only at such pleasure regardless of the term for which originally appointed. 
Sec. 17.3. - First election under Charter. 
    The first Council to take office under provisions of this Charter shall be elected at a special municipal election to be held on the 24th day of June, 1958. At this election the voters shall be entitled to vote for not more than seven candidates for Council. The three candidates who receive the three highest number of votes, shall be declared elected for a term beginning on the first day of July, 1958, and ending on Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1961. The four candidates for Council who receive the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh highest number of votes shall be declared elected for a term beginning on the first day of July, 1958, and ending on the Monday next following the date of the regular city election in 1959. After this initial special election the provisions contained in this Charter relative to elections and terms of elective officers shall govern. 
Sec. 17.4. - Transitional and reorganization period. 
    The period from the effective date of this Charter to July 1, 1958, shall be known as the transitional period. During the transitional period the statutes governing towns shall continue to remain in effect, except that for the purpose of nominating and electing members of the Council or filling vacancies thereon, Chapter III of this Charter shall be immediately operative. 
    Following the election and qualification of the first Council under this Charter, the Council shall proceed with the selection of a Mayor, and all other offices and employees shall proceed to effectuate the other provisions of this Charter so that it shall be fully operative. 
    As the Board of Trustees of the Town of Lafayette, Colorado, prepared and adopted a budget for the Town of Lafayette for the fiscal year commencing April 1, 1958, and ending on March 31, 1959, the Council in adopting the budget for the fiscal year January 1, 1959, to December 31, 1959, shall take into consideration said adopted budget so as to provide an orderly transition from the old fiscal year to the new fiscal year. 
Sec. 17.5. - Local improvements. 
    This Charter shall not affect local improvements not completed on the effective date of this Charter. Neither shall the provisions of this Charter affect municipal bonds outstanding on said effective date. 
Sec. 17.6. - Municipal Court. 
    Until such time as the City Council shall provide by ordinance for the rules, procedure, proceedings, costs and fees in the Municipal Court as required in Section 15.2, the rules, procedure, proceedings, costs, and fees, as provided by the statutes governing second class towns shall remain in effect. 
Sec. 17.7. - Saving Clause. 
    This Charter shall not affect any suit pending in any Court or any document heretofore executed in connection therewith. Nothing in this Charter shall invalidate any existing contracts between the Town of Lafayette and individual corporations, or public agencies. 
    This Charter Convention recommends that this City Council and all future City Councils are charged with the responsibility of maintaining perpetual care for the cemetery. 
CERTIFICATE OF FINAL ADOPTION 
    We, the undersigned, present members of the Lafayette Charter Convention, duly elected by the people of Lafayette, Colorado, at a special election held on December 31, 1957, or duly appointed according to law, under authorization of Article XX, Constitution of the State of Colorado, to frame a Home Rule Charter for the City of Lafayette, do hereby certify that the foregoing is the proposed Charter as finally approved and adopted by the members of the Convention on the 28th day of February, 1958, for submission to the people of Lafayette at a special election to be held on April 1, 1958. 
    Done in triplicate at Lafayette, Colorado, this 28th day of February, 1958. 
    (signed) Roy S. Roberts, President and Chairman 
Loren A. McMahan, Clifford W. Alderson  Secretary Merill L. Angevine Kenneth E. Brown Floyd McWilliams Joe Distel Leland H. Moore Arthur Driver Melvin Mootz Sheldon Epler Boughton Noble Guido Gaz Isa Elizabeth Purdy, James W. Graham, Jr.  Vice-Chairman Walter M. Houser Frank Scarpella Wiliam Kellet, Jr. George Sleppy Robert W. Lee Wilbur Waneka  
STATE OF COLORADO ) SS. COUNTY OF BOULDER )  
    I, W. F. Autrey, Town Clerk of the Town of Lafayette, do hereby certify that the above and foregoing Charter was adopted by a majority of those voting thereon on April 1, 1958, by vote of 333 votes for the adoption and 218 votes against the adoption of said Charter. 
W. F. Autrey, 
Town Clerk 
Subscribed and sworn before me this 7th day of April, 1958. My Commission expires February 26, 1961. 
B. A. McWilliams 
Notary Public 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
The original charter, §§ 1.1 through 17.7, is set out as adopted on April 1, 1958. The following table shows the disposition of amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Disposition 656  7-15-75 1 3.4 742 10- 4-77 1 10.2 965  1- 4-83 3.4 8.8 
10.1 
12.1 1984-03  2-21-84 5.1 
11.2 1986-26  7-15-86 3.4 
7.3 
11.4 1988-25 12- 6-88 1 10.1-10.4 1993-34  8-17-93 1 3.4, 3.6, 3.9, 3.13 1993-35  8-17-93 1 7.5, 15.2, 16.7 1993-36  8-17-93 1 10.3 1993-37  8-17-93 1 12.1, 12.3 1993-38  8-17-93 1       Added 16.13 1993-39  8-17-93 1 10.1 1993-40  8-17-93 1 8.5 11- 7-95       Added 6.10-6.15 2000-11  8-15-00 1 6.10 2001-31  9- 4-01 1(2A) 6.10, 6.12, 6.14, 6.15  (2C) 4.14 2005-25  8-16-05 1(2A)       Rpld 4.13 5.1, 6.9       Added 4.13, 4.13-1  (2B) 12.1  (2C) 15.1       Rpld 15.3  (2D) 4.11, 4.12  (2E) 4.6, 4.9, 4.16  (2F) 8.5 2006-33  9- 5-06 1(2A) 3.2, 3.4, 3.8       Rpld 3.11, 3.13  (2C) 6.10  (2D) Chtr. 2007-38(Res.)  9- 4-07 1(2A) 6.10, 6.14  (2B) 7.2  (2C) 4.4, 5.7(a), 6.1  (2D) 7.5, 16.7       Rpld 15.2  (2E) 5.11 2011-30  8-16-11 1(1) 7.12  (2)       Added 4.17  (3) 7.4  (4) 5.4, 5.5  (5) 4.9, 4.14, 7.3, 8.3, 8.9, 13.5 2012-22  8-21-12 1 6.10, 6.12, 6.14, 6.15 11- 5-13       Added 2.3 2017-32  8-15-17 1 6.10, 6.12, 6.14, 6.15 2017-33  8-15-17 1 4.3  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Name and boundaries of city, § 1.1; exercise of municipal powers as provided by ordinance, § 2.1. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Lafayette, Colorado," and may be so cited. 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances, §§ 7.2, 7.8. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the section or ordinance in question. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
    Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. 
    In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Lafayette, Colorado" followed it and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
    City council, council. Whenever the words "council" or "city council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the city council of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    City officials or officers. Whenever a reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments or other agencies of the city by title only, e.g., "city clerk" or "chief of police," it shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean the "Code of Ordinances, City of Lafayette, Colorado." 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Sunday nor a holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Sundays and holidays shall be excluded in the computation. A half-holiday shall be considered as other days and not as a holiday. 
    When a party has the right or is required to do some act or take some proceedings within a prescribed period after the service of a notice or other paper upon him and the notice or paper is served by mail, three (3) days shall be added to the prescribed period. 
    Corporate or city limits. The term "corporate limits" or "city limits" shall mean the legal boundaries of the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Boulder, State of Colorado. 
    Court. The word "court" shall mean the Municipal Court of the City of Lafayette. 
    C. R. S. 1973. The designation "C. R. S. 1973" or "Colorado Revised Statutes 1973" or the like shall refer to the official embodiment of the statutory law of Colorado, as amended. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears authorizing or requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the authorized or required act or make the authorized or required inspection unless the terms of the provisions or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Hereafter. The word "hereafter" shall mean any time after the effective date of this Code. 
    Heretofore. The word "heretofore" shall mean any time previous to the day when this Code shall take effect. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    May. The word "may" is permissive. 
    Mayor. The word "mayor" shall apply to the mayor pro tem or acting mayor. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public way. The words "public way" shall include any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk or other public thoroughfare. 
    Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Reasonable time or notice. In all cases where a provision of this Code shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Colorado. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof within the designated right-of-way. 
    Tangible personal property. The term "tangible personal property" shall include goods, chattels and all personal property, except intangible personal property. 
    Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Time. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
    Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
    Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letter or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
Charter reference- Interpretation of charter and ordinances, § 16.3. 
State Law reference- Construction of statutes, C. R. S. § 2-1-101 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
Charter reference- Headings not considered part of charter, § 16.9. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Charter reference- Severability of ordinances, § 7.7; severability of charter provisions, § 16.12. 
State Law reference- Severability of statutory provisions, C. R. S. § 2-4-204. 
Sec. 1-5. - Code does not affect prior offenses, contracts, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor shall it affect or prevent any suit, prosecution or proceeding authorized or pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
State Law reference- Repeal of a repealing statute, C. R. S. § 2-4-302. 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, articles, divisions, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: 
    "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Lafayette, Colorado, is hereby amended to read as follows..." 
The revised sections, as amended, shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
    "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Lafayette, Colorado, is hereby amended by adding a section, division, article or chapter to be numbered _______, which section reads as follows:..." 
The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Charter reference- Style of ordinances, § 7.2; amendments to ordinances, § 7.3, amendments to charter, § 16.10. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Charter reference- Amendments to ordinance codification, § 7.8. 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Lafayette to be misrepresented thereby. 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty; continuing violations; injunction. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse or fail to comply with or resist the enforcement of any provision of this Code, the City Charter or any other ordinance of the City of Lafayette, or to commit any act or omission declared to be a misdemeanor, except that unless conduct is specifically designated criminal herein, any offense which is not punishable by imprisonment in jail is not criminal and is deemed decriminalized, and unless a specific lesser penalty is specifically provided for the violation of any specific portion of this Code, the City Charter or any other ordinance of the City of Lafayette, the violation of any provision of this Code, the City Charter or any other ordinance of the City of Lafayette, shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code, the City Charter or any ordinance of the City of Lafayette, except as above-stated, who is eighteen (18) years of age or more on the date of said violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations, or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code, the City Charter or any ordinance of the City of Lafayette, except as above-stated, who is under the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of said violation, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations. 
(3)  Except as hereinafter provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Model Traffic Code of Lafayette, Colorado, and/or the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities as adopted and set forth in articles I and II of chapter 115 of this Code, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations, except any person convicted of violating section 4-6, speed contest, section 5-1, reckless driving, section 19-12, compulsory insurance, or section 21-13, eluding a police officer, all being violations of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities as adopted by the city, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations, or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  In addition to the above penalties and fines, the city may obtain enforcement of its ordinances by seeking injunctive or other appropriate relief in a court of proper jurisdiction. 
(c)  Each day or portion thereof, during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1986-38, § 1, 10-21-86; Ord. No. 1988-16, § 1, 8-16-88; Ord. No. 1994-6, § 2, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 2016-29, § 1, 9-20-16) 
Charter reference- Punishment for violation of ordinances, §§ 7.5, 15.2; penalties for violation of charter, § 16.7. 
State Law reference- Penalty for violation of ordinances, C. R. S. § 31-16-101; constitutional power as to fines and penalties, Art. XX, § 6, Colo. Const. 
Chapter 5 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal powers, Ch. 11; organization of government, Ch. IV. 
Cross reference- Ambulance services, Ch. 15; civil defense council, § 35-5 et seq.; director of civil defense, § 35-7 et seq.; elections. Ch. 40; municipal court, Ch. 65; fire department, § 45-16 et seq.; library board of trustees, § 50-3 et seq.; disrupting government meetings, § 75-18; department of parks, open space and golf, § 80-1 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal government, title 31, C.R.S. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Salary of mayor and council. 
    The mayor shall receive the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) pe r month and council members shall receive the sum of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) per month. These provisions shall apply only to those persons being elected and appointed after the effective date of this section, and prior to said time said persons who hold office shall receive one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month as mayor and one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month as a council member. 
(Ord. No. 426, § 1, 6-6-67; Ord. No. 657, § 3, 6-17-75; Ord. No. 1984-06, § 1, 3-20-84; Ord. No. 1986-12, § 1, 3-4-86) 
Charter reference- Compensation of mayor and councilors, § 4.3. 
State Law reference- Compensation of mayor and councilmen, C. R. S. § 31-4-109. 
Sec. 5-2. - Mayor to preside. 
    The mayor shall preside at all hearings held before the city council. At any such hearing wherein it is necessary for the city attorney to present testimony of witnesses or other evidence, the city council may request the municipal judge to be present to give advice to the mayor and city council concerning rules of order and rulings on objections made and evidence presented by a participant or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 11-1-83) 
Sec. 5-3. - Annexation costs. 
    Any person submitting a petition for annexation shall, in addition to complying with all of the statutory requirements, sign an agreement, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part hereof, binding him to pay all costs of legal advertising and other direct related costs arising out of the petition which he submits for annexation. 
AGREEMENT 
    COMES NOW, the City of Lafayette, a Municipal Corporation, hereinafter called "CITY," and ___________, an individual who has submitted a petition for annexation hereinafter called the "PETITIONER" and in consideration of the mutual promises, covenants and agreements contained herein and for other good and valuable consideration agree as follows: 
1.  That as a part of the consideration for annexation by the City, the Petitioner agrees to pay all of the costs of legal advertising, title search costs, ownership plat costs and engineering and surveying costs which arise out of his submission of the petition for annexation. 
2.  It is understood that this cost cannot accurately be determined prior to the time that it is incurred but the petitioner agrees that upon submission of a statement from the City of Lafayette and by and through its City Administrator, he will pay the cost of such legal advertising and if he fails to do so, the City Council shall vacate any proceedings which may have been had regarding the property which he has submitted for annexation. 
3.  It is understood that in an annexation involving more than one land owner, the costs reimbursed to the City may be borne proportionately by the petitioners. 
4.  That the parties hereto signify by their signatures affixed below that they have had an opportunity to read this agreement, have each received a copy of it and have had the opportunity to consult legal counsel of their own choosing prior to signing. 
    WHEREFORE, the parties hereto have affixed their signatures this _______ day of _______, ___. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 11-21-72) 
Sec. 5-4. - Fees. 
    As provided by law, city council shall, by resolution, establish charges and fees for municipal programs, goods and services. The purpose of such fees is to defray the city's costs of providing the programs, goods or services and the amount of any fee shall be reasonably related to the city's cost of rendering the particular programs, goods or services. 
(Ord. No. 2005-10, § 1, 3-1-05) 
Secs. 5-5-5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 5-16. - Office created. 
    Pursuant to the authority of section 4.6 of the charter of the city, there is hereby created and established the office of city administrator, who shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 1, 7-5-77) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to create administrative offices by ordinance, § 4.6. 
Sec. 5-17. - Intent. 
    It is the intention of the city council that the words "city administrator" shall be substituted for the words "city manager" in any prior ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 8, 7-5-77) 
Sec. 5-18. - Qualifications. 
    The city administrator shall be chosen by the city council on the basis of their executive and administrative qualifications, with particular emphases on actual experience and knowledge of the accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. At the time of their appointment, the city administrator need not be a resident of the city or the state, but shall become a resident of the city within 90 days of the their appointment, and, unless otherwise authorized by city council, remain a resident of the city during their tenure or office. No councilman shall be appointed city administrator during, or within one year after the termination of, their term as a member of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 2016-25, § 1, 8-2-16; Ord. No. 2019-1, § 1 , 1-15-19) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to require officers to reside in city, § 5.1. 
Sec. 5-19. - Appointment; salary; term. 
    The city council shall appoint a city administrator for an indefinite term, at a salary to be fixed by the city council, and he shall hold office at the pleasure of a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 2, 7-5-77) 
Charter reference- Appointment of city employees, § 5.1. 
Sec. 5-20. - Powers and duties. 
    The city administrator shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city placed in his charge, and to that end, he shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Require compliance with the provisions of the city charter and the ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Appoint, suspend, transfer and remove all employees with the consent of the city council and subject to the personnel regulations of the city. 
(3)  Prepare, with the assistance of department heads, a proposed budget annually and submit the same to the council for approval. Further, be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption. 
(4)  Prepare with the assistance of necessary department heads and submit to the city council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year upon request of the city council to make a written or verbal report at the time concerning the affairs of the city under his supervision. 
(5)  Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and the future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the council for adoption as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(6)  Exercise direct supervision and control over all departments and city employees, and with the assistance of department heads, recommend to the city council any proposals to establish more effective procedures in departmental functions and operations. 
(7)  Enforce all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any contract or public utilities franchise, and upon acquiring of any knowledge of any violation thereof, report the same to the city council for such action and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the same. 
(8)  Attend all city council meetings and participate in discussions in an advisory capacity. 
(9)  At the direction of council, inform the public concerning plans and activities of the council and of the city administration. 
(10)  With the assistance of department heads, establish a system of accounting and auditing for the city; show that legal provisions have been complied with, and reflect the financial condition and financial operation of the city; establish a cost accounting system whenever practical. 
(11)  Carry forth the council directives concerning engineering, architectural, maintenance, construction and work equipment services required by the city. 
(12)  Sign all purchase agreements and approve payment of bills pursuant to directive of the city council. 
(13)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance, or required by the council, and not inconsistent with the provisions of the city charter. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 6, 7-5-77) 
Sec. 5-21. - Relation of city administrator to department heads and relation of department heads to city council members. 
    Department heads are accountable for their activities in their departments in the technical and professional areas. The city administrator, as administrator for the council, is the first contact upward for department heads in the city organization. The city administrator is expected to keep department heads informed of all administrative, legal and fiscal matters affecting their departments, and to work in harmony with them in order that each department performs in the most efficient, economical, and practical method to achieve goals and accomplish projects. Department heads shall not initiate any conversation with any council member concerning any administrative policy or city matter unless they have first discussed the situation with the city administrator. The city administrator may request a full and detailed narrative from a department head which includes opinions and positions with regard to any administrative policy or city matter which a department head wishes to discuss with a council member. 
    A department head shall not forward to city council or a council member any form of communication without the prior knowledge of the city administrator. The city administrator may require a department head to provide the city administrator with any and all supporting data or information relating to the subject matter of the communication to be forwarded to the city council or a council member prior to the communication. 
    Department heads shall have the right to request that information which is deemed by them to be sufficiently important and pressing be brought to the attention of the city council. The city administrator shall bring such information to the city council's attention in an expeditious manner. 
    The city council or members of the city council may contact department heads directly for information or facts regarding city matters at their discretion. A department head so contacted shall promptly inform the city administrator of the nature of the contact and the information provided by the department head to the city council or council member. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 5, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 906, § 2, 3-17-81) 
Sec. 5-22. - Relation of city council to city administrator. 
    The city administrator shall carry forward the policies and directives of the city council, and shall further adhere to and obtain adherence by city employees to the City Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 4, 7-5-77; Ord. No. 906, § 1, 3-17-81) 
Sec. 5-23. - Absence. 
    The city administrator shall designate, in writing, to the city council, a person who is a city employee to act as city administrator during any absence or disability of the city administrator, which designated appointment shall be subject to approval of the city council. In the event of the failure of the city administrator to make such a designation, the city council shall appoint an acting city administrator. Such acting city administrator shall, while he is in such office, have all of the responsibilities, duties, function and authority of the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 3, 7-5-77) 
Sec. 5-24. - Removal; severance pay. 
    A majority of the city council may remove the city administrator at its pleasure at any regular city council meeting. Upon the removal of any city administrator, the council shall cause to be paid forth any unpaid balance of salary for the current month, and his salary for the next calendar month following his removal. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 7, 7-5-77) 
Sec. 5-25. - Authorization to negotiate and execute leases of city. 
    The city administrator is authorized to negotiate and execute leases of city-owned real and personal property, including water rights, where the market value of such lease is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and the term is not more than one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 2009-31, § 1, 1-5-10) 
Secs. 5-26-5-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Planning commission, § 4.14. 
Cross reference- Amendments to zoning ordinance, App. A, § 53. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning commissions, C. R. S. § 31-23-201 et seq.; subdivision regulations, C. R. S. § 31-23-214. 

Sec. 5-36. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the word "commission" shall mean the Planning Commission for the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
Sec. 5-37. - Created; membership. 
    In order to achieve a coordinated and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with the present or future needs promote a good civic design and arrangement, healthy and convenient distribution of population and other public requirements, there is hereby created a planning commission for the city which shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the city council after appropriate interviews conducted by a committee of three (3) council members. No member of the city council may also serve as a member of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1, 5-2-67; Ord. No. 2002-8, § 1, 4-16-02) 
Charter reference- Authority for above section, § 4.14. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to create planning commission, C. R. S. § 31-23-202. 
Sec. 5-38. - Procedure. 
    Immediately following their appointment, the members of the planning commission shall meet, organize, elect such officers as it may deem necessary and adopt and later change or alter, rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with city ordinances and state laws. The commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 3, 5-2-67; Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 11-5-02) 
Charter reference- Purposes of planning commission rules, § 4.14. 
State Law reference- Organization and rules of planning commission, C. R. S. § 31-23-204. 
Sec. 5-39. - Compensation. 
    All members of the commission shall serve without compensation except that, if the city council deems it advisable, the secretary may receive such compensation as may be fixed from time to time by said city council and provided for in the appropriation ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 2, 5-2-67) 
Sec. 5-40. - Term of office. 
    Planning commission members shall serve terms of four (4) years, and their terms shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than two (2) members of the planning commission shall expire at any one time. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, and except for each member of the planning commission who is also a member of the city council, the term of each member of the planning commission as of June 30, 2002, shall be and remain the term that each such member, respectively, was initially appointed to serve. For those members of the planning commission appointed on or after July 1, 2002, the city council shall determine who shall initially have a four-year, three-year, two-year and/or one-year term, to maintain staggered terms as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 2, 5-2-67; Ord. No. 2002-8, § 2, 4-16-02) 
Charter reference- Terms of members of planning commission, § 4.14. 
Sec. 5-41. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To prepare and recommend in the city council a comprehensive plan of public improvements, looking to the present and future development and growth of the city. Such a plan after its adoption by the city council will be known as the official plan. 
    Such plan shall include reasonable requirements in reference to streets, alleys and public grounds within the corporate limits and in contiguous territory outside of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles from such limits, and not included in any municipality, such requirements to be effective whenever such lands shall be subdivided after the adoption of such plan. 
(2)  To prepare and recommend to the city council from time to time such changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by the city council or by the planning commission. 
(3)  To prepare and recommend to the city council from time to time plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of such official plan. 
(4)  To give aid to the city officials, charged with the direction of projects for improvements, embraced within the official plan, to further the making of such improvements, and generally to promote the realization of the official plan. 
(5)  To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general purpose of public understanding. 
(6)  To co-operate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area. 
(7)  To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by statute. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 4, 5-2-67) 
Charter reference- Powers and duties of planning commission, § 4.14. 
State Law reference- Master plan, C. R. S. § 31-23-206; comprehensive plan, C. R. S. § 31-23-303. 
Sec. 5-42. - Expenditures. 
    The commission may at the discretion of the city council employ necessary employees, whose salaries, wages and other necessary expenses shall be provided for by adequate appropriation made by the city council from public funds. If said planning commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the city council and appropriations by the city council therefor. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 7, 5-2-67) 
State Law reference- Expenditures of planning commission, C. R. S. § 31-23-205. 
Sec. 5-43. - Improvements. 
    The city clerk shall furnish the planning commission for its consideration a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any nature. The planning commission may report in relation thereto if it deems a report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 6, 5-2-67) 
Cross reference- Public improvements, Ch. 90. 
Sec. 5-44. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by appointment for unexpired terms only. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 2, 5-2-67) 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2007-03, adopted Jan. 16, 2007, repealed §§ 5-45-5-47, which pertained to the board of trustees of policemen's pension fund, and derived from Ord. No. 1984-20, adopted July 17, 1984. 

Secs. 5-45-5-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 11 of Ord. No. 2006-22, adopted June 6, 2006, added §§ 5-52-5-59 and § 13 of said ordinance renumbered §§ 5-50-5-59 as Art. III, §§ 50-20-50-29, reserving §§ 5-50-5-59 for future use. 

Secs. 5-50-5-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2007-04, adopted Jan. 16, 2007, repealed § 5-60, which pertained to the youth advisory committee, and derived from Ord. No. 2006-08, adopted March 7, 2006 and Ord. No. 2006-28, adopted June 19, 2006. 

Secs. 5-60-5-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-38, adopted Nov. 16, 2016, repealed and reenacted art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VII pertained to the Latino Advisory Board and derived from Ord. No. 2006-23, adopted June 6, 2006; and Ord. No. 2011-04, adopted Feb. 1, 2011. 

Sec. 5-70. - Human rights commission. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established the human rights commission. 
(b)  Membership. The advisory board shall consist of seven (7) city electors of at least eighteen (18) years of age who shall be appointed by city council. Council may appoint up to two (2) alternate members, who shall be called upon to serve and vote in the absence of a regular member(s). The board may recruit and recommend nominees to city council for appointment. A city employee appointed by the city administrator shall serve as the city's nonvoting staff liaison to the board. 
(c)  Term and compensation. Members shall be appointed to serve three-year terms. Members seeking reappointment may be recommended by the current board and must be approved by city council. Vacancies for any unexpired term shall be filled by city council appointment. Board members serve at the pleasure of council. Board members shall not receive a salary or other compensation for their service, but may receive reimbursement for necessary expenses in accordance with city policy. 
(d)  Purpose. The purpose of the advisory board is to foster mutual respect and understanding and to create an atmosphere conducive to the promotion of amicable relations among all members of the community and to serve as a vehicle through which citizens can convey their suggestions on city policies with respect to diversity and inclusiveness. 
(e)  Duties and responsibilities. In addition to other tasks that the city council may assign to it, the advisory board shall: 
(1)  Study, prepare and recommend to the city council a plan of long and short range priorities and specific legislation or programs to alleviate problems related to diversity and inclusiveness, including programs administered by the city to promote diversity and inclusiveness; 
(2)  Upon request of the council or the city administrator, or upon its own initiative, advise the city council or administrator on the diversity and inclusiveness impact of proposals to be acted upon by the council or upon areas to which the council's attention should be directed; 
(3)  Facilitate conversation related to incidents of division and conflict on issues of diversity and inclusiveness and attempt to correct them by issuing recommendations to appropriate city departments and to the city council for actions necessary or helpful to eliminate such division and conflict; and 
(4)  Consider, research, study and make recommendations to the city council regarding any contemplated or proposed action by any federal, state or municipal government, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, which may have an effect on diversity and inclusiveness in the community. 
(f)  Meetings and bylaws. The board is authorized to adopt bylaws and other administrative guidelines to govern the conduct of its meetings and activities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-38, § 1, 11-16-16) 
Chapter 6 - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 6-1. - Administrative departments and duties. 
    In accordance with section 4.6 of the city Charter, the city council hereby establishes the following administrative departments of the city and prescribes the following duties to each: 
(a)  A planning department which department shall be under the supervision of the planning director. The planning director shall be hired by and report to the city administrator. The department shall implement and enforce the city's development and zoning and building ordinances, coordinate economic development activities, direct urban renewal efforts, implement city affordable housing regulations, provide planning and building services, enforce code compliance, oversee implementation of the city's historic preservation ordinances, and coordinate cultural arts activities and activities or services related to local history. Wherever in this Code reference is made to the "community development department" it shall be interpreted as a reference to the planning department, and wherever in this Code reference is made to the "community development director" it shall be interpreted as a reference to the planning director. 
(b)  A library department which department shall provide library services and community information services. This department shall be under the supervision of the library director. The library director shall be hired by and report to the city administrator. 
(c)  A department of finance and administrative services which shall be under the supervision of the finance director, who shall also serve as the treasurer and perform such duties as required by the city Charter. The finance director shall be hired by and report to the city administrator. In the director's capacity as treasurer, the director shall advise the city administrator and the city council regarding financial matters concerning the city. 
(d)  A fire department which shall be under the supervision of the fire chief. The fire chief shall be appointed by and serve under the city administrator, and such appointment shall be ratified by the city council. The department may adopt its own administrative rules and bylaws as long as such shall not conflict with the policies, procedures and ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. 
(e)  A municipal court department which shall be under the supervision of the city administrator. The department shall be responsible for the judicial resolution of all cases involving violation of the Code or city Charter. 
(f)  A department of parks, open space and golf, which shall be under the supervision of the director of parks, open space and golf. The parks, open space and golf director shall be hired by and report to the city administrator. The department shall be responsible for the planning and maintenance of municipal parks, open space, and the municipal cemeteries. The department shall also operate the municipal golf course. 
(g)  A police department as established by section 4.12 of the city Charter, which section sets forth the department's functions and chief's duties. 
(h)  A department of public works, which shall be under the supervision of the director of public works. The public works director shall be hired by and report to the city administrator. The department shall review plans for and supervise construction and be responsible for the maintenance of all municipal streets and utilities. The department shall also operate the municipal utility enterprises. 
(i)  A department of recreation and facility management, which shall be under the supervision of the director of recreation and facility management. The recreation and facilities management director shall be hired by and report to the city administrator. The department is responsible for recreation facility operations, recreation programs, services for older adults and other specific segments of the city's population, as directed, implementation of city energy sustainability policies, and the maintenance of public access municipal buildings. 
(j)  A department of arts and cultural resources, which shall be under the supervision of the director of arts and culture. The arts and cultural resources director shall be hired by and report to the city administrator. The department is responsible for operating the public art program, as well as operating, maintaining, and promoting arts and cultural facilities, activities, and resources in the City of Lafayette. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, § 1, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2011-33, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 1, 2-19-19) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 55. 
State Law reference- Fermented malt beverages, C. R. S. § 12-46-101 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, C. R. S. § 12-47-101 et seq.; liquors-special event permits, C. R. S. § 12-48-101 et seq.; taxation of businesses, C. R. S. § 31-15-501(1)(c). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Application fees for sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Each application for a license or temporary permit for the sale of malt, vinous or spirituous beverages shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount as set forth in the Colorado Liquor Code, Colorado Revised Statutes, section 44-3-101 et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 9-7-76; Ord. No. 1984-33, § 1, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 1989-51, § 1, 11-9-89; Ord. No. 1991-21, § 1, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 1998-8, § 1, 1-20-98; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 2, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2018-25, § 1, 8-21-18) 
State Law reference- Colorado Liquor Code, § 12-47-101 et seq., C.R.S. 1973; definitions, § 12-47-103; application for local license, § 12-47-135 
Sec. 10-2. - Application fees for sale of fermented malt beverages. 
    Each application for a license or temporary permit for the sale of fermented malt beverages shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount as set forth in the Colorado Beer Code, Colorado Revised Statutes, section 44-4-101 et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 9-7-76; Ord. No. 1984-33, § 2, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 1991-21, § 2, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 1998-8, § 1, 1-20-98; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 3, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2018-25, § 2, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 10-2.5. - Application fee for special event permit. 
    Each application for a special events permit shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount as set forth in the Colorado Liquor Code, Colorado Revised Statutes, section 44-5-104, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1984-33, § 3, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 4, 3-1-05 ) 
Sec. 10-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 10-2005, adopted March 1, 2005, repealed § 10-3, application fee of hotel and restaurant manager, in its entirety. Former § 10-3 derived from Ord. No. 685, adopted Sept. 7, 1976. 
Sec. 10-3.1. - Distance restrictions for hotel and restaurant licenses. 
    All distance restrictions for hotel and restaurant liquor license applications are abolished and, therefore, an application for same shall be received and acted upon if the building within which the malt, vinous, or spirituous is located within five hundred (500) feet of a public or parochial school or the principal campus of any college, university or seminary. Where the city council grants an application for a liquor license to a restaurant or hotel located less than five hundred (500) feet from any public or parochial school, principal campus of any college, university or seminary, the city council may impose conditions including, but not limited to, approval by the city council of an acceptable traffic plan; and such other reasonable restrictions or conditions as the city council, in its discretion, may impose to protect any school children, college, university or seminary students from the close presence of a liquor establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1994-31, § 1, 10-18-94; Ord. No. 1998-8, § 2, 1-20-98) 
Sec. 10-4. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of sections 10-6-10-9, the word "licensee" shall mean any person duly licensed to sell spirituous, vinous or malt liquors or beverages in the city or any agent, servant or employee of such licensee. 
(Ord. No. 728, § 2, 6-7-77; Ord. No. 1998-8, § 3, 1-20-98) 
Sec. 10-5. - Condition of license approval. 
    Compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter shall be a condition of each license approved by the city council, as local licensing authority, for the sale of alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors as defined by the Colorado Liquor Code, or for the sale of fermented malt beverages, as defined by the Colorado Beer Code. 
(Ord. No. 1994-35, § 1, 10-20-94; Ord. No. 1998-8, § 4, 1-20-98) 
Sec. 10-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-24, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 2002, repealed § 10-6, which pertained to training of licensee employees and derived from Ord. No. 1994-35, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 1994. 
Sec. 10-7. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any disturbance or unlawful or disorderly act or conduct to be committed by any person or group of persons upon any premises licensed for the sale of spirituous, vinous or malt liquors or beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee, in any manner to encourage or participate in any disturbance or unlawful or disorderly act or conduct upon premises selling spirituous, vinous or malt liquors or beverages; provided, however, that such licensee may use such lawful means as may be proper to protect his person or property from damage or injury. 
(Ord. No. 728, § 1, 6-7-77; Ord. No. 1994-35, 10-20-94) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, C. R. S. § 18-9-106 
Sec. 10-8. - Warning sign. 
    Each licensee shall post and keep at all times visible to the public, in a conspicuous place on the premises, a sign to be furnished by the city clerk's office, which sign shall be in the following form: "WARNING" LAFAYETTE CITY POLICE MUST BE NOTIFIED OF ALL DISTURBANCES IN THIS ESTABLISHMENT." 
(Ord. No. 728, § 4, 6-7-77; Ord. No. 1994-35, 10-20-94) 
Cross reference- Offenses, Ch. 75. 
Sec. 10-9. - Reports. 
    Any licensee shall immediately report to the police department any unlawful or disorderly act, conduct or disturbance committed on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 728, § 3, 6-7-77; Ord. No. 1994-35, 10-20-94) 
Sec. 10-10. - Tax-Levied. 
    There is hereby levied and assessed for each year an annual occupation tax upon those businesses located within the city which sell malt, vinous or spirituous liquors and further provide nude entertainment or allow nude entertainment for the customers of said businesses, in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 1, 8-5-80; Ord. No. 1994-35, 10-20-94) 
Sec. 10-11. - Same-Definition. 
    For the purpose of sections 10-10-10-14, nude entertainment shall mean the displaying of pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; nude entertainment shall also be defined as the displaying of the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the displaying of the post-pubertal human female breast where the nipple only or the nipple and areola only are covered. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 2, 8-5-80; Ord. No. 1994-35, 10-20-94; Ord. No. 1998-8, § 5, 1-20-98) 
Sec. 10-12. - Same-Payment. 
(a)  The occupational tax levied in section 10-10 shall be due and payable to the director of finance on January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent on February 15 of the same year. Upon receipt of the tax, the director of finance shall execute and deliver to the licensee paying the tax a receipt showing the name of the licensee, the date of payment, the annual period for which such taxes paid and the place at which said licensee conducts business. All persons who pay the above-mentioned occupational tax shall, at all times, post a receipt of payment in a conspicuous place in the place of business stated in the receipt. 
(b)  Whenever any new licensee begins business with a new license subsequent to January 1 of any year, the occupational tax required herein shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis for the remaining portion of the year; no refund shall be made to any person who has discontinued business under a license prior to the expiration of the period covered by the occupational tax. 
(c)  All licenses issued hereunder shall be nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 3, 8-5-80; Ord. No. 1994-35, 10-20-94; Ord. No. 1998-8, § 6, 1-20-98) 
Sec. 10-13. - Same-Purpose. 
    The purpose of the occupational tax levied in section 10-8 is for revenue purposes. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 4, 8-5-80; Ord. No. 1994-35, 10-20-94; Ord. No. 1998-8, § 7, 1-20-98) 
Sec. 10-14. - Same-Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any business selling malt, vinous or spirituous liquors which business also provides or allows nude entertainment as defined in section 10-11 for customers within the city limits of the city without paying the tax imposed by section 10-10; and any person doing so shall be guilty of a violation of such section and upon conviction of such offense in the municipal court shall be fined in a sum not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00). This offense is not punishable by imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 883, § 5, 8-5-80; Ord. No. 1994-6, § 3, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 1994-35, 10-20-94; Ord. No. 1998-8, § 8, 1-20-98) 
Sec. 10-14.5. - Appointment, authority and duties of hearing officer. 
    City council shall, by resolution, appoint and establish the compensation for a hearing officer who shall serve at the pleasure of city council. The hearing officer shall be authorized to conduct and rule regarding all show cause suspension and revocation hearings, renewal hearings and, as assigned by the local licensing authority, contested license applications. City council may also appoint an alternate hearing officer in the event the appointed hearing officer is unable to serve. 
    The hearing officer must have sufficient knowledge and expertise to apply and enforce the Colorado Liquor Code, Colorado Beer Code, and the Colorado Liquor Rules 1 CCR. 203-2. 
    The hearing officer shall not hold any other city office, nor be appointed or serve in any staff position or upon any city board or commission except that the municipal judge may serve as the hearing officer. 
    The hearing officer shall not have any ownership interest, or employment, or contractual relationship with any applicant or holder of a local liquor license or local establishment governed by the Colorado Liquor Code or the Colorado Beer Code. 
    The hearing officer shall have the authority to adopt rules and regulations concerning the matters that come before it, and in the conduct of any hearing have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, decide discovery issues, regulate the course of the hearing, grant continuances, decide motions and exclude incompetent or unduly repetitious testimony or evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2015-22, § 1, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 10-15. - Delegation of authority to city clerk. 
    The city clerk is authorized to act as the local licensing authority for the following Colorado Liquor Code and Colorado Beer Code licensing functions: 
(1)  Processing, and approval or disapproval of applications for special event permits, issuance of approved special event permits, and reporting of issued special event permits to the State Liquor Enforcement Division, in accordance with Article 5 of Title 44, C.R.S., as amended. 
(2)  Annual Colorado Liquor Code and Colorado Beer Code license renewals, provided that the licensee has not violated any provisions of the Colorado Liquor or Beer Codes and associated regulations during the preceding year. 
(3)  Changes in shareholders, officers, directors or trade names of a licensee, provided that any investigation conducted by the city does not reveal information that may reasonably form the basis of a determination that the applicant is not qualified to hold the respective license. 
(4)  Changes in registered manager of a licensee, provided that any investigation conducted by the city does not reveal information that may reasonably form the basis of a determination that the proposed manager is not qualified to hold the position. 
(5)  The issuance of temporary permits pursuant to and in compliance with the provisions of section 44-3-303, C.R.S., as amended. 
(6)  The city clerk shall receive applications for new liquor licenses or for changes of location of a liquor-licensed establishment. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complete application for a new liquor license or for a change of location of a liquor-licensed establishment, the city clerk shall establish the boundaries of the neighborhood to be served by the proposed or relocated liquor-licensed establishment, and shall set the date and time for the public hearing on the application. The city clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant of the boundaries of the neighborhood and of the date and time of the public hearing. 
(b)  If the applicant objects to the neighborhood boundaries set by the city clerk, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a written request that the full local licensing authority establish the boundaries of the neighborhood. The applicant shall file such request not more than ten (10) days after the date of the city clerk's notice to the applicant of the boundaries of the neighborhood. At its next meeting, the full local licensing authority shall set the boundaries of the neighborhood, and shall reschedule the date for the public hearing on the application. 
(7)  Processing, approval, denial and renewal of tasting permits. 
    The city clerk may, nevertheless, refer any licensing decision authorized under this section to the local licensing authority if, in the clerk's discretion, the matter should be presented to the full local licensing authority. 
(Ord. No. 1991-21, § 3, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 1994-35, 10-20-94; Ord. No. 2006-27, § 1, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-18-11; Ord. No. 2011-32, § 2, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 2, 7-21-15; Ord. No. 2018-25, §§ 4, 5, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 10-16. - Optional premises license. 
(a)  An annually renewable optional premises license for the sale or service of alcoholic beverages may be issued by the local licensing authority for any outdoor sports and recreational facility which charges a fee for the use of such facility so long as such facility is located on or adjacent to an existing or new hotel and restaurant licensed premises. Any optional premises licensed issued shall permit the licensee to sell or serve alcoholic beverages only on the optional premises specified in the license. 
(b)  Except for the issuance of a special events permit pursuant to section 44-5-101 et seq., C.R.S., as amended, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at an outdoor sports and recreational facility without having first obtained a valid optional premises license to do so as provided by this section, or in violation of any provision, restriction or limitation of the license if one has been issued. 
(c)  The types of outdoor sports and recreational facilities which may be considered for an optional premises license include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Country club. 
(2)  Golf courses and driving ranges. 
(d)  Number of optional premises. There are no restrictions on the number of optional premises which any one licensee may have on his outdoor sports or recreational facility. However, any applicant requesting approval of more than one optional premises shall demonstrate the need for each optional premise in relationship to the outdoor sports or recreational facility and its guests. 
(e)  Submittal requirements. When submitting a request for the approval of an optional premises, an applicant shall also submit the following information: 
(1)  A map or other drawing illustrating the outdoor sports recreational facility boundaries and the approximate location of each optional premises requested. 
(2)  A legal description of the approximate area within which the optional premises shall be located. 
(3)  A description of the method which shall be used to identify the boundaries of the optional premises when it is in use. 
(4)  A description of the provisions which have been made for storing malt, vinous and spirituous liquors in a secured area on or off the optional premises for the future use on the optional premises. 
(f)  An application for a new hotel and restaurant license with optional premises shall be processed in the same manner as any other hotel and restaurant license application. If an application to use optional premises is filed in connection with an existing hotel and restaurant license, then the application shall be processed in the same manner as an application to modify or expand licensed premises. No fee shall be required in connection with an application for an optional premises license relating to an existing hotel and restaurant license. 
(g)  No alcoholic beverages may be served on the optional premises until the licensee has provided written notice to the state and city council forty-eight (48) hours prior to servicing alcoholic beverages on the optional premises. Such notice must contain the specific days and hours on which the optional premises are to be used. In this regard, there is no limitation on the number of days which a license may specify in each notice. 
(h)  In addition to or in lieu of any enforcement actions which the local licensing authority takes against the adjacent hotel and restaurant license for violations of this Code or the Colorado Liquor Code and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the local licensing authority may decline to renew the optional premises license for good cause shown, subject to judicial review. In addition, the local licensing authority may suspend or revoke the optional premises license in accordance with the procedures specified in the Colorado Liquor Code Regulations. 
(i)  This ordinance [section] adopted herein shall be considered in addition to the Colorado Liquor Code regarding the issuance of licenses under the same for optional premises licenses. 
(Ord. No. 1993-23, § 1, 7-20-93; Ord. No. 1994-35, 10-20-94; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 3, 7-21-15; Ord. No. 2018-25, § 6, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 10-17. - Fines in lieu of license suspension. 
(a)  Prior to the operative date of any suspension, a license may petition the city council, as local licensing authority, for permission to pay a fine in lieu of having his or her license suspended whenever the local licensing authority issues a final decision suspending a licensee's license for fourteen (14) days or less. 
(b)  The local licensing authority may stay the proposed suspension, cause any investigation to be made which it deems desirable and may, in its sole discretion, grant the petition if it is satisfied: 
(1)  That the public welfare and morals would not be impaired by permitting the licensee to operate during the period set for suspension and that the payment of the fine will achieve the desired disciplinary purposes; 
(2)  That the books and records of the licensee are kept in such a manner that the loss of sales of alcohol beverages that the licensee would have suffered had the suspension gone into effect can be determined with reasonable accuracy therefrom; and 
(3)  That the license has not had his or her license suspended or revoked, nor had any suspension stayed by payment of a fine, during the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of the motion or complaint which has resulted in a final decision to suspend the license. 
(c)  The fine accepted shall equal twenty (20) percent of the licensee's estimated gross revenues from the sales of alcoholic beverages during the period of the proposed suspension, provided, however that such fine shall not be less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Payment shall be in the form of cash, certified check or cashier's check. 
(d)  Upon payment of any fine, the local licensing authority shall enter its further order permanently staying the imposition of the suspension. Any money collected under this section 10-17 shall be paid into the general fund. 
(e)  Any stay granted under this section 10-17 is limited to such stay as is necessary for the local licensing authority to complete its investigation and make its findings and, if it makes such findings, to the granting of an order permanently staying the imposition of the entire suspension or that portion of the suspension not otherwise conditionally stayed. 
(f)  If the local licensing authority does not make the finding required in subsection (b) of this section and does order the suspension permanently stayed, the suspension shall go into effect on the operative date finally set by the local licensing authority. 
(Ord. No. 1998-8, § 9, 1-20-98) 
Sec. 10-18. - Tastings. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following word and term shall have the meaning set forth in this section: 
    Tastings means the sampling of malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors that may occur on the premises of a retail liquor store licensee or liquor licensed drugstore licensee by adult patrons of the licensee pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Permitting in general. 
(1)  The city hereby authorizes tastings to be conducted by retail liquor store or liquor licensed drugstore licensees in accordance with this section and pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-3-301, as amended. Within the city, it is unlawful for any person or licensee to conduct tastings unless a permit has been obtained in accordance with this section. The local licensing authority is authorized to issue tasting permits in accordance with the requirement of this section. 
(2)  A retail liquor store or liquor licensed drugstore licensee that desires to conduct tastings shall submit an application for an annual tastings permit to the city clerk. All applicants shall pay an application and application renewal fee in an amount determined by resolution of city council. The city clerk may reject the application if the applicant fails to establish that the licensee is able to conduct tastings without violating the provisions of this section or creating a public safety risk to the neighborhood. 
(3)  Tastings shall be subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Tastings shall be conducted only by a person who has completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the liquor enforcement division of the Colorado Department of Revenue and who is either a retail liquor store licensee or a liquor licensed drugstore licensee, an employee of a retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licenses licensee, or a representative, employee, or agent of the licensed wholesaler, brew pub, distillery pub, manufacturer, limited winery, importer, or vintner's restaurant promoting the alcohol beverages for the tasting, and only on a licensee's licensed premises. 
b.  The alcohol used in tastings shall be purchased through a licensed wholesaler, licensed brew pub, or winery licensed pursuant to C.R.S. § 44-3-403, at a cost that is not less than the laid-in cost of such alcohol. 
c.  The size of an individual alcohol sample shall not exceed one (1) ounce of malt or vinous liquor or one-half (1/2) of one (1) ounce of spirituous liquor. 
d.  Tastings shall not exceed a total of five (5) hours in duration per day, which need not be consecutive. 
e.  Tastings shall be conducted only during the operating hours in which the licensee on whose premises the tastings occur is permitted to sell alcohol beverages, and in no case earlier than 11:00 a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m. 
f.  The licensee shall prohibit patrons from leaving the licensed premises with an unconsumed sample. 
g.  The licensee shall promptly remove all open and unconsumed alcohol beverage samples from the licensed premises destroy the samples immediately following the completion of the tasting, or store any open containers of unconsumed alcohol beverages in a secure area outside the sales area of the licensed premises for use at a tasting conducted at a later time or date. 
h.  The licensee shall not serve a person who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or who is visibly intoxicated. 
i.  The licensee shall not serve more than four (4) individual samples to a patron during a tasting. 
j.  Alcohol samples shall be in open containers and shall be provided to a patron free of charge. 
k.  The licensee may conduct tastings on no more than one hundred fifty-six (156) days per year. 
l.  No manufacturer of spirituous or vinous liquors shall induce a licensee through free goods or financial or in-kind assistance to favor the manufacturer's products being sampled at a tasting. The retail liquor store or liquor-licensed drugstore licensee bears the financial and all other responsibility for a tasting conducted on its licensed premises. 
m.  The applicant for a tastings permit shall certify on the application that all persons serving alcohol at tastings have completed a server training program that meets the standards established by the Liquor Enforcement Division of the Colorado Department of Revenue. The applicant for a tastings permit shall state on the application the days and times that tastings will occur. 
(4)  The city recommends that permittees, without charge to their patrons, have available for consumption sandwiches and light snacks for all patrons who are served samples. 
(5)  A violation of a limitation specified in this section by a retail liquor store or liquor licensed drugstore licensee, whether by the licensee's employees, agents, or otherwise, or by a representative, employee, or agent of the licensed wholesaler, brew pub, distillery pub, manufacturer, limited winery, importer, or vintner's restaurant that promoted the alcohol beverages for the tasting, shall be the responsibility of, and C.R.S. § 44-3-801 applies to, the retail liquor store or liquor licensed drugstore licensee that conducted the tasting. 
(6)  A retail liquor store or liquor licensed drugstore licensee conducting a tasting shall be subject to the same revocation, suspension, and enforcement provisions as otherwise apply to the licensee and are imposed by the local licensing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2008-11, § 1, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 2015-22, § 4, 7-21-15; Ord. No. 2018-25, § 7, 8-21-18) 
Secs. 10-19-10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 2014-13, adopted May 6, 2014, repealed Art. II, which pertained to minors, consisted of §§ 10-21-10-26, and derived from Ord. No. 446, adopted Apr. 16, 1968; and Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted Apr. 19, 1994. 

Secs. 10-21-10-26. - Reserved. 
Chapter 20 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The amusements ordinances of the city are in the process of revision and will be included in the Code in a supplement. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 10; licensing of amusement devices and coin-operated machines, § 55-21 et seq.; libraries, Ch. 50; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 55; parks and recreation, Ch. 80. 

Sec. 20-1. - Amusement ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to amusements or entertainment, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Chapter 25 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 70; parks, open space, and golf, Ch. 80; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 105; traffic, Ch. 115. 
State Law reference- Livestock, C. R. S. Title 35, Art. 41; municipal regulation of the running at large and keeping of animals, C. R. S. § 31-15-401(1)(m). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2006-21, adopted May 16, 2006, repealed Art. I in its entirety, with the exception of § 25-1(a), and enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. I was comprised of §§ 25-1-25-3, and derived from Ord. No. 419, adopted March 7, 1967; Ord. No. 435, adopted Nov. 7, 1967; and Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994. 

Sec. 25-1. - Domestic animal cruel treatment prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly engage in any of the following acts, or any combination thereof: 
(1)  To abandon any domestic animal; or 
(2)  Fail to provide veterinary care when needed to prevent unnecessary suffering or injury or death of a domestic animal; or 
(3)  To needlessly mutilate, beat, kill or injure a domestic animal; or 
(4)  To mistreat, neglect, cruelly treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse a domestic animal to the extent that the animal is in imminent danger of injury, sickness or death; or 
(5)  To crop a domestic animal's ears, dock its tail or spay or neuter a domestic animal. This provision shall not apply to actions of a veterinarian who performs such procedures in accordance with industry standards, which includes, for example, the American Kennel Club, United Kennel Club, American Rare Breed Association and Continental Kennel Club; or 
(6)  To confine a domestic animal in such a way that the animal is exposed to extreme temperature or weather conditions or subject a domestic animal to unsanitary living conditions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, instigate or encourage any domestic animal to fight or to enter into combat in any manner; and it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any place where domestic animals are permitted or encouraged to fight for exhibition, wager or sport. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domestic animal which dies to dump or abandon such animal on any public or private property. All dead domestic animals shall be humanely disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours of their death. All dogs, cats or other large domestic animals must be disposed of by burial on private property with the permission of the person who owns or is in control of the property or transported to an animal shelter or veterinarian facility for proper disposal. 
(d)  Any operator of a motor vehicle whose vehicle strikes a domesticated animal shall immediately report any injury or death of such animal to the police or community services department. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager or employee of a pet shop, kennel, animal hospital or shelter to fail to maintain the facilities in a sanitary condition, provide proper heating and ventilation, provide space appropriate to the size, width and species of animal, provide adequate nutrition, provide adequate veterinary care for all animals in their care, or to fail to take reasonable care to release for sale, trade or adoption only those domestic animals which are free of disease or injuries. 
(f)  No person shall give away any domestic animal as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition or as inducement to enter a place of amusement, for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(g)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, set, place, maintain or tend any trap. Live traps may be set for the purpose of trapping domestic animals which are at large in violation of this chapter, so long as any such animal trapped is turned over to the animal shelter as soon as possible upon discovery. 
(h)  Except as provided in this subsection it shall be unlawful to tether any animal. Animals may, only upon an owner's property, be restrained by a tether however any such tether must be at least ten (10) feet in unobstructed length and attached to a pulley or trolley mounted cable which is at least ten (10) feet in unobstructed length and mounted no more than seven (7) feet above ground level. The tethering system must be entirely contained within the owner's property, any tether shall weigh no more than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of the animal's weight, have swivels on both ends and be attached to a properly fitted collar or harness. 
(i)  Any community service or police officer may impound a domestic animal if such officer reasonably believes that a violation of any of the acts prohibited in this section exists and that impoundment is necessary for the health, safety or welfare of such animal. Such impoundment and subsequent hearing shall be in accordance with the procedure set forth in article VII of this chapter. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person to antagonize, agitate, interfere, beat, kick, strike, torture, torment, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by any law enforcement personnel when such dog is being used in the performance of the functions or duties of such department. 
(k)  Ownership of any animal shall not be recognized as an affirmative defense for violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 733, § 6, 6-7-77; Ord. No. 1985-32, § 1, 11-5-85; Ord. No. 1991-07, § 1, 5-7-91; Ord. No. 1994-6, § 4, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2006-30, § 2, 7-18-06) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, C. R. S. § 18-9-201 et seq.; power of city council to prohibit cruelty to animals, C. R. S. § 31-15-401(1)(i). 
Sec. 25-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall, unless otherwise specified, mean as follows: 
    Abandon means an owner's leaving of an animal without adequate provisions such as food, water and shelter for the animal's proper care. 
    Africanized or Africanised bee means any hybrid of the subspecies Apis mellifera scutellata. 
    Animal means any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. 
    Animal owner or owner means any person who owns, keeps, harbors, possesses, or otherwise has custody or control of any animal in the city, whether such person is a resident or nonresident of the city. 
    Animal shelter means any premise designated by the city for the purpose of boarding or the caring of any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city or law of the state. 
    Backyard chicken(s) means any female breed of chicken not to include any poultry such as ducks, quail, geese, pigeons, and/or turkeys, for raising and keeping in the backyard area of residential uses. 
    Bee shall mean any stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis mellifera species. 
    Beekeeping shall mean the placement or maintenance of bees, bee colonies, or bee hives. 
    Bodily injury means any physical injury that results in severe bruising, muscle tears or skin lacerations requiring professional and medical treatment or any physical injury that requires corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
    Cat means any domesticated animal of the species felis domestica. 
    Chicken coop means any structure or enclosure built or used specifically for the shelter of backyard chickens. 
    Chicken run means a predator-proof fenced area designated for backyard chickens. 
    Colony shall mean a bee hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen and brood. 
    Common areas includes, but is not limited to, the yards, grounds, garden areas, play areas, club houses, swimming pools, walkways, common garage areas, entryways, hallways and driveways of condominiums, townhouses or apartment building complexes. 
    Community service officer means any officer(s) or employee(s) of the city designated or authorized by the chief of police or by the chief's authorized representative to enforce the provisions of this title. 
    Dog means any domesticated animal of the species canis familaris, or other species of the family canidae. 
    Domestic animal means other than wildlife, an animal such as a dog or cat that has been tamed and kept by a person as a pet, members of those species that have, through selective breeding, become notably different from their wild ancestors and those species determined domestic by the state wildlife or agricultural commissions. 
    Guard dog means a dog disciplined, through special training, to protect persons and/or property by attacking or threatening to attack any person found within the area authorized to be patrolled by the dog. 
    Harbor means the activity of the occupant of any premises on which an animal is kept or to which an animal customarily returns for food and care which contributes to the animal's habit or tendency to stay at or return to said premises for care and sustenance. 
    Hive shall mean a structure intended for the housing of a bee colony. 
    Immediate family means the owner's spouse, child, parent, sibling or significant other. 
    Leash means a chain, cord, rope or similar device which shall be securely fastened to a collar or harness affixed upon the animal and of sufficient strength to hold an animal in restraint. 
    Livestock means cattle, swine, sheep, goats and such horses, mules, asses, and other animals associated with or used in a farm or ranch. 
    Miniature pot-bellied pig shall mean a cloven-hoofed animal, also known as Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian pot-bellied pigs which is domesticated, does not exceed twenty-two (22) inches in height at the shoulders and does not exceed one hundred (100) pounds in weight. 
    Miniature goat shall mean a livestock animal from the Nigerian Dwarf Goat or African Pygmy Goat breed that is not taller than twenty-four and one-half inches (24.5) inches at the withers. 
    Mistreat means any act or omission which causes or unreasonably permits the continuation of unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering. 
    Muzzle means a restraining device made of metal, plastic, leather, cloth or a combination of these materials that, when fitted and fastened over a snout/mouth/head, prevents the animal from biting, but allows room for the animal to breath and pant. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any person or animal. 
    Neglect means failure to provide food, water or protection from the elements, opportunity for exercise, or other customary care, usual and proper for an animals' health and well-being and includes, but is not limited to, leaving an animal unattended in a vehicle without adequate ventilation and water, or leaving an animal tethered in such a manner that it becomes entangled or endangers itself or is unable to reach necessary water or shelter. 
    Rabies inoculation means the inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine approved by the Colorado Department of Health and administered by a Colorado licensed veterinarian. 
    Running at large means any animal, unless specifically permitted by this chapter, off the premises of the owner and not under the direct control of the owner or the owner's authorized agent by means of a leash, except an animal within a motor vehicle with its owner and dogs within the enclosed confines of a city designated dog park. For the purpose of this definition, the premises of the owner shall not include common areas of condominiums, townhouses, and apartment buildings, and any animal not in the direct control of its owner upon the common area of a condominium, townhouse, or apartment building, or the grounds thereof, shall be deemed to be running at large. 
    Secure temporary enclosure means a secure enclosure used for purposes of transporting an animal and which includes a top and bottom permanently attached to the sides except for a door for removal of the animal. Such enclosure must be of such material and secured with a keyed or combination lock so that the animal cannot exit the enclosure on its own. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury which, at the time of the actual injury or a later time, involves a substantial risk of death, a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, a substantial risk of protracted loss or impairment of the function of any part or organ of the body, or breaks, fractures, or burns of the second or third degree. The infliction of serious bodily injury shall be deemed gross negligence per se. 
    Significant other means any person who is in a family-type living arrangement with another who would constitute a spouse if the two (2) were married. 
    Shelter means a moisture-proof structure of suitable size to accommodate the animal and allow retention of body heat, made of durable material with a solid floor raised at least two (2) inches from the ground and with the entrance covered by a flexible, wind-proof material. Such structure shall contain a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to provide insulation and protection against the elements. 
    Tether or tethering means the securing of an animal by the means of a leash, rope, chain, strap or other restraining device to a fixed base and also includes the securing of an animal to any device that allows the animal to travel between two (2) fixed points by means of a line to which a lease, rope, chain, strap or other restraining device is attached. 
    Veterinarian means a person currently licensed by the State of Colorado to practice veterinary medicine. 
    Vicious animal means any animal which; 
(1)  Unprovoked, attacks or bites humans or other animals on public or private property; or 
(2)  Without provocation approaches any person or animal on public or private property in a terrorizing manner or in an apparent attitude of attack; or 
(3)  Has been engaged in or trained for animal fighting as described and prohibited by section 18-9-204, C.R.S., as amended. 
    Wildlife means wild vertebrates, mollusks, and crustaceans, whether alive or dead, including any part, product, egg, or offspring thereof, that exist as a species in a natural wild state in their place of origin, presently or historically, except those species determined to be domestic animals by rule or regulation by the state wildlife or agricultural commissions and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2006-30, § 1, 7-18-06; Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, 1-20-15; Ord. No. 2016-39, § 1, 12-6-16) 
Secs. 25-3-25-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE AND RABIES CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2006-21, adopted May 16, 2006, repealed Art. II, Dogs, in its entirety and enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. II was comprised of §§ 25-21-25-46, and derived from Ord. No. 710, adopted Feb. 1, 1977; Ord. No. 643, adopted Dec. 17, 1974; Ord. No. 649, adopted Feb. 18, 1975; Ord. No. 914, adopted June 2, 1981; Ord. No. 962, adopted Oct. 19, 1982; Ord. No. 1984-24, adopted Sept. 4, 1984; Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994; Ord. No. 2001-27, adopted Sept. 4, 2001; and Ord. No. 2005-10, adopted March 1, 2005. 
State Law reference- Rabies control, C. R. S. § 25-4-601 et seq. 

Sec. 25-21. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog over the age of six (6) months to fail to obtain a license for such animal. Application for such license shall be made to the community service division or to a veterinarian under contract with the city to issue such license. Licenses shall expire on the first day of April in the year after the license is issued or upon expiration of the animal's current rabies vaccination, whichever is the later. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-22. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon application for a license, the furnishing of the required certificate of rabies vaccination and payment of the required fee, the community service division or veterinarian shall issue a dog license with an accompanying tag, which tag shall be securely affixed to the collar of the dog and worn at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-23. - License fee. 
    The license fee, including fee for replacement licenses shall be in an amount as set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-24. - Rabies vaccination required. 
(a)  No owner of a dog or cat over four (4) months of age shall fail to have such dog or cat vaccinated against rabies when the dog or cat becomes four (4) months of age and again within twelve (12) months of the date of such initial vaccination. Thereafter, no such person shall fail to have the dog or cat vaccinated at intervals recommended by a veterinarian. 
(b)  Vaccinations shall be performed by a person legally authorized to do so as designated by the Boulder County Health Department. 
(c)  Animals other than dogs or cats shall be vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the current Compendium of Animal Rabies Control published yearly by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, Inc. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-25. - Reporting animal bites; confinement. 
(a)  Any person having knowledge that an animal, other than an animal not subject to vaccination, has bitten a human shall immediately report the incident to the police or community service department. 
(b)  If any animal is suspected of having rabies or if any animal has bitten a person and such animal has not had a current vaccination, such animal shall at the owner's expense be confined for a period of at least ten (10) days from the date of the bite at the animal shelter or at a veterinary facility of the owner's choice. During the ten-day observation period, no rabies vaccine shall be administered to the animal. 
(c)  No animal held for observation on suspicion of rabies shall be released or removed from confinement until the observation period is over, except if the owner shows proof of current rabies vaccination, the animal may be released into rabies confinement at the owner's residence, at the discretion of the community service officer. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, rabies confinement at owner's residence shall mean that the animal is kept inside a secure building where no contact with animals or persons outside the owner's family can occur for a ten-day period. During such period of confinement, the animal must not be let out to relieve itself without being on a leash and handled by a person capable of physically restraining the animal. If such animal is otherwise found outside the owner's residence during the confinement period, it shall at the owner's expense be taken and confined at the animal shelter or at a veterinary facility of the owner's choice for the remainder of the confinement period. 
(e)  If any animal has been bitten by another animal suspected to have rabies, the owner of such animal exposed to rabies shall report such fact to a community service officer. The community service officer shall have the power, in the officer's discretion, to have the animal suspected of having rabies or of being exposed to rabies removed from the owner's residence to a veterinary facility and placed under observation for a period of up to six (6) months at the expense of the owner, provided that the owner may elect to have such animal destroyed in lieu thereof. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the above, if a standard incubation period has not been established by the Colorado Department of Health for the particular species of animal which was bitten, it shall be summarily euthanized. If the animal has been in contact with another animal or human, a necropsy shall be performed by a certified laboratory to determine rabies contamination. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-26. - Destruction of rabies infected animals. 
    If rabies is detected in any animal the animal shall be summarily euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Secs. 25-27-25-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WILD, EXOTIC AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 2006-30, adopted July 18, 2006, repealed Art. III in its entirety and enacted similar provisions to reads as herein set out. Former Art. III was derived from Ord. No. 1984-22, adopted Aug. 7, 1984. 

Sec. 25-50. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  Wildlife. In accordance with state statute, all wildlife, except as permitted by the state is deemed to be the property of the state and right, title, interest, acquisition, transfer, sale, importation, exportation, release, donation, possession, hunting and removal is permitted only as provided by state or federal statute, rule or regulation (C.R.S. 33-1-101). 
(1)  Trapping of wild animals including but not limited to skunks, squirrels, raccoons, bats and prairie dogs is permitted provided that such wildlife is trapped, released or disposed of in accordance with the applicable state laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)  Trapping or poisoning of rats, mice and insects is permitted provided such conforms with the applicable state laws, rules and regulations. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to dispose of any dead wildlife upon the owner's property in accordance with the applicable state laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  Prohibited animals. Except as permitted by state or federal law, rule or regulation it shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep or feed any wild or exotic animal, which includes but is not limited to: 
(1)  Bats of any species; 
(2)  Bears; 
(3)  Any species of feline, including exotic cat/domesticated cat crossbreeds, other than ordinary domesticated house cats; 
(4)  Poisonous or venomous amphibians or reptiles or any non-poisonous snake greater than four (4) feet in length or any alligator, crocodile or caiman; 
(5)  Any member of the mustelidae family including raccoons, porcupines, badgers, minks, otters, martens, fishers, skunks, weasels or other similar species, except European ferrets ; 
(6)  Deer, elk, antelope or buffalo; 
(7)  Any wolf, coyote, fox or hybrid thereof; 
(8)  Any species of nonhuman primate; and 
(9)  Wild birds, including for example, raptors, geese or ducks. 
(c)  Affirmative defense to a charge of violation. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of violating this section that a person is feeding only nonmigratory wild birds, other than raptors or ducks. For the purposes of this section "feeding" shall mean provision of edible or drinkable material. 
(Ord. No. 2006-30, § 3, 7-18-06) 
Secs. 25-51-25-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONTROL OF ANIMALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2006-21, adopted May 16, 2006, repealed Art. IV, Running At Large, in its entirety and enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV was comprised of §§ 25-60-25-62, and derived from Ord. No. 1986-10, adopted Feb. 18, 1986; Ord. No. 1988-16, adopted Aug. 16, 1988; and Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994. 

Sec. 25-60. - Strict liability of animal owner. 
    For the purpose of prosecution for violation of any section of this chapter, it shall not be necessary to prove notice or knowledge on the part of the animal owner that such animal was violating any of the sections of this chapter at the time and place charged, it being the purpose and intent of this section to impose strict liability upon the animal owner for the actions, conduct and condition of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-61. - Running at large prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any animal owner to permit an animal to run at large within the city except on the premises of the owner or on the premises of the person having charge of the animal. Dogs under the control of a public law enforcement agency or dogs in areas designated and posted by the city permitting dogs to be at large (dog parks) are exempt from this prohibition. 
(b)  Fences used for the enclosure of animals shall be securely constructed and kept in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-62. - Animal disturbance of peace and quiet prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any animal owner to permit such animal to make unreasonable noise or disturb the peace and quiet of any person by barking, whining, howling, yowling, squawking or making any other noise in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion. For purposes of this section, unreasonable noise shall mean any sound of such level and duration as to be, or tend to be, injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-63. - Confinement during estrus required; exception. 
    Any unspayed female animal in the stage of estrus (heat) shall be securely confined during such period within a house, building or other secure enclosure which is so constructed as to prevent other animals of the same species from gaining access to the confined animal. Any owner who does not adequately so to confine the animal during the stage of estrus, or whose animal during estrus creates a nuisance, shall be ordered by a community service officer to remove the animal to a boarding kennel, to a veterinary facility or to an animal shelter. All expenses incurred as a result of such confinement shall be paid by the animal owner. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with a community service officer's removal order and the animal shall be impounded at the owner's expense. This section shall not apply when animals are intentionally brought together within an enclosed area of the owner's premises, or any enclosed area of the owner's authorized agent's premises, for purposes of breeding. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-64. - Removal of animal excrement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to prevent such animal from defecating or voiding excrement on the property of another person, common areas, or upon any street, right-of-way, park, open space or any other public place or property; provided, however, it is a specific defense to a charge of violating this section that the owner or person having charge of the animal immediately removed or cleaned up such defecation or excrement and disposed of it in a receptacle ordinarily used for garbage or in an otherwise lawful and sanitary manner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an animal owner to fail to remove excrement deposited by such animal on property owned or exclusively occupied by such owner so as to prevent the creation of offensive odors which interfere or unreasonably disrupt any other persons lawful use or enjoyment of one's home or property. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-65. - Animals scattering trash. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to prevent such animal from scavenging, scattering, tearing at or rummaging through trash, garbage or rubbish, whether such is in a receptacle or not, or from scattering or littering such trash, garbage or rubbish on or around any public or private property; provided, however, that it is a specific defense to a charge of violating this section that the owner immediately removed or cleaned up the trash, garbage or rubbish and disposed of it securely in a receptacle ordinarily used for trash, garbage or rubbish or in an otherwise lawful and sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 2006-30, adopted July 18, 2006, repealed § 25-66, which pertained to tethering on public property, causing damage prohibited, and derived from Ord. No. 2006-21, adopted May 16, 2006. 
Secs. 25-67-25-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VICIOUS ANIMALS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2006-21, adopted May 16, 2006, repealed Art. V, in its entirety and enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. V was comprised of §§ 25-65-25-69, and derived from Ord. No. 2000-33, adopted Oct. 3, 2000. 

Sec. 25-85. - Vicious animals prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own a vicious animal. Any person convicted of such offense may, if applicable keep such animal only upon compliance with all terms and conditions set forth pursuant to section 25-89. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to the charge of vicious animal that the person or animal that was attacked, bitten, clawed or approached by the vicious animal was: 
(1)  Other than in self-defense or defense of others, attacking the animal or engaging in conduct reasonably calculated to provoke the animal to attack or bite; 
(2)  Unlawfully engaging in entry into or upon a fenced or enclosed portion of the premises upon which the animal was lawfully kept or upon a portion of the premises where the animal was lawfully restrained by leash; 
(3)  Unlawfully engaging in entry into or in or upon a vehicle in which the animal was confined; 
(4)  Attempting to assault another person; 
(5)  Attempting to stop a fight between the animal and any other animal; 
(6)  Attempting to aid the animal when it was injured; or 
(7)  Attempting to capture the animal in the absence of the owner with the exception of a police officer, firefighter, community service officer or other governmental animal control officer in the performance of his/her duty. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, a person is lawfully upon the premises of an owner or keeper when such person is on the premises in the performance of any duty imposed by law or by the express or implied invitation of the owner of such premises or the owner's agent. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-86. - Exemption. 
    Employees or agents of the city or any local, state or federal governmental entity, using animals within the course of their duties or employment shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-87. - Impoundment. 
    Any animal which has caused injury to any person or animal or which has unprovokedly attacked any person or animal or which has approached any person or animal in a terrorizing manner or apparent attitude of attack may be seized and impounded as provided for in this chapter or in the discretion of a community service officer, where charges are pending, the animal may be released to the custody of the owner subject to written conditions regarding the confinement and control of the animal. If, after making every reasonable attempt to seize such animal, including the solicitation of assistance from the animal's owner, if such owner is immediately ascertainable and available, the community service or police officers determines that the animal cannot be seized without exposing the officers or other persons to danger of personal injury from the animal, and the animal presents a present danger to any person, property, or other animal, it shall be lawful for the officers to destroy the animal without notice to the animal owner. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2007-87, § 1, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 25-88. - Hearing. 
    Any animal impounded pursuant to this article may be held for a hearing before the municipal court to determine the disposition of such animal. The city shall notify, when ascertainable, the owner of the animal in writing of the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing at least five (5) days before said hearing. The court shall conduct such hearing at the earliest date available to the court. If, on the date of the hearing, the duly notified owner does not appear, the court may proceed with the hearing. The hearing may take place regardless of any pending municipal charge pertaining to the animal. 
    At the hearing the formal rules of evidence shall not apply and any statement made by any person at such hearing shall not be used as evidence at any municipal trial. The court shall be guided by the basic notions of fairness and due process in the conduct of such hearing and allow the parties to present evidence, witnesses and have the right of cross-examination. 
    The municipal judge shall consider as applicable, the following: 
(a)  Any evidence presented at any trial involving the animal; 
(b)  The conduct of the animal during the incident charged; 
(c)  Any evidence of dangerous or violent behavior by the animal or threats thereof; 
(d)  Any prior violations by the owner of the animal of this chapter or the laws of the city, or laws of any state or political subdivision thereof; 
(e)  Any prior violations by any other owner of the animal, involving the same animal, of any violation of this chapter or the laws of the city, or any laws of the state or political subdivision thereof; 
(f)  Any conditions existing on the property where the animal has been or will be kept which would affect the likelihood of any danger to any person, animal or property; 
(g)  Any evidence of any ameliorative action taken by the owner of the animal which would affect the likelihood of any danger to any person, animal or property; and 
(h)  Any other evidence relevant to the issues as determined by the court. 
    If, at the hearing, the city establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that there is a reasonable likelihood of future injury to persons, property or animals, the municipal judge shall order the animal to remain impounded at the owner's expense until final disposition of any pending municipal charges. The owner shall bear all costs of impounding the animal regardless of the results of any municipal charges. 
    If the municipal judge determines that it is not appropriate to order the animal impounded the municipal judge may order the animal returned to the owner and to be kept under such circumstances as will ensure the safety of persons, property or other animals. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-89. - Vicious animal conditions and mandatory fine. 
(a)  Upon conviction or entry of plea of guilty or no contest to a charge of vicious animal, the municipal judge shall order that the subject animal may be kept within the city only upon its owner's compliance with the conditions set forth in this section: 
(1)  The owner shall, at the owner's expense, have the animal spayed or neutered and shall provide proof to community service from a veterinarian that the sterilization has been performed. 
(2)  The owner shall, at the owner's expense, have a microchip, conforming to the city's standards implanted into the animal and provide such information to code enforcement. Code enforcement shall maintain records containing the registration numbers and names of all animals and names and addresses of the owners. The owner shall be responsible for notifying community service of any change in address. 
(3)  At all times when the animal is at the property of the owner, the owner shall keep the animal confined. When outdoors, the animal shall be confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled. Such pen, kennel or structure shall have minimum dimensions of five (5) feet by ten (10) feet per animal housed, secure nonwooden sides of at least six (6) feet in height and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures must be locked with a key or combination lock when animals are within the structure. Such structure shall have a secure and safe bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen shall be embedded in the ground no less than two (2) feet. All structures erected to house such animal must comply with all zoning and building regulations. All such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated, kept in a clean and sanitary condition and provide shelter as defined herein in section 25-2. No animal may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the animal to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure. The secure enclosure requirement of this section may be waived upon the owner demonstrating to the satisfaction of the municipal judge that because of homeowner covenants, or the lack of a yard, the owner is unable to construct an enclosure. The animal must however, be leashed and muzzled whenever outdoors upon the owner's property. 
(4)  The owner shall present to community service proof that the owner has procured liability insurance in a minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering any damage or injury caused by the animal. 
(5)  At all times when the animal is off the property of the owner, the animal shall be muzzled and either placed within a secure temporary enclosure, or secured by a leash of no longer than four (4) feet in length. Extension leashes are not permitted and leashed may not be attached to inanimate objects. 
(6)  The owner shall post, at each entrance to the owner's property where the animal is kept, a conspicuous, reflective, lettered and clearly legible weather resistant sign of at least eight (8) by ten (10) inches, which shall contain the words "BEWARE, VICIOUS ANIMAL" in lettering at least two (2) inches in height. 
(7)  The owner shall not sell or transfer the animal to any person residing within the city except a member of the owner's immediate family who shall then be deemed the owner and subject to all requirements of this chapter. 
(8)  The owner shall immediately notify the police department or community service in the event that the animal is at-large, stolen or has acted in a vicious manner. 
(9)  The owner may temporarily transport the animal through the city. During such transport, the owner may not stop within the city for any reason not related to and necessary for travel. During travel the animal shall be muzzled and confined either within a secure temporary enclosure or by a leash no longer than four (4) feet in length. Extension leashes are not permitted and leashes may not be attached to inanimate objects. 
(10)  In addition to the conditions set forth herein, and any other sentence provisions, the municipal judge shall impose a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense and minimum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any other vicious animal offense committed within twelve (12) months of the initial violation. Such fines shall not be waived, suspended or offset in any manner. 
(b)  If upon conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or no contest to a charge of vicious animal the municipal judge finds as substantiated by the record that the subject animals actions resulted in less than bodily injury or injury not requiring veterinarian care or the death of another animal and that the animal has not been the subject of any other violation of this chapter resulting in a conviction or the subject of any report by the police department, including community services regarding animal conduct regulated by this chapter, the municipal judge shall impose a sentence which at a minimum consists of the following: 
(1)  The conditions set forth in section 25-89(a)(1), (2), (6), and (8). 
(2)  At all times when the animal is off the property of the owner it shall be secured by a leash of no longer than four (4) feet in length. Extension leashes are not permitted and leashes may not be attached to inanimate objects. 
(3)  When outdoors, upon the property of the owner, the animal must be kept either within a secure pen or kennel or confined upon the property by a fence which shall be at least six (6) feet in height, securely constructed, adequate for the purpose and kept in good repair with any gate to be locked whenever the animal is within the enclosure. 
(4)  Successful completion of animal behavior training at a program approved by the municipal judge. 
(5)  A fine of at least two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to comply with the requirements set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2007-87, §§ 2, 3, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 25-90. - Reserved. 
Sec. 25-91. - Euthanization. 
    Upon a conviction of vicious animal, the municipal judge, in addition to the requirements set forth in this article and the penalties set forth in the Code may order that the animal be euthanized by or under the supervision of a veterinarian. The municipal judge shall order that the animal be euthanized by or under the supervision of a veterinarian if during the course of the offense the animal inflicted serious bodily injury upon any person. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-92. - Authority for immediate destruction. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the immediate destruction of any vicious animal when deemed necessary in the interest of public safety by the community service or police officer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Secs. 25-93-25-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 25-98. - Guard dog requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or maintain guard dogs in any area for the protection of persons or property unless the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The dog's owner shall comply with the requirements of section 25-89(a)(1), (2), (4), (8) and (9) pertaining to the keeping of vicious animals; 
(b)  The dogs shall be confined to an enclosed and secure area or under the absolute control of an adult handler at all times; 
(c)  Such building or enclosure shall have adequate safeguards against accidental entry by children and against accidental and unintentional entry by any person; 
(d)  Warning signs meeting the requirements of section 25-89(a)(6) shall be conspicuously posted at all access points to the property indicating the presence of guard dogs and such signs shall plainly show a telephone number where a person responsible for controlling such dogs can be reached at all times; 
(e)  Prior to the posting of guard dogs on any property, the person or persons responsible for the posting shall inform community service division in writing of their intention to post such dogs, the number and breed of dogs to be posted, the location where such dog or dogs will be posted, the hours of posting and the approximate length of time such dog or dogs will be patrolling the property; 
(f)  In the event that the chief of police or his/her agent determines that the presence of the guard dogs or the circumstances of their presence constitutes a present danger to any person, property or animal, the chief or his/her agent shall issue a cease and desist order to be served upon the person notifying the police department under subsection (e) of this section. Service shall be in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person responsible for the dogs as set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-99. - Backyard chickens. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or maintain backyard chickens in any area unless the following conditions and requirements are met: 
(1)  Backyard chickens are an accessory use in conjunction with a residential use or school use as defined in section 26-8-1. Refer to Table 26A - Permitted Uses in Chapter 26 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances for a list of the zoning districts where backyard chickens are allowed. 
(2)  A backyard chicken license must be approved by the planning department. A nonrefundable application fee shall be submitted with the backyard chicken license application. City council shall set the amount of such fee by resolution. 
(3)  No more than six (6) backyard chickens are permitted per dwelling unit or school. 
(4)  Roosters are prohibited. 
(5)  Other poultry or fowl are prohibited. No person may own or keep any other fowl, including ducks, quail, geese, pigeons or turkeys. 
(6)  Backyard chickens are required to be located within a designated chicken coop and chicken run that shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The chicken coop and chicken run shall be located in the rear or backyard of a residential or school property. 
b.  Neither the coop nor run shall be located between the rear of the principal structure and the front yard lot line. 
c.  The coop shall have a minimum five (5) feet setback from any side or rear property line, except as permitted in subsection 25-99(f)(xii). 
d.  Coops shall be predator resistant with a solid covered roof. 
e.  Water shall be provided onsite and accessible to chickens at all times. 
f.  During daylight hours, the chickens shall have access to a chicken run that is adequately fenced and protected from predators and shall also have access to a chicken coop. 
g.  From dusk until dawn, chickens shall be protected from predators by being enclosed within a chicken coop. 
h.  The maximum chicken coop size is 100 square feet, except as permitted in subsection 25-99(f)(xii). 
i.  A minimum of four (4) square feet of space per chicken shall be provided in both the coop and the run. 
j.  The maximum height of a coop shall be no more than seven (7) feet at the highest point of the roof, except as permitted in subsection 25-99(f)(xii). 
k.  No chickens, coop or run shall be located in common areas of a multi-unit, multi-use, or multifamily property. 
l.  Existing structures on a property as of January 1, 2011, that do not meet the setback requirement in Code subsection 25-99(e)(iii), exceed the maximum size requirement in Code subsection 25-99(e)(viii), or exceed the maximum height in Code subsection 25-99(e)(x) may be used as a chicken coop as long as the structure is located in the rear yard of the property and if said structure is approved as part of the backyard chicken license. 
(7)  Chicken coops and chicken runs shall be maintained and shall be regularly cleaned to control dust, odor, and waste and not constitute a safety hazard, or health problem to surrounding properties. 
(8)  No on-site slaughtering is allowed. 
(9)  Chicken feed shall be stored in a resealable, airtight, predator proof container. 
(10)  Chicken waste shall only be stored in resealable, airtight, predator proof container. 
(11)  Many homeowner association bylaws do not allow poultry of any kind. The City of Lafayette encourages residents to research their individual homeowner association regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05, § 2, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 2013-8, § 1, 5-7-13; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 25-100. - Beekeeping. 
(a)  Beekeeping is hereby declared to be an accessory use in the agricultural zoning, residential zoning, and public zoning districts, and in conjunction with residential uses and school uses as such uses are defined in section 26-8-1. In all areas, beekeeping is only allowed as an accessory use subject to the conditions and restrictions of paragraph (b) of this section. Refer to table 26A - Permitted uses in chapter 26 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances for a list of the zoning districts where beekeeping is allowed. 
(b)  Beekeeping shall be unlawful in any area unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A beekeeping license must be approved by the planning department. A nonrefundable application fee shall be submitted with the beekeeping license application. City council shall set the amount of such fee by resolution. 
(2)  No more than the following number of bee hives may be allowed on any lot or parcel: 
a.  Two (2) hives on any lot or parcel less than one-quarter (0.25) acre in size. 
b.  Four (4) hives on any lot or parcel equal to or greater than one-quarter (0.25) acre but less than one-half (0.50) acre in size; 
c.  Six (6) hives on any lot or parcel one-half (0.50) acre but less than one (1) acre in size; 
d.  Eight (8) hives on any lot or parcel one (1) acre but less than five (5) acres in size; 
e.  Sixteen (16) hives on any lot or parcel five (5) acres or larger in size; 
f.  For properties zoned AG (Agricultural), more than sixteen (16) hives may be allowed pursuant to a special use review in accordance with section 26-15 of this Code. 
(3)  Hives shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from all property lines. 
(4)  A fresh water supply must be maintained within five (5) feet of the hive. 
(5)  The maximum height of a hive and any stand shall not be greater than six (6) feet. 
(c)  It shall always be unlawful to maintain Africanized bees. 
(d)  Beekeeping shall always be unlawful in common areas of a multi-unit, multi-use or multifamily property. 
(e)  Any colony that has been abandoned or is kept in such a manner as to cause any unhealthy condition fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to immunize a beekeeper from civil liability arising out of their beekeeping activities, regardless of the beekeepers compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 2, 1-20-15; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 25-101. - Miniature goat and miniature pot-bellied pigs. 
    Keeping of miniature goats or miniature pot-bellied pigs shall be unlawful in any area unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Keeping of miniature goats or miniature pot-bellied pigs is hereby declared to be an accessory use in the agricultural zoning, residential zoning, and public zoning districts, and in conjunction with residential uses and school uses as such uses are defined in section 26-8-1. In all areas, keeping of miniature goats or miniature pot-bellied pigs is only allowed as an accessory use subject to the conditions and restrictions of paragraph (b) of this section. Refer to table 26A, permitted uses in chapter 26 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances for a list of the zoning districts where keeping of miniature goats or miniature pot-bellied pigs is allowed. 
(2)  A miniature goats or miniature pot-bellied pigs license must be approved by the planning and building department. A nonrefundable application fee shall be submitted with the license application. City council shall set the amount of such fee by resolution. 
(3)  Miniature goats and miniature pot-bellied pigs are required to be located within a designated shelter and yard area that shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Neither the shelter nor yard area shall be located in that front fifty (50) percent of any lot which is on the side that abuts a private or public street that provides principal access to or visibility of the lot. 
b.  The shelter shall have a minimum five (5) feet setback from any side or rear property line, except as permitted in subsection 25-101(c)(7). 
c.  The shelter shall be predator resistant with a solid covered roof. 
d.  Water shall be provided onsite and accessible to animals at all times. 
e.  The maximum shelter size is one hundred (100) square feet, except as permitted in subsection 25-101(c)(7). 
f.  The maximum height of a shelter shall be no more than seven (7) feet at the highest point of the roof, except as permitted in subsection 25-101(c)(7). 
g.  Existing structures on a property as of December 1, 2016, that do not meet the setback requirement in subsection 25-101(c)(2), exceed the maximum size requirement in subsection 25-101(c)(5), or exceed the maximum height in subsection 25-101(c)(6) may be used as a shelter as long as the structure is located in the rear yard of the property and if said structure is approved as part of the miniature animal license. 
h.  Yard areas must be fully fenced and constructed to confine all animals onsite. 
(4)  Pot-bellied pig. 
a.  Only one (1) miniature pot-bellied pig shall be kept within or upon any parcel of land or dwelling unit within the city limits; 
b.  Miniature pot-bellied pigs over four (4) months of age must have current inoculation against rabies and leptospirosis. 
c.  Any male miniature pot-bellied pig must be neutered or any female miniature pot-bellied pig must be spayed. 
d.  Any person owning or having charge, care, custody, or control of any miniature pot-bellied pig shall be responsible for removing and cleaning up such pig feces on any public or private property; 
(5)  Miniature goats. 
a.  No more and no less than two (2) miniature goats, twelve (12) weeks of age or older, must be kept in order to humanely meet the companionship needs of miniature goats; 
b.  Males must be neutered before the age of six (6) months; 
c.  Any person owning or having charge, care, custody, or control of any miniature goats shall be responsible for removing and cleaning up such goat feces on any public or private property; 
d.  Any number of offspring younger than twelve (12) weeks of age may be kept at the property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-39, § 2, 12-6-16) 
Secs. 25-102-25-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 25-105. - Authorization for capture and impoundment. 
    Community service and police officers, are in addition, to the circumstances permitted in this chapter, authorized in any lawful manner to take possession of animals deemed by them to be included in the categories listed below and impound them at an animal shelter or other appropriate location where the animals will be confined in a humane manner. Such officers may utilize a tranquilizer dart if necessary in order to capture an animal which appears to be vicious or a danger to the public or to destroy such animal if necessary to avoid an imminent threat to humans. 
(1)  Animals at large, animals subject to neglect, vicious animals, and nuisance animals; 
(2)  Livestock, wild or exotic animals kept in violation of the Code; 
(3)  Animals which were being transported by a person involved in a vehicular accident when such person becomes unable to care for or maintain control over the animal as a result of the accident and there is no responsible person present to take possession of the animal; and 
(4)  Animals which will be or have been left uncared for as a result of the death, injury, arrest, detention or other incapacitation of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-106. - Notice of impoundment. 
    If, by tags or other identification attached to the animal or any other information given to the animal shelter, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, a community service officer shall, as soon as practicable, upon impoundment, notify the owner of such impoundment by telephone, personal contact, electronic mail, U.S. mail or written notice posted conspicuously upon the owner's last known residence. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-107. - Minimum time for impoundment of unclaimed animals. 
(a)  Unclaimed animals shall be kept at an animal shelter or other appropriate location for not less than five (5) days unless euthanasia prior to that time is deemed necessary or appropriate by the veterinarian advising the animal shelter personnel. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "days" shall mean days during which the animal shelter is open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-108. - Reclamation of certain animals restricted or prohibited. 
    The following restrictions or prohibitions shall apply to the reclamation of the following impounded animals: 
(1)  Animals subject to a vicious animal charge shall not be reclaimed unless a dismissal of the charge is entered by the municipal court or, upon a conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or no contest, the court orders the animal released subject to the requirements of section 25-88; 
(2)  Wild or exotic animals kept in violation of the Code shall not be released to the owner or any other person; provided, however, that such animal may be released to the appropriate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-109. - Impound fees. 
(a)  An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay all impound and a daily boarding fees, established by the animal shelter, plus all actual and necessary veterinary costs incurred on behalf of the animal. No owner may reclaim an impounded animal until he or she has paid all impoundment and boarding fees and veterinary costs. 
(b)  It is unlawful for an owner of any impounded animal to fail to pay all fees and charges incurred as a result of the impoundment. Failure to reclaim an animal prior to a determination that the animal has become the property of the city or its designated animal shelter as set forth in the Code shall not relieve the owner of the impounded animal of the responsibility to pay all impound fees and costs incurred prior to said determination. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-110. - Adoption or disposal of unclaimed animals. 
    Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within the period of time set forth herein shall become the property of the animal shelter and may be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Secs. 25-111-25-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - INSPECTION/ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 25-116. - Inspections. 
(a)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law, or to perform any duty imposed herein or other applicable laws, or whenever a community service or police officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building, structure, enclosure, or premises any violation of this chapter, such officer is hereby authorized to enter such location to inspect the same and perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this chapter or other applicable law; providing that: 
(1)  If such building, structure, enclosure, or premises is occupied, a community service or police officer shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining reasons therefore. 
(2)  If entry is refused the community service or police officer shall provide the property owner or occupant a twenty-four-hour written notice of intention to inspect. If said owner or occupant cannot be located after reasonable effort, the twenty-four-hour written notice of intention to inspect shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the property. Said notice given to the owner or occupant or posted on the premises shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made upon issuance of a search warrant by a municipal judge of the city or by a judge of any other court having jurisdiction. 
(3)  After expiration of said twenty-four-hour period from the giving of such notice the officer may appear before the municipal court of the city or any other court having jurisdiction and upon a showing of a probable cause shall obtain a search warrant entitling him/her to enter said location. Upon presentation of said search warrant and proper credentials, or possession of same in the case of an unoccupied location, the officer may enter into said location using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry therein. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a community service officer or police officer has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping, possessing or maintaining of any animal is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the animal or the public health or safety, the officer shall have the right immediately to enter and inspect such property and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether such property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied the officer shall first present proper credentials to the owner or occupant and demand entry explaining his/her reasons therefore and the purpose of the inspection. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, to fail or refuse, after proper demand has been made as provided in paragraph b above, to permit a community service or police officer to make any inspection provided for therein. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-117. - Interference with community service officers prohibited. 
    No person shall knowingly interfere with, impede or obstruct any community service officer who is attempting to discharge or is in the course of discharging an official duty, nor shall any person fail to obey the lawful order of a community service officer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 25-118. - Minimum penalty. 
    Except for vicious animals the municipal judge, in addition to any other sentence provision, shall impose a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense and a minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for any other offense committed within the following twelve (12) months upon any person who is convicted of, or pleads guilty or no-contest to violation of any provision of this chapter. Such fines shall not be waived, suspended or offset in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 2006-21, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Chapter 26 - DEVELOPMENT AND ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, adopted Feb. 4, 1986, enacted provisions designated as Ch. 26, Development and Zoning, set forth herein. Due to the nature and scope of the material and in order to conform to the style of the ordinance, the user will note that the Section headings indicating general subject matter bear two-part numbers and are comparable to article headings in other chapters of the Code, while sections thereunder containing textual material bear a three-part number indicating chapter, Section (article), and sec. (in sequential order). 

SECTION 26-1. - SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 26-1-1. - Short title; purpose. 
    This chapter shall be cited as the "Development and Zoning Code" and is enacted to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city, and to ensure a logical growth of the various physical elements of the city; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to improve housing standards; to conserve property values; to prevent overcrowding; to facilitate adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewage facilities, schools, parks and other public requirements; to promote commercial and industrial development; and to preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
SECTION 26-2. - DISTRICT DESIGNATION 

Sec. 26-2-1. - District designation. 
    To carry out the purpose and provisions of this chapter and the city's comprehensive plan, the City of Lafayette, Colorado, is divided into the following zone districts: 
(a)  Single-family residential districts. 
RE1 Rural estate residential 
RE2 Rural residential 
R0 Low density residential 
R1 Medium density residential 
(b)  Multiple-family residential districts. 
R2 Single-family and two-family residential 
OTR Old Town Residential 
R3 Multifamily residential 
R4 High density residential 
RSR Senior and special residential 
(c)  Commercial or business districts. 
T1 Transitional business 
B1 Community service business district 
C1 Regional business district 
(d)  Industrial districts. 
M1 Industrial 
(e)  Others. 
DR Developing resource 
P Public 
AG Agricultural 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1990-4, § 1, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 1993-6, § 1, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1994-1, § 1, 4-5-94; Ord. No. 1998-26, § 1, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2002-31, § 2, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 2014-22, § 2, 1-6-15) 
Sec. 26-2-2. - Lafayette Old Town Neighborhood Overlay District. 
    In addition to the basic zoning districts established by section 26-2-1, there is established an overlay zone district designated as the old town neighborhood overlay district. This district encompasses the entirety of the old town residential (OTR) zone district and portions of adjacent R-1, R-2 and T-1 zoned areas, and is established to maintain the existing character of the property within the overlay district. Regulations are established for this overlay district that shall apply in addition to, or as a modification of, the regulations established for any underlying basic zoning district encompassed within the old town neighborhood overlay district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-30, § 1, 9-5-17) 
SECTION 26-3. - ZONING MAP 

Sec. 26-3-1. - Zoning map. 
    The location and boundaries of the zone districts established by this chapter are shown upon the "zone district map of the City of Lafayette", which is incorporated into this chapter. The zoning map, together with all data shown thereon and all amendments thereto, is by reference made a part of this chapter. The zone district map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and bear the seal of the city and the date of adoption. Changes in the boundary of any zone district shall be made only by amendment to this chapter and shall promptly be entered on the zone district map. The zone district map shall be located in the office of the city planning department and copies made available to the public at a moderate price. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 1, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 13, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-3-2. - Old Town neighborhood overlay district boundaries. 
    The Old Town neighborhood overlay district shall consist of, and include those properties shown in figure 1 below, and shall be shown on the "Zone District Map of the City of Lafayette": 

Figure 1
(Ord. No. 2017-30, § 2, 9-5-17) 
SECTION 26-4. - BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 26-4-1. - Boundaries. 
    Except where otherwise indicated, zone district boundaries shall follow municipal corporate limits, section lines, lot lines or right-of-way lines or extensions thereof. Unsubdivided property and/or where a zone district boundary divides a lot or tract, the location of such boundary, unless indicated by dimension, shall be determined by the scale of the zone district map. Where a zone district boundary coincides with a right-of-way line and the right-of-way is abandoned, the zone district boundary shall then follow the center line of the former right-of-way. Land not part of a public railroad, or utility right-of-way which is not indicated as being in any zone district shall be considered to be included in the most restricted adjacent zone district even when such district is separated from the land in question by a public railroad or utility right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 2, 8-18-98) 
SECTION 26-5. - ANNEXATION 

Sec. 26-5-1. - Annexation. 
(a)  An annexation request shall be reviewed against the criteria for planned unit development approval specified in section 26-18-5, to the extent that such criteria are relevant to the proposed annexation and may be used to guide the planning commission's and city council's discretion in reviewing a proposed annexation. 
(b)  All territory annexed to the city subsequent to the effective date of this chapter shall be zoned according to district classifications of this chapter. Such classification shall be determined through the standard rezoning process. The proposed zoning shall be established in accordance with applicable state statutes and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1993-6, § 2, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 3, 8-18-98) 
SECTION 26-6. - APPLICATION 

Sec. 26-6-1. - Conformity to subdivision and use regulations. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or structure shall be moved, altered or extended, nor shall any land, building or structure be used, designed to be used or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as provided for by the uses hereinafter listed in the district regulations for the district in which such land, building or structure is located, or as provided in any urban renewal plan as approved by the city pursuant to C.R.S. 31-25-101 et seq. In case of conflict between the urban renewal plan and the district regulations, the urban renewal plan shall control. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner, developer or occupant of any land, building or structure to use or develop any property for any purpose or in any manner other than as provided for by the uses hereinafter listed in the district regulations for the district in which such land, building, or structure is located, or as provided in any urban renewal plan as approved by the city pursuant to C.R.S. 31-25-101 et seq. In case of conflict between the urban renewal plan and the district regulations, the urban renewal plan shall control. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to divide from any real property and transfer, sell or agree to transfer or sell any lot, tract, parcel, site, separate interest, condominium interest, time share or interval estate, or any other legal or equitable interest in and to real property, except an easement, until such subdivision has been approved by the city, in writing, in accordance with this chapter and a plat is filed in the office of the clerk and recorder for Boulder County, Colorado; provided, however, that a written agreement to transfer or sell that is expressly conditioned upon full compliance by the seller with all provisions of this chapter concerning the subdivision of land within a specified period of time and that expressly recites that the seller's failure to satisfy such condition within said period of time shall terminate the agreement and entitle the buyer to the prompt return of all consideration under said agreement, shall not constitute a violation of this subsection. 
(d)  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a principal building until a lot is created as part of a final subdivision plan that has been approved, filed and recorded with the Boulder County Clerk and Recorder's Office, in accordance with the process established by section 26-16-2. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1993-6, § 3, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 1, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2001-26, § 1, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 2006-24, § 6, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 26-6-1.1. - Conformity to development approvals. 
(a)  Following approval of any application required by this chapter, all property described in the application must be developed in accordance with the approval, including, but not limited to, the written documents, site plans, plats, development schedules and agreements between the city and the owner or developer. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner, developer or applicant to use or develop the property for any other use or in a manner not consistent with the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 4, 3-2-93) 
Sec. 26-6-2. - Conformity to setback, site area and height provisions. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure shall be erected nor shall any existing building or structure be moved, altered or extended nor shall any open area surrounding any building or structure be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the setback, building site area, building location and height provisions hereinafter provided in the district regulations for the district in which such building, structure or open area is located. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner, developer or occupant of any building or structure to erect, move, alter or extend any building or structure or to encroach upon or reduce in any manner the open area surrounding any building or structure, except in conformity with the setback, building site area, building location and height provisions hereinafter provided in the district regulations for the district in which such building, structure or open area is located. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1993-6, § 5, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 2, 3-20-01) 
Sec. 26-6-3. - Lot area, yard, frontage, open area, parking restrictions. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no lot area, yard, frontage, other open area or parking area provided for any building for the purpose of complying with provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing such lot area, yard, frontage, other open area or parking area for any other building, and no lot area, yard, frontage, other open area or parking area for a building on one (1) lot shall be considered as providing such areas for a building on another lot. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 3, 3-20-01) 
Sec. 26-6-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1998-25, adopted Aug. 18, 1998, repealed § 26-6-4, which pertained to principal building and derived from Ord. No. 1986-01, adopted Feb. 4, 1986. 
SECTION 26-7. - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 26-7-1. - Rules of construction. 
    Whenever appropriate within the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural number include the singular. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
SECTION 26-8. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 26-8-1. - General definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and words shall have the following meaning: 
    Accessory building or structure , see this section under "Building or structure, accessory." 
    Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a lot or contiguous lots in the same ownership which is conducted for the benefit of the owners, occupants, employees, customers or visitors of the lot. 
    Addition means any activity that expands the enclosed footprint or increases the square footage of an existing structure. 
    Alley means public right-of-way within a block upon which the rear of building lots generally abut; its use is for secondary access to the lot and/or service purposes. 
    Amateur radio operator means any person holding a valid amateur radio operators and station license issued by the Federal Communication Commission. 
    Amateur radio tower means a structure as contemplated by the building code used for the purpose of the transmission and reception of amateur radio signals and includes antennas and other appurtenances thereto. 
    Animal means, for purposes of this chapter, animals other than household pets or prohibited animals listed in Section 25-50 of this Code. 
    Animated or flashing sign means any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement or rotation, or which gives the visual impression of such movement by use of lighting, including blinking, chasing, scrolling or other animation effects, or signs which exhibit intermittent or sequential flashing of natural or artificial light or color effects. 
    Architectural projection means any projection that is not intended for occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, including, without limitation, roof overhangs, mansards, unenclosed exterior balconies, marquees, canopies, pilasters and fascias, but not including signs. 
    Assisted living means a stated-licensed establishment which provides living quarters and a variety of limited personal care and supportive health care to individuals who are unable to live independently due to infirmity of age, physical or mental handicap, but who do not need the skilled nursing care of a convalescent or nursing home. Additional care consists of varying levels and intensities of care and supervision, protective supervision and personal care. The physical facilities may consist of individual living quarters of a barrier-free design, with separate bathroom facilities, a full kitchen or no kitchen. The facility may provide a minimal amount of supportive health care monitoring, such as assistance with medication, but is limited to health care services which do not require state or federal licensing. In addition, the facility may have a communal dining area, recreation facilities (library, lounge, game room), laundry facilities and common open areas. 
    Awning means a movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and of a type that can be retracted, folded or collapsed against the face of the supporting building. 
    Backyard chicken(s) means any female breed of chicken not to include any poultry such as ducks, quail, geese, pigeons, and/or turkeys, for raising and keeping in the backyard area of residential uses. 
    Basement means any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Bed and breakfast means a residential building in which rooms are rented on a daily basis. The number of rental rooms available shall not exceed the occupancy requirements of a family for the number of rooms legally permitted by the zoning district in which the facility is to be located. 
    Board and care facility means a facility not required to be licensed by the state health department wherein the following services may be available: Lodging, housekeeping, meal preparation. No skilled personal care is provided. 
    Brew pub means an establishment, licensed as a brew pub by the appropriate local, state and/or federal authorities, where malt liquors or fermented malt beverages are manufactured, packaged or distributed, and which may also include sales of such products for on- or off-premises consumption. 
    Brewery means an establishment, licensed as a manufacturer by the appropriate state and/or federal authorities, where malt liquors or fermented malt beverages are manufactured, packaged or distributed, and which may also include sales of such products for on- or off-premises consumption, and which does not meet the definition of brew pub, micro brew pub or microbrewery. 
    Building means any permanent structure built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building form means the shape and structure of a building as distinguished from its substance or material. 
    Building mass means the three-dimensional bulk of a building height, width, and depth. 
    Building or structure, accessory means a detached subordinate building or structure which is not used for living or sleeping quarters and whose use is incidental to the use of the lot or principal building located on the same lot. 
    Building, principal means a building in which there is conducted the principal use of the lot on which the building is located. 
    Building scale means the size and proportion of a building relative to surrounding buildings and environs, adjacent streets, and pedestrians. 
    Cabana means any portable, demountable or permanent room, enclosure, or other building erected or constructed within six (6) feet of a mobile home or camping vehicle and is used for human habitation. 
    Camper park means an area established, maintained, operated or used for temporary occupancy of camping vehicles, tents or other camping equipment including all public and private lands and surface waters of the state available to the public for picnicking, fishing and other recreational activities. 
    Camping party means one (1) or more persons assigned to a single campsite. 
    Campsite means a camping vehicle lot or an area within a camper park designed to be used for temporary occupancy of camping vehicles, tents or other camping equipment by a single camping party. 
    Canopy means a permanently roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway or other similar area, that may be wholly supported by a building or may be wholly or partially supported by columns, poles or braces extended from the ground. 
    Car wash means a facility for washing or steam cleaning motor vehicles (including self-service operation), operating either as a separate facility or as an accessory use with another use. 
    Channel means the physical confine of stream or waterway consisting of a bed and stream banks, existing in a variety of geometries. 
    City council means the duly elected officials who constitute the legislative and governing body of the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    City inspector means an authorized representative of the city, including the building official, the health officer, and any inspector for the fire department acting within the city limits. 
    City planning commission means the board appointed by city council to review and make decisions as directed by this chapter and the comprehensive plan for the City of Lafayette. 
    Density, gross means total land area including streets, retention areas, parks, open space, etc. 
    Density, net means developable area only, excluding streets, parks, other public land areas and open space. 
    Dependent mobile home or camping vehicle means a mobile home or camping vehicle that has no toilet, lavatory, and/or bathing facilities and is dependent upon a service building for toilet, lavatory and/or bathing facilities. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Drive-up facility means any use, which by design, physical facilities, services, or operating procedures permits persons to receive services, or obtain or drop off goods, while remaining in their motor vehicle. Drive-up facilities may include, but are not limited to, facilities at donation drop-offs, banks, dry cleaners, and pharmacies. 
    Drive-up restaurant means an establishment that by design of physical facilities, or by the type of service and packaging, permits or encourages as a principal component of its business the purchase of prepared, ready-to-eat foods for consumption either off the premises or on the premises in an automobile, or both. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof used for residential occupancy, and conforming to any building code, fire code and safety code adopted by the City of Lafayette. 
    Dwelling, single-family means a building containing one (1) dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family means a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, two-family means a building containing two (2) dwelling units immediately adjacent to each other, sharing at least one common wall, or stacked one on another, or some combination thereof. 
    Dwelling unit means a structure or portion of a structure designed for occupancy as a residence by a single family. 
    Dwelling unit, accessory means a detached dwelling unit that is (i) located on the same lot or parcel as the principal dwelling unit, (ii) incidental and subordinate to the principal dwelling unit, and (iii) excluded from the calculation of dwelling units per acre that are permitted in a given zone district. 
    Electronic message sign means a sign module capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means, including animated graphics and video. 
(a)  Dissolve means a mode of message transition on an electronic message sign accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually and uniformly appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual and uniform appearance and legibility of the second message. 
(b)  Fade means a mode of message transition on an electronic message sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually and uniformly reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually and uniformly increases intensity to the point of legibility. 
    Electric sign means any sign containing electric wiring, but not including signs illuminated by exterior light sources, such as floodlights. 
    Family means one (1) or more persons living together on the premises of a dwelling unit; but does not include a group of four (4) or more persons unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the agency responsible for administering the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of water from channels and reservoir spillways; 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
(c)  Mudslides or mudflows that occur from excess surface water that is combined with mud or other debris that is sufficiently fluid so as to flow over the surface of normally dry land areas (such as earth carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current). 
    Flood, base means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Flood hazard, area of special means the land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Flooding, area of shallow means an area so designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one (1) to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration which includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. The Colorado statewide standard for the designated height to be used for all newly studied reaches shall be one-half (1/2) foot (six (6) inches). Letters of map revision to existing floodway delineations may continue to use the floodway criteria in place at the time of the existing floodway delineation. 
    Floor area means the gross area of the building measured along the outside walls of the building including each floor level and interior balconies, but excluding garages, enclosed parking areas, exterior unenclosed balconies, and enclosed mechanical areas. 
    Floor, habitable means any floor area usable for living purposes that includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor area used only for storage purposes is not a "habitable floor". 
    Floor, lowest means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. 
    Frontage, building for sign calculation purposes means the horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a building that abuts a street, a parking area, a mall, or other circulation area open to the general public and that has either a main window display of the enterprise or a public entrance to the building; in industrial districts, a building side with an entrance open to employees is a building frontage; where more than one (1) use occupies a building, each such use having a public entrance or main window display for its exclusive use shall be considered to have its own building frontage, which shall be the front width of the portion of the building occupied by that use. 
    Frontage, street means the linear frontage of a lot or tract abutting a private or public street that provides principal access to or visibility of the premises. 
    Gas station (fuel facility) means any facility which engages in the retail sale of fuel for motor vehicles, whether as a principal use or an accessory use. 
    Grounds means the yard areas or premises. 
    Halfway house means a dwelling designated by a court, the county, a state agency or any other public or private entity or organization, in which a group of not more than eight (8) adults and/or children live together with appropriate supervisory staff as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Health department means the health officer for the city or his duly appointed representative. 
    Height for sign purposes means the vertical distance measured from the elevation of the nearest sidewalk, or, if there is no sidewalk within twenty-five (25) feet, from the lowest point of the finished grade on the lot upon which the sign is located and within twenty-five (25) feet of the sign, to the uppermost point on the sign or the sign structure. 
    Height for building or structure purposes, see section 26-14-8. 
    Home occupation means any use for gain or support carried on within a dwelling or mobile home located in a residential district only by the occupants thereof; it may be located within the principal building or in any accessory building. All home occupations shall be allowed only in accordance with the provisions of section 26-14-9. 
    Hospital means a building designed and used for the medical, surgical diagnosis, and treatment of persons under the care of doctors and nurses. A nursing home and a convalescent home are not included. 
    Household pet means those animals commonly kept indoors as pets, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, or other domestic animals of similar size; white mice, guinea pigs or similar small animals; birds; turtles; and fish. 
    Illumination, direct means lighting by means of an unshielded light source, including neon tubing, that is effectively visible as part of the sign, where light travels directly from the source to the viewer's eye. 
    Illumination, indirect means lighting of a surface by a light source that is directed at the reflecting surface in such a way as to illuminate the sign from the front, or a light source that is primarily designed to illuminate the entire building facade upon which a sign is displayed, but does not include lighting that is primarily used for purposes other than sign illumination, including, without limitation, parking lot lights or lights inside a building that may silhouette a window sign but that are not primarily installed to serve as inside illumination. 
    Illumination, internal means lighting by means of a light source that is within a sign having a translucent background, silhouetting opaque letters or designs, or that is within letters or designs that are themselves made of translucent material. 
    Independent mobile home or camping vehicle means a mobile home or camping vehicle that has a toilet, lavatory and bathing facilities. 
    Kennel means any lot or tract on which are harbored. 
(a)  Four (4) or more animals; or 
(b)  Four (4) or more of any one species of household pet, including rabbits, but excluding household pets customarily housed in a cage, aquarium or similar enclosure, at least four (4) months of age. 
    Infill development means development on a vacant or substantially vacant tract of land surrounded by existing development. 
    Kiosk means a small structure, typically located within a pedestrian walkway or similar circulation area, intended for use as a small shop, or for use as a display space for posters, notices and exhibits. 
    Light source means neon, fluorescent or similar tube lighting, an incandescent bulb, including the light-producing elements therein and any reflecting surface that, by reason of its construction or placement, becomes the light source. 
    Lot means a piece or plot of land shown as such on a duly recorded plat. 
    Lot area, minimum means the total horizontal area within the boundaries of a lot. 
    Lot coverage means the percentage of the lot that is covered by the footprint of all buildings and structures, including, but not limited to, covered and/or enclosed porches, patios, and decks. 
    Lot line, front means the property line of a lot dividing the lot from the adjoining street. On a corner lot or double frontage lot, the property owner may elect which street frontage shall be the front lot line only for the purpose of determining the rear yard. Any yard adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard for the purposes of determining setbacks and height of buildings except that, in the Old Town Residential zone district, the lot line that fronts on an east/west street shall be considered the front lot line and the lot line that fronts on a north/south street shall be considered a side street lot line for purposes of determining setbacks and height of buildings. 
    Lot line, rear means the property line of a lot opposite or more parallel to the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side means any lot property line other than a front and rear lot line. 
    Lot line, side street means, in the Old Town Residential zone district, on lots bordered on two (2) contiguous sides by streets, the lot line of the lot that divides the lot from a north/south street. 
    Maintenance means the replacing, repairing, or repainting of a portion of a sign or any structure, periodic changing of bulletin board panels, or renewing of copy that has been made unusable by ordinary wear and tear, weather or accident. 
    Marquee means a permanently roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting from the building. 
    Micro brew pub means an establishment, licensed as a brew pub by the appropriate local, state and/or federal authorities, where malt liquors or fermented malt beverages are manufactured, packaged or distributed with all production and manufacturing equipment and processes enclosed within a building, and which may also include sales of such products for on- or off-premises consumption, with manufacturing not exceeding a total of seventy-seven thousand five hundred (77,500) gallons (or two thousand five hundred (2,500) barrels, where one (1) barrel equals thirty-one (31) gallons) of malt liquor and fermented malt beverage on its licensed premises each calendar year and any off-premises wholesale distribution not exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of its total annual production. 
    Microbrewery means an establishment, licensed as a manufacturer by the appropriate state and/or federal authorities, where malt liquors or fermented malt beverages are manufactured, packaged or distributed with all production and manufacturing equipment and processes enclosed within a building, and which may also include sales of such products for on- or off-premises consumption, with manufacturing not exceeding a total seventy-seven thousand five hundred (77,500) gallons (or two thousand five hundred (2,500) barrels, where one (1) barrel equals thirty-one (31) gallons) of malt liquor and fermented malt beverages on its licensed premises each calendar year and any off-premises wholesale distribution not exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the total annual production, and which does not meet the definition of a micro brew pub. 
    Minor subdivision means a division of land into three (3) or fewer lots, a realignment of lots, or condominiumization of a property. 
    Mixed use building complex means a planned unit development consisting of one (1) or more principal buildings containing, either individually or collectively, both residential and nonresidential principal uses. 
    Mobile home means a transferable, single-family dwelling unit suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile housing. Such structure will have wheels or removable jacks for conveyance on highways and may be transported to a site as one (1) or more sections. The terms "mobile home" shall not include "travel trailers", "campers" or "camper buses" or "motor homes", as defined herein, or modular homes designed to be placed on a foundation complying with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code. 
    Mobile home lot means a designated portion of a mobile home park designated for the placement of a single mobile home and accessory structures for the exclusive use of the occupants and is exclusive of streets, walks and other common use areas in a mobile home parks and exclusive of county or city streets, alleys, walks or other public easements and adjacent private properties. 
    Mobile home park means a plot of land where two (2) or more mobile homes are located for permanent dwelling purposes. 
    Mobile home or camper sales lot means a plot of land that is used primarily for the sale of mobile homes or campers. Such uses are permitted only in commercially zoned areas and not as part of mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions. 
    Mobile home subdivision means an area or tract of land subdivided specifically to be occupied by mobile home for residential purposes. 
    Motor home means a motor vehicle containing cooking and/or sleeping facilities and designated as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping and travel use. The term "motor home" shall include vehicles designed as "camper buses" and shall include vehicles which may have been originally designed for use as vans, buses and the like, but which have been converted to be used as temporary living quarters. 
    New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter. 
    Nuisance means any public nuisance defined by city ordinance, code, and/or state statute. 
    Nursing home/convalescent home means any home, place or institution which operates or maintains a facility providing convalescent or chronic care for twenty-four (24) consecutive hours for three (3) or more patients not related by blood or marriage to the operator, who by reason of illness or infirmity, are unable properly to care for themselves. Convalescent and chronic care may include, but not be limited to, any or all procedures commonly employed in waiting on the sick, such as administration of medicines, preparation of special diets, giving of bedside nursing care, application of dressings and bandages, and carrying out of treatment prescribed by a duly licensed practitioner of the healing arts. 
    Occupant means any person residing in or having actual possession of a mobile home, camping vehicle, or dwelling. 
    Occupied area means that area of an individual mobile home lot or campsite covered by a mobile home, camping vehicle or tent and accessory structures. 
    Open space means privately-owned property protected by real covenant, or publicly-owned property protected by real covenant and/or designated by ordinance or resolution of the city council, which real covenant or designation designates the property for use as one (1) or more of the following: a community buffer; a wildlife corridor and habitat area; a wetland; a view corridor; agricultural land; an area of archeological, historical, geologic or topographic significance; an area containing significant renewable and/or nonrenewable natural resources; and/or other undesignated, typically nonirrigated, undeveloped land uses. Open space shall not include parks or developed active recreation areas. 
    Outlot means a piece or plot of land shown as such on a duly recorded plat that is not occupied or intended to be occupied by a habitable structure. 
    Owner means any person as defined by this chapter, who, alone, jointly or severally with others, or in a representative capacity (including, without limitation, an authorized agent, executor or trustee) has legal or equitable title to any property in question. 
    Owner or manager (mobile home park; camper park) means the person who owns, has charge, care or control of a mobile home park or camping vehicle park. 
    Park, playground, golf course with or without country club means facility built and maintained either by a unit of government or nonprofit corporation or as part of a subdivision or development of land for use of the inhabitants thereof. 
    Person means an individual or group of individuals, association, partnership, corporation, firm, company or private or public agency. 
    Planned unit development means a process of development by which tracts of land may be developed through an overall approach, as described in a development plan prepared and approved in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. While a planned unit development does not rezone the underlying zoning district, the approved development plan governs the future development of the property and has the force and effect of zoning regulations. 
    Public entrance means an entrance to a building or premises that is customarily used or intended for use by the general public, and excludes fire exits, special employee entrances, and loading dock entrances not generally used by the public. 
    Ramada means any freestanding roof or shade structure installed, erected or used above a mobile home or any portion thereof. 
    Redevelopment means development on a tract of land with existing buildings where all or most of the existing buildings would be razed and a new building or buildings built. 
    Refuse means all combustible or noncombustible, putrescible or nonputrescible solid or liquid wastes. 
    Refuse, waste, and recycling collection area means a centralized outdoor storage facility for receptacles used for the purposes of storage, collection, and disposal of refuse, waste, and recycling materials. The term "waste" shall not be interpreted as including hazardous waste. 
    Rent means any money or any other consideration given for the right to use, occupy or possess property. 
    Roof means the cover of any building, including the eaves and similar projections. 
    Roof forms means the type, arrangement of ridges or parapet walls, or materials used on a roof. 
    Roof line means the highest point an any building where an exterior wall encloses usable floor space (including roof areas for housing mechanical equipment) and the highest point on any parapet wall if the parapet wall extends around the entire perimeter of the building. 
    Sanitary facilities means toilets, urinals, lavatories, showers, utility sinks and drinking fountains and the service buildings containing these items. 
    Sanitary waste station means a facility used for removing and disposing of wastes from self-contained camping vehicle sewage holding tanks. 
    School means a public or private preschool, elementary school, secondary school, college or university. 
    Service building means a structure housing toilet, lavatory, bathing, laundry, service sink and other such sanitary facilities as may be required. 
    Sewage means any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution, or the water-carried wastes resulting from the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines, sinks, showers, or any other source of water-carried or nonwater-carried wastes of human origin or containing putrescible material. 
    Sewer connection (mobile home park, camper park, and mobile home subdivision) means the connection of all pipe, fittings and appurtenances connecting the drain outlet of the mobile home or camping vehicle with the sewer riser pipe of the sewage system. 
    Sex offender means an individual who is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to C.R.S. § 18-3-412.5, as amended. 
    Sexually oriented business means one (1) or more of the businesses defined as such in section 26-15.5-2 of this chapter. 
    Sign means any writing, pictorial representation, decoration (including any material used to differentiate sign copy from its background), form, emblem, or trademark, flag or banner, or any other figure of similar character that: 
(1)  Is a structure or any part thereof (including the roof or wall of a building); or 
(2)  Is written, printed, projected, painted, constructed, or otherwise placed or displayed upon or designed into a building, board, plate, canopy, awning, or vehicle or upon any material object or device whatsoever; and 
(3)  By reason of its form, color, wording, symbol, design, illumination or motion, attracts or is designed to attract attention to the subject thereof or is used as a means of identification, advertisement or announcement. 
    The following terms define the classes and types of signs covered by this chapter: 
1.  Bulletin board sign means a sign used for the purpose of notification to the public of an event or occurrence of public interest, including without limitation, church services, political rallies, civic meetings, or other similar events. 
2.  Business sign means a sign that identifies or directs attention to the business, profession, commodities, services, entertainment, or activities conducted, sold, displayed, offered or stored on the premises where the sign is located. 
3.  Commercial sign means a sign whose principal purpose is to identify a business or induce a purchase of a good or service, including, without limitation, any sign naming a brand of good or service. 
4.  Construction sign means a temporary sign announcing subdivision, development, construction, or other improvement of a property by a building contractor or other person furnishing services, materials, or labor to the premises, but does not include a "real estate" sign. 
5.  Freestanding sign means a nontemporary sign that is supported by one (1) or more columns, upright poles or braces extended from the ground or from an object on the ground or that is erected on the ground, where no part of the sign is attached to any part of a building, structure, or other sign; the term includes pole signs, pedestal signs and ground signs. 
6.  Identification sign means a name plate that establishes the identity of an occupant by listing name and business or professional title; a sign that establishes the identity of a building or a building complex by name or symbol only; a sign that indicates street address or combines name plate and street address; a sign that identifies an area in the city that, by reason of development, natural features, historical occurrences, or common reference, has or will become a landmark in the city; and a commemorative sign, such as a cornerstone, memorial, or plaque cut into a masonry surface or constructed of bronze or other incombustible material and made an integral part of the structure. 
7.  Joint identification sign means a sign that serves as a common or collective identification for two (2) or more businesses or industrial uses on the same lot and that may contain a directory to the uses as an integral part thereof or may serve as a general identification only for such developments as shopping centers, industrial parks and similar uses. 
8.  Off-premises advertising sign means any off-premises sign, including, without limitation, a billboard or general outdoor advertising device, that advertises or directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or activity conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than on the same lot or within the same building upon which such sign is located. 
9.  Real estate sign means a sign indicating the availability for sale, rent or lease of the specific lot, building or portion of a building upon which the sign is erected or displayed. 
10.  Temporary sign means a sign, banner or similar device or display that is intended for a temporary period of display for the purpose of announcing a special event or advertising or directing persons to a subdivision or other land or building development. 
11.  Time-temperature-date sign means a sign that displays the current time, outdoor temperature, date of the month or any combination of that information. 
12.  Wind sign means a sign consisting of one (1) or more banners, flags, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, captive balloons, or other objects or material; fastened in such manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind. 
13.  Window sign means a sign that is painted on, applied or attached to, or located within three (3) feet of the interior of a window and that can be seen through the window from the exterior of the structure, but excludes merchandise included in a window display. 
    Sign face means the surface of a sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated. 
    Sign, illegal nonconforming means a sign that was in violation of any of the laws of the city governing the erection or construction of such sign at the time of its erection and that has never been erected or displayed in conformity with all such laws (including those in this chapter), including, without limitation, signs that are pasted, nailed, or painted, or otherwise unlawfully displayed upon structures, utility poles, trees and fences. 
    Sign, legal nonconforming means any sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the enactment of any laws of the city governing the erection or construction of such sign at the time of its erection and that does not conform to all the applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter and any sign located in an area annexed to the city since the enactment of this chapter, that was legal at the time of its construction but does not conform to all the applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter. 
    Sign, sidewalk means a sign with two (2) faces that are adjoined at the top and displayed at an angle, which is not permanently anchored or secured, or similar design. 
    Sign structure means any supports, uprights, braces or framework of a sign. 
    Special review uses means uses permitted within a district only with the prior approval of the planning commission or planning director, where permitted, in accordance with the procedures stated in Section 26-15 of this chapter. 
    Special use means a use permitted within a district other than an unconditionally permitted use, requiring approval of the planning director, unless the application for special use approval is referred or appealed to the planning commission. 
    Stand means that part of an individual mobile home lot or campsite used for the placement of the mobile home or camping vehicle. 
    Start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (other than a mobile home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; but does include excavation for a basement, footing, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; as well as the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure (other than a mobile home) without a basement or poured footings, the "start of construction" includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For mobile homes not within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, "start of construction" means the affixing of the mobile home to its permanent site. For mobile homes within mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions, "start of construction" is the date on which the construction of facilities for servicing the site on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is completed. 
    Street means a public right-of-way either dedicated or established by usage, other than an alley, which provides primary access to adjacent property. 
    Street, arterial means those public streets which serve to move medium to high traffic volume through and between major residential, commercial or industrial areas within the city. 
    Street, collector means those public streets with low to medium traffic volume, whose purpose is to channel traffic from residential, industrial or commercial areas to arterial streets. 
    Street, local means one with low volume, low speed traffic which is intended to provide access to adjacent residential or commercial lots. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground and/or above or below grade, including telecommunication facilities, but does not include other poles, lines, cables or other transmission or distribution facilities or public utilities. For the purposes of floodplains, "structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a mobile home. 
    Subdivision means the division of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, for residential, industrial, commercial or other use. Subdivision shall also include, when appropriate to the context, the process of creating a single lot from previously unsubdivided real property or from previously subdivided lots, outlots, tracts or parcels. Subdivision does not include the division of property for the purpose of dedication or conveyance of public rights-of-way, or conveyance to the city for municipal uses. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Telecommunication facility means one (1) or more of the facilities defined as such in section 26-22.5-2 of this chapter. 
    Tract means a piece or plot of land or assemblage of contiguous pieces or plots of land as established by survey, plat or deed. 
    Transferred development rights planned unit development (TDR/PUD) shall have the same meaning as that term is used in Article 6 of the Boulder County Land Use Code. 
    Travel trailer means a portable structure, mounted on wheels and designed to be towed by a motor vehicle, and containing cooking and/or sleeping facilities to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use. Such structures may be constructed with rigid sides, or may have collapsible side walls of fabric, plastic or other pliable material. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
    Water connection (mobile home, camper park and mobile home subdivision) means the connection of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances connecting the water inlet pipe of the mobile home or camping vehicle with the water riser pipe of the water supply. 
    Water riser pipe (mobile home, camper park and mobile home subdivision) means the portion of the water supply system which extends vertically to the ground surface and terminates at a mobile home or camping vehicle stand. 
    Yard means an open area other than a court, not in any alley or street, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    Yard, front means a yard extending the full width of the lot or tract, the depth of which is measured in the least horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest wall of the principal building; such distance being referred to as the front yard setback. 
    Yard, rear means a yard extending the full width of the lot or tract, the depth of which is measured in the least horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest wall of the principal building; such depth being referred to as the rear yard setback. 
    Yard, side means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is measured in the least horizontal distance between the side lot line or the side street lot line and the nearest wall of the principal building, such width being referred to as the side yard setback or the side street yard setback, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1987-02, § 1, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 1990-4, § 1, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 1993-6, § 6, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1995-21, § 1, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 1996-11, §§ 1-3, 4-16-96; Ord. No. 1998-25, §§ 2-5, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 1998-26, §§ 2-4, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 1998-28, §§ 1-3, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 1998-29, §§ 4-16, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 1999-10, § 2, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 11-7-00; Ord. No. 2000-25, § 2, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2000-29, § 1, 10-3-00; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 4, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2002-31, § 3, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 1, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2005-38, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 2, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2006-24, § 5, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2009-09, §§ 1, 2, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2011-05, § 3, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 2011-15, § 1, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2011-27, § 1, 8-2-11; Ord. No. 2011-33, §§ 12-14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2012-11, § 1, 5-15-12; Ord. No. 2012-36, §§ 1-3, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 5-7-13; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 3, 9-5-17; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Cross reference- Meaning of terms pertaining to Section 26-23, see § 26-23-22; additional definitions of words applicable to Section 26-23, see § 26-23-24. 
SECTION 26-9. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 26-9-1. - Residential districts, description. 
(a)  Single-family residential districts: 
(1)  Rural estate residential (RE1). 
(2)  Rural residential (RE2). 
(3)  Low density residential (R0). 
(4)  Medium density residential (R1). 
(b)  Multiple-family residential districts: 
(1)  Single- and two-family residential (R2). 
(2)  Old Town Residential (OTR). 
(3)  Multifamily residential (R3). 
(4)  High density residential (R4). 
(5)  Senior and special residential (RSR). Districts designated RSR are areas of the city where senior housing, assisted-care, and similar special projects may develop. Special use approval under section 26-15 of this chapter is required for all projects in RSR districts. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1990-4, § 3, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 1993-6, § 7, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1994-1, § 2, 4-5-94; Ord. No. 1998-26, § 5, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2002-31, § 4, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 26-9-2. - Schedule of uses. 
    See Table 26-A. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-9-3. - Schedule of requirements. 
    See Table 26-B. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
SECTION 26-10. - COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 26-10-1. - Commercial and business districts, description. 
(a)  Transitional business district (T1). It is the intent of the transitional business district to permit uses that are compatible with the character of the adjacent residential neighborhood. 
(b)  Community business district (B1). It is the intent of the community business district to provide areas for retail stores and convenience services. The character of these uses requires convenient vehicular access from major streets. 
(c)  Regional business district (C1). It is the intent of the regional business district to provide for the main retail business activity, usually combining comparison shopping (department, clothing, jewelry, restaurants, sporting goods, etc.) and convenience shopping (supermarkets, personal service shops, liquor stores, etc.) opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-26, § 6, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-10-2. - Schedule of uses. 
    See Table 26-A. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-10-3. - Schedule of requirements. 
    See Table 26-B. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-10-4. - General requirements for all commercial and business districts. 
(a)  All service, fabrication and repair operations shall be conducted within a building. 
(b)  Except for uses specifically stated in sections 26-14-15 and 26-14-15.1, all permitted uses shall be conducted within a building. 
(c)  No smoke shall be emitted at a density that exceeds zero point five (0.5) on the Ringelmann Chart. No particulate matter shall be emitted which exceeds zero point two (0.2) grains per cubic foot of flue gas at stack temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit. No emission of smoke or particulate shall result in a concentration at or beyond the property lines containing such use that is detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the public, as defined by the state health department. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-24, § 1, 8-18-98) 
SECTION 26-11. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 26-11-1. - Industrial district, description. 
    The industrial district (M1) is intended to provide for the location of sexually oriented businesses and the development of industrial areas, including commercial and industrial uses that are nonpolluting and are compatible with the environmental character of the community, provide essential areas for industrial development, the location of sexually oriented businesses and provide employment opportunities for the community. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-26, § 7, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 1999-10, § 3, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-11-2. - Schedule of uses. 
    See Table 26-A. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-11-3. - Schedule of requirements. 
    See Table 26-B. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-11-4. - General requirements for industrial district. 
    The following standards and requirements shall apply to all uses in the M1 district: 
(a)  Except for uses specifically stated in sections 26-14-15 and 26-14-15.1, all permitted uses shall be conducted within a building. 
(b)  All service, fabrication, repair operations, and storage of materials shall be enclosed and screened by an opaque fence at least six (6) feet in height. 
(c)  All loading and unloading of materials shall be conducted on private property. 
(d)  The following performance standards shall be met: 
(1)  Smoke. No smoke shall be emitted at a density that exceeds #1 on the Ringelmann Chart. 
(2)  Particulate matter. No particulate matter shall be emitted which exceeds zero point two (0.2) grains per cubic foot of flue gas at stack temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(3)  Dust, odors, gas, fumes, noise, glare or vibrations. No emission of these matters shall result in a concentration at or beyond the property lines containing such use that is detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the public, as defined by the state health department. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-26, § 8, 8-18-98) 
SECTION 26-11.5. - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 26-11.5-1. - Agricultural district, description. 
    The intent of the agricultural district (AG) is to recognize lands which are primarily rural in character, and where the agricultural uses predominately occur outside including, but not limited to, the grazing, keeping, and use of livestock, the production, harvesting and selling of agricultural or horticultural products, and accessory storage. Accessory structures such as hoop houses or high tunnels to extend the growing season, or for storage or maintenance of items that support agricultural use are allowed as part of this use. Accessory structures must meet the requirements of Chapter 26, "Building structure, accessory" in this zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2014-22, § 2, 1-6-15) 
Sec. 26-11.5-2. - Schedule of uses. 
    See Table 26-A. 
(Ord. No. 2014-22, § 2, 1-6-15) 
Sec. 26-11.5-3. - Schedule of requirements. 
    See Table 26-B. 
(Ord. No. 2014-22, § 2, 1-6-15) 
Sec. 26-11.5-4. - Accessory uses. 
    Special events such as, but not limited to, selling of agricultural products as part of an upcoming holiday, farm-to-table dinners, demonstration/educational projects, farm stands, etc., shall require approval of a permanent or temporary outdoor sales permit per section 26-14-15 and/or 26-14-15.1 as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-22, § 2, 1-6-15) 
SECTION 26-12. - DEVELOPING RESOURCE DISTRICT 

Sec. 26-12-1. - Developing resource district, description. 
    The intent of the developing resource district (DR) is to provide for the annexation of those areas that are presently used for agriculture or other nonurban uses that are adjacent to the city limits of Lafayette. These areas are designated in the comprehensive plan as potentially suitable for urban development, but not in the immediate future because of lack of utilities, other services, or other needs. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-26, § 10, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-12-2. - Schedule of uses. 
    See Table 26-A. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-12-3. - Schedule of requirements. 
    See Table 26-B. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-12-4. - Rezoning required. 
    No uses other than those existing at the time of annexation, or permitted by section 26-12-2 shall be permitted on property zoned DR unless the property is rezoned to a zoning district that permits the proposed use. Such rezoning shall be in accordance with Section 26-30. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-12-5. - Park dedication requirements and water rights. 
    Property not receiving municipal water and/or sewer service that is annexed and zoned DR (developing resource) shall not be subject to requirements for park dedication or cash payment in lieu of dedicating park land or for water rights fees or requirements or any other fees except for the annexation costs and fees, unless municipal utilities are to be extended to the property, until such time that the property is zoned for development. The requirements for park dedication and water rights or other fees and requirements shall be met before rezoning from DR is completed. There shall be a signed agreement at the time of annexation to comply with all city requirements for dedication. Any fee changes or dedication requirements imposed generally after annexation of the lot or tract shall be applied to the lot or tract zoned DR at the time of rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-26, § 11, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-12-6. - Deferral of park dedication requirements and water rights. 
    The payment of any fees and costs contained within section 26-12-5 may be deferred pursuant to Article XIV of Chapter 30 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1990-17, § 19, 8-21-90) 
Editor's note- Designated as § 26-12-5.1 by Ord. No. 1990-17, § 19, adopted August 21, 1990, provisions pertaining to deferral of park dedication requirements and water rights have been redesignated as § 26-12-6. 
SECTION 26-13. - PUBLIC DISTRICT 

Sec. 26-13-1. - Public district, description. 
    The intent of the public district is to recognize all publicly owned lands (federal, state or local governmental agencies). 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-13-2. - Schedule of uses. 
    See Table 26-A. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-13-3. - Schedule of requirements. 
    See Table 26-B. Lot area and setback requirements shall be the same as for the most restrictive district adjacent to each side of the property. If a public use is adjacent to a public zone on one (1) side, the setbacks for the community services business district shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-13-4. - Transfer of ownership. 
(a)  Whenever property zoned public is transferred to private ownership such transfer shall require the rezoning of the property. 
(b)  Whenever any privately owned land is acquired by a governmental body for public use, the land so acquired may be considered for rezoning in accordance with the applicable provisions of Sections 26-16 and 26-17 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 5, 3-20-01) 
SECTION 26-14. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 26-14-1. - Land and building use regulations. 
    In addition to regulations contained elsewhere in this chapter, the use of the land and buildings shall be governed by the following provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-14-2. - Utilities. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent construction or installation of a public utility use or structure necessary for the transmission of commodities or services of a utility company, including mains, or distribution lines, substations or exchanges in any zone district. Storage, maintenance facilities and business offices shall be restricted to an appropriate zone district. Location of power transmission lines with a capacity of 100KV or over shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-14-3. - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses are permitted in any zone district, provided such use complies with the use limitations contained within this chapter. An accessory use shall be permitted only in conjunction with an existing principle use. A permitted accessory use shall not dominate the lawful principal use in area, extent or purpose, or otherwise substantially alter the character of the principle use. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1987-02, § 2, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 1993-44, § 1, 10-19-93; Ord. No. 1998-25, § 6, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-14-4. - Frontage. 
    Each lot or tract in separate ownership shall have at least twenty-five (25) lineal feet of frontage on a public street unless otherwise provided for under planned unit development provisions. Every principal, as opposed to accessory, building devoted wholly or in part to residential use shall front a public street unless otherwise provided pursuant to planned unit development provisions. Every accessory building devoted wholly or in part to residential use shall be constructed in accordance with section 26-14-19 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 17, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2002-31, § 5, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 26-14-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 2001-42, adopted Nov. 20, 2001, repealed § 26-14-5, which pertained to nonconforming lot of record, and derived from Ord. No. 1986-01, adopted Feb. 4, 1986; Ord. No. 1987-04, adopted March 17, 1987; and Ord. No. 1993-6, adopted March 2, 1993. 
Sec. 26-14-6. - Yard requirements. 
(a)  On "double frontage lots" (lots extending from one street to another paralleling street), both streets shall be considered street frontages for purposes of calculating front yard setbacks. 
(b)  On corner lots, the owner shall determine which yard shall be the rear yard if the definition of a rear yard defines more than one (1) rear yard. 
(c)  On lots bordered on two (2) contiguous sides by streets, the required front yard setback shall be observed along both streets except that, in the Old Town Residential zone district, the lot line that fronts on an east/west street shall be considered the front lot line and the lot line that fronts on a north/south street shall be considered the side street lot line for purposes of determining setbacks and height of buildings. 
(d)  Where a lot in a commercial or industrial zone district shares a common side or rear lot line with a lot in a residential district, the required side or rear yard setback of the residential district shall be observed along the common lot line in the commercial or industrial district. 
(e)  Where the side yard of a lot in a commercial or industrial district is an extension of the front yard of a lot in an adjacent residential district, a side yard setback equal to one-half the required front yard setback of the residential district shall be observed by the lot. 
(f)  For purposes of setback calculations, a two-family dwelling shall be construed as one (1) building occupying one (1) lot. 
(g)  On a vacant lot bordered on two (2) sides by previously constructed legal nonconforming buildings which do not meet the required front yard setback for the district, the required front yard setback for the vacant lot shall be established as the average front yard setback of the two (2) adjacent buildings. Where a vacant lot is bordered on only one (1) side by a previously constructed legal nonconforming building which does not meet the required front yard setback for the district, the required front yard setback for the vacant lot shall be established as the average front yard setback of the adjacent building and the minimum front yard setback for the district. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (i) of this section, every part of a required yard shall be unobstructed by buildings from ground level upward except for projections of architectural features as follows: 
(1)  Cornices, sills and ornamental features, not to exceed twelve (12) inches; 
(2)  Roof eaves, not to exceed eighteen (18) inches; 
(3)  Uncovered porches, slabs and patios; walks and steps; all when less than thirty-six (36) inches above the ground; 
(4)  Fire escapes and individual balconies not used as passageways may project eighteen (18) inches into any required side yard, or four (4) feet into any required front or rear yard; 
(5)  Solar collection devices and equipment, not to exceed eighteen (18) inches or ten (10) percent of the required setback, whichever is greater. 
(i)  In the Old Town Residential zone district, an unenclosed covered porch that is attached to a principal dwelling unit, which dwelling unit was in existence as of the effective date of this section, November 15, 2002, may encroach into the front or side street yard setback area up to a distance of six (6) feet from such dwelling unit, but in no case shall any portion of such encroachment be closer than three (3) feet from the front or side street lot line, as the case may be. For the purposes of this subsection, an unenclosed covered porch shall mean that the front and sides of the porch are unobstructed by walls, screening, glass or any other material except support columns, in all areas of such front and sides that are more than three (3) feet above the floor of the porch. 
(j)  In the Old Town Residential zone district, an addition to a previously constructed legal nonconforming principal dwelling unit may encroach into the front, side street or rear yard setback area in an amount that is equal to but not greater than the legal nonconforming encroachment of such dwelling unit into the front, side street or rear lot line setback area, respectively, but in no case may the addition be closer than three (3) feet from the front, side or rear lot line, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1991-31, §§ 1, 2, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 1998-25, § 7, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2002-31, § 6, 11-5-02) 
Sec. 26-14-7. - Fences, hedges and walls. 
    All fences, hedges and walls may be permitted in the required yards of any district subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  All fences and walls over three (3) feet in height shall not be constructed without first obtaining a building permit. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to locate all property lines. No fence, hedge or wall may extend beyond or across a property line except with the joint written agreement of the abutting property owner. 
(3)  No fence, hedge or wall shall be placed nearer than twelve (12) inches to any public sidewalk. 
(4)  No barbed wire, sharp-pointed, or electrically charged fence shall be permitted except in the M1, DR and P zoned areas. Such fences located in a DR zone must be placed fifteen (15) feet from all property lines. 
(5)  Fences, or walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. The height shall be measured at the finished grade on the side nearest the street or abutting property. 
(6)  No fence, hedge or wall over thirty-six (36) inches in height shall be placed within the sight vision clearance area as defined by section 26-14-16. 
(7)  Fences may be located in easements, provided the property owner has notified the owner of the easement of the proposed construction prior to beginning construction of the fence and has received written permission of the city. 
(8)  Fence construction standards: 
a.  Posts for fences greater than three (3) feet in height shall be set in concrete to a depth of eighteen (18) inches, except for temporary fences not to stand for more than twelve (12) months. 
b.  Posts must be placed such that no more than forty-eight (48) square feet of fence material exists between upright posts. At least two (2) horizontal supporting members must be placed between upright posts. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1991-31, § 3, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 1998-26, § 12, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-14-8. - Height provisions. 
(a)  Maximum permitted height. The maximum permitted height of buildings or other structures in each zone district shall be as shown in Table 26-B of this chapter. 
(b)  Height determination . The height of buildings or other structures shall not exceed the maximum permitted height shown in Table 26-B as measured from any point at the top of a flat or mansard roof or from the midpoint between the highest eave line and highest ridge line of a gable, gambrel, hip, shed or similar pitched roof to the over-lot grade elevation, which shall be based on an approved grading plan, directly below such point. It is the intent of this regulation that a building plane be established that runs parallel to the over-lot grading elevation of the lot and no higher than the maximum permitted height shown in Table 26-B. Such plane shall act as a ceiling beyond which a flat or mansard roof does not protrude and beyond which the midpoint between the eave line and ridge line of a gable, gambrel, hip, shed or similar pitched roof does not protrude. 
(c)  Maximum height for appurtenances. Except as may be permitted by sections 26-14-21 and 26-22.5-7 of this chapter, the maximum permitted height of stacks, vents, antennae, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, solar panels, tanks, monuments, cupolas, domes, towers, spires and similar mechanical and nonhabitable structural appurtenances shall be no more than ten (10) feet above the highest point of the principal building on the property in question or ten (10) feet above the maximum permitted height in the zone district, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2000-26, § 1, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 3, 3-3-09) 
Sec. 26-14-9. - Home occupations. 
    A home occupation may be placed in a zone when the following standards can be met and maintained: 
(1)  No persons other than family members residing in the dwelling or Mobile home are to be engaged in the business. 
(2)  No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling or mobile home is used for the business. 
(3)  An accessory building may be used provided the floor area requirements of subsection (b) above are not exceeded and the accessory building can be converted to a common accessory building on termination of the home occupation. 
(4)  A minimum of one (1) or more additional parking spaces may be required by the planning director. 
(5)  The use must maintain a nonbusiness, noncommercial appearance at all times. 
(6)  One (1) sign not to exceed one and one-half (11/2) square feet. 
(7)  The home occupation is not a nuisance to surrounding properties due to noise, odor or increased traffic. If a home occupation is lawfully established and a nuisance or abuse of an approved plan is determined to exist after the establishment of the use, the planning director shall give the owners one hundred twenty (120) days in which to correct the nuisance, relocate the use, or terminate use of the property for the home occupation. 
(8)  The following uses shall not be considered home occupations: Automotive repair shops, construction equipment storage yards, welding shops, and other similar uses that generate undue noise, on-site storage, or require storage of toxic or flammable materials. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-14-10. - Swimming pools. 
    All residential and commercial pools shall have a six-foot high fence around them of either chain link or solid wood construction. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-14-11. - Restrictions applicable to registered sex offenders. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 26-14-11(b), it is unlawful for any sex offender to reside in a dwelling unit or a halfway house with any other sex offender unless such individuals are related as parent and child, as siblings, or by marriage. 
(b)  A dwelling unit or halfway house may be used as a residence for not more than three (3) sex offenders between the ages of ten (10) and eighteen (18) years, if such dwelling unit or halfway house is supervised by at least one (1) individual who: 
(1)  Holds all requisite licenses and permits pursuant to Article 6 of Title 26 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, to operate a foster care home; and 
(2)  Holds a Master of Social Work degree or a Master's degree in behavioral science with an emphasis in child development and/or family relations and a minimum of two (2) years paid full time or equivalent part-time experience in social work. 
(c)  If, on November 15, 2000, any dwelling unit or halfway house within the city limits is in use in such a manner as to cause a violation of subsection (a) of this section 26-14-11, such use must be discontinued within twelve (12) months of said date. 
(Ord. No. 2000-24, § 2, 11-7-00) 
Sec. 26-14-12. - Halfway houses. 
    No halfway house shall be located within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of another halfway house, school or daycare center. 
(Ord. No. 2000-24, § 3, 11-7-00) 
Sec. 26-14-13. - Temporary real estate office, construction office or storage building. 
    Such uses may be permitted within any zoned district subject to the approval of the planning director for a period of up to twelve (12) months. The director may extend such use for additional time as necessary to accommodate up to ninety-five (95) percent build out of a residential project or twelve (12) months for other projects. The uses shall be located in accordance with all principal building setbacks for the zone in which they are located. Signage shall conform to the provisions of Section 26-21 of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1991-31, § 4, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-14-14. - Recreational vehicles and trailers. 
    Recreational vehicles, as hereinafter defined, or trailers, as hereinafter defined, which are stored on private property, shall be stored behind the front yard setback or on a paved or graveled area within the front yard area, however, a recreational vehicle or trailer shall not be stored within a sight-restriction area for visibility purposes. No recreational vehicle or trailer shall be stored on private property in such a manner that it projects over a public right-of-way or is located within eighteen (18) inches of a public sidewalk. No more than one (1) recreational vehicle and one (1) trailer may be stored within the front yard area. For the purposes of this section "recreational vehicles" are defined to include motor homes, boats, travel trailers, campers, camper trailers, and similar recreational equipment, and "trailers" are defined to include any wheeled vehicle without motive power, which is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to carry its cargo load wholly upon its own structure and which is commonly used to carry and transport property over the public highways. 
(Ord. No. 1986-15, § 1, 5-6-86; Ord. No. 2012-20, § 1, 8-21-12; Ord. No. 2016-21, § 1, 6-20-16) 
Sec. 26-14-15. - Permanent outdoor sales, storage or display of merchandise. 
    Unless otherwise approved as part of a planned unit development, the sale, storage or display of general merchandise inclusive of salvage material, automobiles not for sale, lumber, plumbing, other construction equipment, and similar material is allowed provided such sale, storage or display complies with the conditions listed below: 
(1)  Except as authorized by section 26-14-15.1, it shall be unlawful to sell, store or display merchandise outdoors without first obtaining a site plan approval therefor, in compliance with the provisions of this section 26-14-15 and any other applicable requirements. 
(2)  Except for the lawful principal use of property as an enclosed, fenced storage yard as shown by Table 26-B, such sale, storage or display is part of or related to the business located permanently within the principal building on the property where the sale, storage or display is occurring. 
(Ord. No. 1988-18, § 1, 9-20-88; Ord. No. 1989-35, § 1, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 1991-01, § 1, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 1998-24, § 2, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-14-15.1. - Temporary outdoor sales, storage or display of merchandise. 
(a)  The occupant of a building may engage in the temporary outdoor sale, storage or display of general merchandise on the lot or tract occupied by such building provided the occupant complies with the conditions listed below: 
(1)  Unless otherwise approved as part of a planned unit development, it shall be unlawful temporarily to sell, store or display merchandise outdoors without first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this section 26-14-15.1. 
(2)  Each applicant must possess a current city sales tax license. 
(3)  An applicant who qualifies as a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor, as those terms are defined in chapter 55 hereof, must possess a current license in compliance with Section 55-31 
(4)  Any signage proposed to be displayed by the applicant must comply with the permit requirements of section 26-21-3. 
(5)  An application for a permit will be filed with the planning department. The following shall be included in such application: 
a.  A sketch of the area to be occupied in sufficient detail to indicate the following: proposed access; parking; location of any vending cart, truck, other temporary structure or proposed display area; location of any proposed display area; location of any proposed utility or sanitation connection; location of any flammables or other hazardous materials; location of any proposed sign; and location of all existing and proposed structures. 
b.  The applicant must demonstrate adequate facilities to dispose of all trash or other waste generated by the temporary outdoor sale, storage or display. 
c.  The applicant shall document ownership of, a leasehold interest in, or the consent of the owner or lessee of the property to be occupied. 
d.  Each application shall be submitted with the fee established for that application pursuant to section 26-17-3(f). 
(6)  In each calendar year, the aggregate total number of days for which a temporary outdoor sales, storage or display permit is granted shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days per lot or tract. 
(7)  The applicant must demonstrate there will be adequate parking for the existing uses as well as the proposed temporary outdoor sales, storage or display. 
(8)  All trucks, tents or other structures, including associated parking, must be located on asphaltic, concrete or equivalent surface unless the applicant can demonstrate no adverse effect on drainage, access, or the intent of this chapter as determined by the planning director. 
(9)  The outdoor location must not interfere with public passage or the otherwise normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(10)  The planning director may require an applicant to obtain written approval from the appropriate city official, including, but without limitation, the building inspector or fire marshal, whenever, in the opinion of the planning director, the proposed outdoor location presents potential risks to persons or property sufficient to warrant such additional review. 
(11)  The outdoor location may be on an adjacent public sidewalk, provided that the applicant executes a license and indemnity agreement in form required by the city. 
(b)  A person other than the occupant of a building may engage in the temporary outdoor sale, storage or display of general merchandise on the lot or tract occupied by a building, provided, however, that prior to engaging in the temporary outdoor sale, storage or display, the applicant provides a plan for storage of any vending cart or motorized vehicle for hours of nonoperation, in addition to complying with the conditions listed above in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  If after reviewing the application for a permit and the accompanying information, the planning director or designee finds it to be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, a temporary outdoor sales, storage or display permit shall be issued to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1998-24, § 3, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2011-33, §§ 13, 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, §§ 2, 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-14-16. - Sight vision clearance area. 
    No structure or plant material over thirty-six (36) inches in height, except for single trunk trees that are trimmed from the ground to a line at least seven (7) feet above the level of the intersection, shall be placed or maintained within the sight triangle areas defined below: 
Street Designation D distance L distance R distance Local 17' 200' 122' Collector 19' 313' 167' Arterial 19' 401' 181' State Highway 19' 591' 211'  
    See Figure 14-16 for location of D, L and R distances. All distances are measured from a point where the two (2) curb lines, if extended, or the edge of the roadway if no street curb exists, would intersect. 

Figure 14-16 
(Ord. No. 1991-31, § 5, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 18, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 2, 8-2-05) 
Sec. 26-14-17. - Principal buildings. 
    Only one (1) principal building shall be permitted on any one (1) lot unless otherwise approved as part of a planned unit development. 
(Ord. No. 1998-25, § 9, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2011-15, § 2, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 26-14-18. - Principal uses. 
    The principal use of a principal building, lot or tract is the primary function for which the same is used. 
(Ord. No. 1998-25, § 10, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-14-19. - Accessory buildings, structures and dwelling units. 
(a)  Accessory buildings and structures are permitted in any zone district, subject to all limitations contained in this chapter including, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Construction of an accessory building or structure must occur concurrently with or subsequent to construction of a principal building. 
(2)  The maximum floor area of an accessory building located in a residential zone shall not exceed the lesser of ten (10) percent of the lot area or seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. In a residential zone, accessory buildings larger than those permitted by this subsection (2) may be allowed through a special use review as defined in Section 26-15. In a nonresidential zone, the maximum floor area shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the lot area. 
(3)  An accessory structure is any device with a surface area of four (4) square feet or larger, including a microwave dish, antenna or other similar device, and is subject to all regulations applicable to accessory buildings and structures including height requirements. Amateur radio antennas and towers shall be subject to the requirements of section 26-14-21 of this chapter. 
(4)  All accessory buildings and structures shall maintain side yard or side street yard setbacks equal to the side yard or side street yard setbacks required for the principal building located on the lot and a front yard setback equal to the front yard setback for the principal building plus an additional ten (10) feet. Any accessory building or structure located in a side yard must be screened so as not to be visible from any public street. Notwithstanding the foregoing, flagpoles may be located one (1) foot behind the rear edge of any sidewalk or property line, whichever location is further from the property line. 
(b)  Accessory dwelling units are permitted in the Old Town Residential zone district, subject to all limitations contained in this chapter including, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  The floor area of an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
(2)  Not more than one (1) accessory dwelling unit may be constructed on any single lot or parcel of land. 
(3)  An accessory dwelling unit may be contained within the same accessory structure or building that is provided for a separate accessory use, provided, however, that the building footprint of such combined accessory structure shall not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. When an accessory dwelling unit is contained within the same accessory structure or building that is provided for a separate accessory use, the building height limitation applicable to accessory dwelling units shall apply to the structure. 
(4)  In the Old Town Residential zone district, an accessory dwelling unit shall maintain a setback from the front lot line in an amount that is equal to the required front yard setback for a principal structure plus an additional ten (10) feet. 
(5)  An accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed not less than six (6) feet from the principal dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 1998-25, § 11, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2002-31, § 7, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 1, 4-15-03; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 4, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2017-49, § 1, 11-6-17) 
Sec. 26-14-20. - Vacation of roadways and easements. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this Article 14, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  Access easement includes any land or interest therein or designated public improvement dedicated to the city for the purposes of vehicular or pedestrian access or travel, whether or not it has been used as such. 
(2)  Easement includes any land or interest therein or designated public easement dedicated to the city, whether or not it has been used. 
(3)  Roadway includes any platted or designated public street, alley, lane, parkway, avenue, road or other public way or right of way, whether or not it has been used as such. 
(4)  Vacation means the extinguishment by ordinance of all right, title or interest of the city in and to any roadway or easement. 
(b)  Vacation by ordinance. All right, title or interest of the city in and to any roadway or easement shall be divested only upon adoption by the city council of an ordinance vacating any roadway or easement or portion thereof located within the corporate limits of the city. If a roadway constitutes a boundary line of the city, it may be vacated only by joint action of the board of county commissioners of the county and the city council, or by joint action of the city council and the governing body of any adjacent municipality. 
(c)  Findings. Any ordinance effecting a vacation under this article shall contain the following findings, if applicable: 
(1)  That no land adjoining any roadway to be vacated is left without an established public road connecting said land with another established public road. 
(2)  That the land to be vacated is no longer necessary for the public use and convenience. 
(d)  Vacation procedures. Before final action by the city council may be taken on such ordinance, the following procedures shall have occurred: 
(1)  Submission of a complete application for vacation by the city's director of planning or by the record owners of more than fifty (50) percent of property abutting the roadway or easement to be vacated, including payment of the filing fee in an amount set by resolution of city council. Said application shall include the following information: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant(s). 
b.  Accurate legal description of the roadway or easement to be vacated. 
c.  A map showing the roadway or easement to be vacated and abutting properties. The planning director may require the applicant to furnish a survey of the roadway or easement to be vacated. 
d.  Names and addresses of all record owners of property abutting that portion of the roadway or easement to be vacated. 
e.  Reasons for the requested vacation. 
f.  Certification by the applicant that the statements referred to in subsection (b) above are true. 
g.  Signature of the applicant. 
(2)  Review of the proposal by the city staff and preparation of a staff report, and in the case of the proposed vacation of an easement which is not being referred to the planning commission, preparation of a proposed vacation ordinance. 
(3)  Vacations of roadways and access easements shall be referred to the planning commission for a public hearing and recommendation to the city council. The planning director may refer the vacation of an easement which is not an access easement to the planning commission for a public hearing and recommendation to the city council, if the director determines that such a referral would assist the city council in determining whether or not to grant the vacation request. 
(4)  The public hearing before the planning commission shall be noticed in accordance with the provisions of section 26-16-9(b) and (c) of this chapter. Notice as provided by section 26-16-9(a) shall not be required; however, ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing notice shall be sent by first class mail to all real property owners owning property abutting the roadway or easement to be vacated. This notice shall be in accordance with section 26-16-9(d) of this chapter. 
(5)  The city council shall consider the proposed vacation of roadway and access easements at a public hearing noticed in accordance with the provisions of section 26-16-9(b), (c) and (d) of this chapter. A public hearing is not required for the vacation of a utility easement. Additionally, ten (10) days prior to the date of a public hearing for the vacation of roadways and access easements notice shall be sent by first class mail to all real property owners owning property abutting the roadway or easement to be vacated. This notice shall be in accordance with section 26-16-9(d) of this chapter. The planning director may notice and schedule a public hearing before city council on the request for vacation of an easement which is not an access easement, if the director determines that such a hearing would assist the city council in determining whether or not to grant the vacation request. 
(e)  Vacation of portion of request. The city shall have the right, in its discretion, to refuse any vacation request, or to vacate only a portion of the total area requested for vacation. 
(f)  Reservation of rights-of-way or easements. In the event of a vacation in accordance with this article, rights-of-way or easements may be reserved for the continued use of existing or future sewer, gas, water or similar pipelines and appurtenances, for overland drainage, drainage facilities or canals and appurtenances, and for electric, cable television, telephone and similar lines and appurtenances, or any other public purpose. 
(g)  Conditions on vacation. The planning commission may recommend, and the city council in the ordinance effecting a vacation may impose, reasonable conditions on said vacation, to preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and the public generally. Such reasonable conditions may include the payment of money to the city as consideration for a vacation, when the vesting of title upon vacation may confer a benefit upon the new owner of the vacated roadway or easement, or where the city has purchased or will purchase a roadway or easement to replace that being vacated. 
(h)  Recordation of vacation. In the event of a vacation in accordance with this article, the vacation documents, including but not necessarily limited to any resolution, ordinance, deed, conveyance document, plat or survey, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk and recorder of the county in which the roadway or easement is located. 
(i)  Preservation of access. No roadway or easement or part thereof shall be vacated so as to leave any land adjoining said roadway or easement without an established public road connecting said land with another established public road. 
(j)  Vesting of title upon vacation. Any ordinance effecting a vacation of a roadway under this article shall vest title to the vacated land in accordance with Colorado law. 
(k)  Adjacent platted lands. Where title to a vacated roadway vests with the owner of adjacent platted land, said owner shall, within ninety (90) days of the adoption of the ordinance effecting such vacation, take all necessary steps to include said vacated roadway within the plat of the adjacent land. 
(Ord. No. 1999-17, § 1, 5-18-99; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 10, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 3, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2006-22, §§ 3, 4, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2014-14, § 1, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-14-21. - Amateur radio antennas and towers. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable accommodations for amateur radio operators and to provide practicable regulations regarding amateur radio towers in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of City of Lafayette. 
(b)  Zone districts allowed. The use of a property for an amateur radio operation shall be allowed in any zone district, but only as an accessory use, with any amateur radio tower being considered as an accessory structure. 
(c)  Permitted height of amateur radio towers. Notwithstanding the limitations on permitted heights for structures set forth in section 26-14-8 of this chapter, an amateur radio operator having the right of occupancy of any building shall be permitted to construct an amateur radio tower of a height not exceeding the following: 
(1)  Freestanding amateur radio towers, or amateur radio towers mounted as appurtenances to an accessory building, shall be limited in height to the allowable principal building height of the zoning district where such tower is to be located. 
(2)  Amateur radio towers mounted as appurtenances to a principal building shall be limited in height to ten (10) feet above the allowable principal building height of the zoning district where such tower is to be located. 
All other applicable building code provisions, including building permit and structural requirements, shall remain in full force and effect. At the time that an application for a building permit for an amateur radio tower is submitted, a copy of a valid F.C.C. license for the amateur radio operator shall be provided to the building official. 
(d)  Exceptions to permitted height. Amateur radio towers higher than permitted in this section may occur when approved in accordance with Section 26-15, Special Use Application Requirements and Procedures. Any applicant requesting an amateur radio tower height in excess of that permitted in this section shall include as part of their submittal sufficient data to justify the need for the additional height. Any approval for a tower height in excess of that permitted by this section shall be the minimum necessary to provide the amateur radio operator with the communications that he/she desires to engage in. 
(e)  Permitted locations of amateur radio towers. 
(1)  Amateur radio towers and any supporting apparatus shall be confined to the applicant's property. 
(2)  Amateur radio towers shall be located in the rear yard or a side yard. Such side yard shall not abut a public street. 
(3)  Freestanding amateur radio towers shall be set back from any side or rear yard property line a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. All antennas and guy-wires associated with freestanding amateur radio towers shall have a minimum side and rear yard setback of five (5) feet. 
(4)  Amateur radio towers attached as an appurtenance to a building shall comply with the setback requirements of the zoning district for the building. All antennas and guy-wires associated with the amateur radio tower shall have a minimum side and rear yard setback of five (5) feet. 
(f)  Removal of amateur radio tower. When an amateur radio operator no longer holds the requisite F.C.C. license, or is no longer in possession of the underlying property, and if no person being an amateur radio operator continues to occupy the property, then the amateur radio tower shall be removed in compliance with the building code within thirty (30) days, unless the city council grants an extension of time for good cause shown, not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
(g)  Violations. The city may bring an action before any court of competent jurisdiction to seek removal of an amateur radio tower that does not comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, § 6, 3-3-09) 
SECTION 26-15. - SPECIAL USE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 26-15-1. - Special use application requirements and procedures, intent. 
    Uses designated special use are conditioned uses which may or may not be appropriate in a particular location depending on the nature of the proposed use, its relationship to surrounding land use, its impact on traffic capacities, and potential environmental effects. It is the intent of this section and Section 26-22.1 to provide a review of such uses so that the community is assured that the uses are compatible with their locations and surrounding land uses. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1994-7, § 3, 6-21-94) 
Sec. 26-15-2. - When allowed. 
    Special uses may be permitted in designated districts as set forth in Table 26-A upon approval by the Planning director, or city council, as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2000-25, § 3, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1, 3-20-18; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-15-3. - Application requirements. 
    All special use applications shall be processed according to the procedure in this Section and Section 26-16. Applications will require the preparation and submittal of materials and information as specified in Section 26-17. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1, 3-20-18) 
Sec. 26-15-4. - Review criteria. 
(a)  Except for a special use application for oil and gas operations, criteria for review of a special use application shall include: 
(1)  Compliance of the application with the Municipal Code. 
(2)  The compatibility of the proposal with the character of the surrounding area. 
(3)  The potential for adverse environmental influences that might result from the proposed use. 
(4)  Compatibility of the proposed use and the site plan with the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Taking into consideration any proposed mitigation measures, special use shall not create significant adverse impacts on government services and existing developments in the surrounding neighborhood or on any anticipated future development permitted by this chapter. Significant impacts included but are not limited to: 
a.  Significant impact in traffic generation and parking; 
b.  Lack of screening of parking, loading, traffic circulation, or outdoor activities; garbage collection facilities and storage; 
c.  Significant intrusions of noise, light, dust, or glare onto nearby properties; 
d.  Significant increases in burdens on housing, schools, public utilities, or governmental services such as fire, ambulance, police, library and recreation; or 
e.  Hours of operation. 
(b)  In addition to the review criteria specified in subsection 26-15-4(a) above, the following criteria shall also apply to all drive-up restaurants, gas stations (fuel facilities), car washes and drive-up facilities. 
(1)  Drive-up restaurants, gas stations (fuel facilities), car washes, and drive-up facilities shall be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from the following, as measured from the nearest proposed building wall or other structure of the drive-up restaurant, gas station (fuel facility), car wash or drive-up facility: 
a.  Residentially zoned lot lines; 
b.  Tracts zoned DR that have a residential land use designation in the Comprehensive Plan; 
c.  Property having a residential land use designation in the Comprehensive Plan when such property is not currently zoned. 
The 200-foot separation requirement of this section may be reduced by the planning commission, if the planning commission finds that, because of topography, site design conditions, or other attendant circumstances, the affected residential parcel will not be adversely affected by the development of a drive-up restaurant, gas station (fuel facility), car wash or drive-up facility. 
(2)  All drive-up windows or point of drive-up service shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the drive-up window or point of drive-up service of any other lot, or other drive-up window or point of service for a separate use on the same lot. The planning commission may approve a reduction of this separation requirement subject to design techniques that address and minimize the potential for traffic conflicts or visual aesthetics. 
(3)  Carwashes that are proposed in conjunction with a gas station (fuel facility) shall be treated as a single use for the purpose of the locational requirements of criteria 2 above. 
(4)  Every drive-up restaurant shall include an indoor dining component that features tables and chairs sufficient to service year-round walk-in trade. 
(c)  The following criteria shall be applied and met in the case of an oil and gas operation special use application: 
(1)  The applicant has complied with all requirements of section 26-22.1, together with applicable ordinances, resolutions, regulations or statutes and will eliminate or mitigate any pollution or other adverse impacts on the well site and adjacent property. 
(2)  Approval of the application will not violate the provisions of the Code of Ordinances, or the regulations of the O.G.C.C. If the O.G.C.C. has already granted the applicant a permit to drill, it shall be presumed that approval of the applicant's special use will not violate O.G.C.C. regulations. 
(3)  The oil and gas well site or production site can be adequately served by necessary utility and public safety services. 
(4)  Applicant's other oil and gas operations located within the city are in compliance with section 26-22.1 or the applicable provisions thereof, or those regulations in existence at the time the oil and gas operation was permitted or approved, and all other applicable ordinances, resolutions, regulations or statutes. Approval of the special use application shall not constitute a waiver by the city of its right to institute proceedings against the applicant as provided by section 26-22.1-14 of this chapter or to exercise any remedy the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1994-7, § 4, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 2011-15, § 3, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2014-14, § 2, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1, 3-20-18) 
Sec. 26-15-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 1999-10, adopted April 20, 1999, repealed § 26-15-5, adult entertainment and/or service facilities, which derived from Ord. No. 1986-01, adopted February 4, 1986. Similar provisions are found in § 26-15.5. 
SECTION 26-15.5. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 26-15.5-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this section are not intended to impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. It is not the intent of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or the Colorado Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-2. - Definitions. 
    Words and phrases used in this section shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
    Adult arcade means any commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited where, for any form of consideration, one (1) or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image or virtual reality producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, are used to regularly show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic, digital or electronic reproductions describing, simulating or depicting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations however produced that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, concert hall, auditorium or other commercial establishment which features: 
(1)  Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or seminudity; or 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by the exhibition of "specified sexual activities." 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic productions however produced which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment which is distinguished or characterized by showing of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions with an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" which are regularly shown for any form of consideration. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
    Commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as a sexually oriented business. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as a sexually oriented business so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." The term "commercial establishment" includes clubs, fraternal organizations, social organizations, civic organizations or other similar organizations with paid memberships. 
    Employee means a person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business. 
    Establishment of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business into a sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of a different sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of a sexually oriented business. 
    Industrial district shall have the meaning set forth in section 26-11 of this chapter. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
    Licensing officer means the city clerk or his or her designee. 
    Manager means an operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by a sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the business. 
    Nudity or state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or areola or nipple of the female breast. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 
    Operator means and includes the owner, license holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any licensed premises. 
    Peep booth means a room, semi-enclosure or other similar area located within a licensed premises wherein a person may view representations of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, or other legal entity. 
    Premises or licensed premises means any premises that requires a sexually oriented business license and that is classified as a sexually oriented business, including parking lots and sidewalks immediately adjacent to the structure containing the sexually oriented business. 
    Principal business purpose means as to any establishment, having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade the items listed in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of the definition of "adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store" above or having on the premises at least twenty-five (25) square feet of display space occupied by the display of the items described therein. 
    Principal owner means any person owing, directly or beneficially: 
(1)  Ten (10) percent or more of the membership interests in a limited liability company; or 
(2)  In the case of any other legal entity, ten (10) percent or more of the ownership interests in the entity, but excluding shareholders of a corporation. 
    Residentially zoned area shall mean any area depicted on the Lafayette zoning map as a residential land use. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, or nude model studio. The definition of sexually oriented business shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the State of Colorado engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
    Seminude or seminudity means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Specified anatomical areas, as used herein, means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified criminal acts means sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, sexual assault, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity, prostitution, or pandering. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 
(5)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (a) through (d) of this definition. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, management arrangement, gift or other similar legal device which transfers ownership or control of the business, including a transfer by bequest or operation of law. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Secs. 26-15.5-3-26-15.5-10. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-15.5-11. - Interior lighting regulations. 
(a)  The interior portion of the premises of a sexually oriented business to which patrons are permitted access shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place (including peep booths) at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) footcandles as measured at the floor level. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the licensee and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-12. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of the M1 industrial zone. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of: 
(1)  Any church; 
(2)  Any school meeting all requirements of the compulsory education laws of the State of Colorado; 
(3)  The boundary of any residentially zoned area; or 
(4)  An existing dwelling. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one (1) sexually oriented business within the same building, structure, or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-13. - Measurement of distance. 
(a)  For purposes of this subsection, distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. 
(b)  For purposes of this subsection, distance between any sexually oriented business and any church, school, dwelling or residentially zoned area shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, school, or dwelling or the nearest boundary of an affected residentially zoned area. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-14. - Other locational regulations. 
(a)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this ordinance that is in violation of section 26-15.5-12 will be permitted to continue for a period of six (6) months from the effective date hereof. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), the licensing officer may grant an extension of time during which a sexually oriented business in violation of section 26-15.5-12 will be permitted to continue upon a showing that the owner of the business has not had a reasonable time to recover the initial financial investment in the business. No such extension of time shall be for a period greater than that reasonably necessary for the owner of the business to recover his or her initial financial investment in the business. A sexually oriented business in violation of section 26-15.5-12 may continue during such extended period unless the business is sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such business shall not be enlarged, extended, or altered except that the business may be brought into compliance with this subsection. 
(c)  If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at the particular location will be deemed to be in compliance with section 26-15.5-12 and the later established business(es) will be deemed to be in violation of section 26-15.5-12. 
(d)  A sexually oriented business which at the time it received its sexually oriented business license was in compliance with the location requirements of section 26-15.5-12 does not violate that section if when the sexually oriented business applies to renew its valid sexually oriented business license a church, school, dwelling or residentially zoned area is now located within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid sexually oriented business license and does not apply to an application for a sexually oriented business license that is submitted as a result of the previous sexually oriented business license expiring or being revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-15. - Stage required in adult cabaret and adult theater. 
    Any adult cabaret or adult theater shall have one (1) or more separate areas designated as a stage in the diagram submitted as part of the application for the sexually oriented business license. Entertainers shall perform only upon the stage. The stage shall be fixed and immovable. No seating for the audience shall be permitted within three (3) feet of the edge of the stage. No members of the audience shall be permitted upon the stage or within three (3) feet of the edge of the stage. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-16. - Conduct in sexually oriented business. 
(a)  No licensee, manager or employee mingling with the patrons of a sexually oriented business, or serving food or drinks, shall be in a state of nudity. It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this subsection that an employee of a sexually oriented business exposed any specified anatomical area only during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. 
(b)  No licensee, manager or employee shall encourage or knowingly permit any person upon the premises to touch, caress, or fondle the breasts, anus, or specified anatomical areas of any person. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-17. - Employee tips. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of a sexually oriented business to receive tips from patrons except as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  A licensee that desires to provide for tips from its patrons shall establish one (1) or more boxes or other containers to receive tips. All tips for such employees shall be placed by the patron of the sexually oriented business into the tip box. 
(c)  A sexually oriented business that provides tip boxes for its patrons as provided in this section shall post one (1) or more signs to be conspicuously visible to the patrons on the premises, in bold letters at least one (1) inch high to read as follows: 
"All tips are to be placed in the tip box and not handed directly to employees. Any physical contact between a patron and employees is strictly prohibited." 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-18. - Unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee, manager or employee to violate any of the requirements of this section or to knowingly permit any patron to violate the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-19. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this section regulating nude model studios do not apply to: 
(a)  A college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(b)  A private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(c)  A business located in a structure which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-20. - Regulation of peep booths. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business with peep booths to violate the requirements of this section. 
(a)  At least one (1) employee must be on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that such employee shall be clearly visible from every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of the employee from at least one of the manager's station from each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. The view area shall remain unobstructed by any opaque coverings, two-way mirrors, doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times, and no patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to section 55-203. 
(b)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video display equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. The view area shall remain unobstructed by any opaque coverings, two-way mirrors, doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times, and no patron shall be permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to section 55-203. 
(c)  No peep booth may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any one (1) time. 
(d)  No door, two-way mirror, screen, opaque covering or other covering shall be placed or allowed to remain on any peep booth, and no holes or openings shall be placed or allowed to remain in the wall between any two (2) adjacent peep booths. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-21. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for a sexually oriented business to be open for business or for the licensee, manager or any employee of a licensee to allow patrons upon the licensed premises during the following time periods: 
(a)  On any Tuesday through Saturday from 2:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m.; 
(b)  On any Monday, other than a Monday which falls on January 1, from 12:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m.; 
(c)  On any Sunday from 2:00 a.m. until 8:00 a.m.; 
(d)  On any Monday which falls on January 1 from 2:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 26-15.5-22. - Minimum age. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be upon the premises of a sexually oriented business that operates pursuant to a type A sexually oriented business license or for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be upon the premises of a sexually oriented business that operates pursuant to a type B sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the licensee, manager or any employee of the licensee to allow anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be upon the premises of a sexually oriented business operated pursuant to a type A sexually oriented business license or to allow anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years upon the premises of a sexually oriented business that operates pursuant to a type B sexually oriented business license. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-20-99) 
SECTION 26-16. - REVIEW PROCEDURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 9 of Ord. No. 1993-6, adopted Mar. 2, 1993, amended § 26-16 to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 26-16 consisted of §§ 26-16-1-26-16-15, which pertained to review procedures and derived from § 2 of Ord. No. 1986-01, adopted Feb. 4, 1986; §§ 4-6 of Ord. No. 1987-02, adopted Feb. 17, 1987; § 1 of Ord. No. 1987-16, adopted Aug. 18, 1987; and § 1 of Ord. No. 1988-01, adopted Feb. 2, 1988. 

Sec. 26-16-1. - Review procedures, general. 
    The purpose of this section is to set forth procedures for review of applications required by this chapter, including subdivision, planned unit development, special use, site plan and architectural review in connection with building permit applications, rezoning, and annexation applications. A single application procedure is utilized to the extent practicable in order to streamline development reviews and to allow an applicant to process simultaneously applications requiring more than one (1) approval. Additional or different procedural requirements are specified where they pertain to certain applications. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2001-43, § 1, 12-4-01) 
Sec. 26-16-2. - Required process. 
(a)  Annexation. An annexation shall be processed in the same manner as a zoning or rezoning, in accordance with sections 26-5-1, 26-16-3 and 26-16-8.1 of this chapter, unless otherwise specified. In the event that additional procedural requirements are imposed by applicable state statute, the planning director shall modify the annexation process to add any additional procedures required by state statute. 
(b)  Minor subdivision. A minor subdivision shall be processed in accordance with section 26-16-6 of this chapter. 
(c)  PUD. A planned unit development shall be processed concurrently with the subdivision, in accordance with sections 26-16-4 and 26-16-5 of this chapter, except that if the expedited review exemption in sections 26-18-4(b) or (c) can be met, the procedure outlined in section 26-16-6 of this chapter may be followed. 
(d)  Site plan/architectural review. A site plan and architectural review required by sections 26-29-4 or 26-16-7(a) of this chapter shall be processed in accordance with section 26-16-7 of this chapter. 
(e)  Special use. A special use shall be processed in accordance with section 26-16-3 and 26-16-6.1 of this chapter. 
(f)  Subdivision. A subdivision shall be processed in accordance with sections 26-16-4 and 26-16-5 of this chapter, unless otherwise specified. 
(g)  Zoning/rezoning. The procedures set forth in section 26-16-8.1 shall be followed. 
(h)  Review of TDR/PUD. Review and approval of any matter pursuant to the "Intergovernmental Agreement for City of Lafayette-Boulder County TDR Comprehensive Development Plan," such as the identification of sending and receiving sites, and the approval of any transferred development rights planned unit development within the plan area governed by said intergovernmental agreement, shall be processed as a PUD, in accordance with sections 26-16-4, 26-16-5(b)(1), and 26-16-7 of this chapter; except that the provisions of section 26-16-4(e)(2) shall not apply to the approval of a TDR/PUD. Any matter pursuant to said intergovernmental agreement shall be referred to in this chapter as a "TDR/PUD." 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1995-21, § 2, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 19, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 1, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 6, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2001-43, § 2, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 2, 3-20-18; Ord. No. 2018-17, § 1, 7-3-18; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-16-3. - Preapplication conferences. 
(a)  This section 22-16-3 shall not apply to applications for either sketch plan or preliminary plan applications, both of which are addressed in Section 22-16-4. 
(b)  Preapplication conferences. Prior to submitting a formal application, the applicant shall schedule preapplication conferences with the planning director or the director's representative in order to obtain information and guidance. The purpose of the first preapplication conference is to familiarize the applicant with the city's requirements, procedures and comprehensive plan before substantial time and financial commitments are made in the preparation of plans, surveys, and other studies. At this preapplication conference, the planning director will furnish the applicant with a predevelopment questionnaire. Completion of the predevelopment questionnaire by the applicant shall be a prerequisite to filing a formal application. The purpose of the second preapplication conference is to allow city staff an opportunity to review the applicant's application package in order to verify compliance with the submittal requirements. The requirement for a second preapplication conference may be waived by the planning director. 
(c)  [Preapplication conference fee.] A preapplication conference fee shall be established pursuant to a resolution of city council. 
(d)  Neighborhood meeting . Prior to submitting a formal application, the applicant shall hold a neighborhood meeting/open house with residents in adjacent neighborhoods regarding the proposed development. Such neighborhood meeting will allow the applicant to present the proposed development to the adjacent neighborhoods prior to submitting the proposed development to the city; will allow members of the adjacent neighborhoods to provide input regarding the proposed development; and will allow the applicant the ability to propose strategies to address the neighborhood's input as part of the formal submittal. This requirement applies to those development applications as outlined in section 26-16-2 that may require a public hearing, including all special use review applications, but with the exception of a zoning/rezoning request. The applicant shall notify all property owners within the distance specified in section 26-16-9 from the subject property by regular mail of the date, time and place of the neighborhood meeting/open house, and shall prominently post at least one sign with a minimum size of 18" × 24", which is to be visible from the nearest roadway, notice of such neighborhood meeting on the subject property. Such notifications shall be mailed and placed on the subject property ten (10) days prior to the date of the neighborhood meeting with a copy being sent to the planning and building department of the City of Lafayette. Copies of sign-in sheets and comments received by the applicant at the neighborhood meeting shall be submitted as part of the formal application. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 4, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 2011-15, § 5, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 3, 3-20-18; Ord. No. 2018-17, § 2, 7-3-18; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-16-4. - Sketch plans and preliminary plans. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  Sketch plans. The purpose of the sketch plan is to allow a review of the concept and the appropriateness of the proposed development in order to identify major problems which must be resolved and to assess the overall feasibility of the request. 
(2)  Preliminary plans. The preliminary plan shall provide the necessary information to allow the staff and planning commission to review a more detailed design and to resolve planning or engineering problems which may have been raised at the sketch plan phase. 
(b)  Review procedure. 
(1)  Pre-application Conferences. Prior to submitting a formal application for either sketch plan approval or preliminary plan approval, the applicant shall schedule pre-application conferences with the planning director or the director's representative in order to obtain information and guidance. The purpose of the first pre-application conference is to familiarize the applicant with the city's requirements, procedures and comprehensive plan before substantial time and financial commitments are made in the preparation of plans, surveys, and other studies. At this pre-application conference, the planning director will furnish the applicant with a predevelopment questionnaire. Completion of the predevelopment questionnaire by the applicant shall be a prerequisite to filing a formal application. Following the first pre-application conference and prior to holding a second pre-application meeting, the applicant shall the complete "Intent to Develop Notification" requirement specified in Section 26-16-4 (b)(2). The purpose of a second pre-application conference is to allow city staff an opportunity to review the applicant's application package in order to verify compliance with the submittal requirements. The requirement for a second pre-application conference may be waived by the Planning director. 
(2)  Intent to Develop. Prior to holding a second pre-application meeting the applicant shall: 
a.  Schedule and facilitate a consecutive 10 day public online comment forum to be hosted on the City's website. The applicant shall provide an illustrative plan of the proposed development, in a digital format as requested by the City, 20 days prior to the start of the online public comment. The online public comment period shall begin at least 15 days prior to a second pre-application meeting. 
b.  Mail, by regular mail, notice of the public online comment forum to all property owners within the distance from the subject property specified in Section 26-16-9. The notice shall include the city's website address at which the illustrative plan and comment opportunity may be accessed, as well as city contact information to allow one to obtain a physical copy of the illustrative plan and provide comment and inquiry. 
c.  Post the subject property with a at least one sign with a minimum size of 18" by 24", which is to be visible from the nearest roadway, with the words "Intent to Develop" and the relevant city website and contact information. 
(3)  Neighborhood Meeting. Within 15 days following the submittal of a complete formal application, the city shall hold a neighborhood meeting/open house with residents in adjacent neighborhoods regarding the proposed development. Such neighborhood meeting will allow the applicant to present the proposed development to the adjacent neighborhoods; will allow members of the adjacent neighborhoods to provide input regarding the proposed development; and will allow the applicant the ability to propose strategies to address the neighborhood's input as part of a revised submittal. The neighborhood meeting/open house also provides an opportunity for staff to address the development process and other Code requirements. The location and time of the neighborhood meeting/open house shall be reasonably convenient to the neighbors and shall be approved by the City at the pre-application conferences. The applicant shall notify all property owners within the distance specified in section 26-16-9 from the subject property by regular mail of the date, time and place of the neighborhood meeting/open house, and shall prominently post at least one sign on the subject property with a minimum size of 18" × 24", which is to be visible from the nearest roadway, that provides notice of the time and location of such neighborhood meeting/open house and reference the nature of the development application and how or where the development application may be reviewed. Such notifications shall be mailed and placed on the subject property ten (10) days prior to the date of the neighborhood meeting/open house with a copy being sent to the planning and building department of the City of Lafayette. Copies of sign-in sheets and comments received by the applicant at the neighborhood meeting shall be submitted as part of the formal application. 
(4)  Technical review committee. Upon receipt of a complete application, the planning director shall refer the application to the representatives of various departments and agencies assigned to the technical review committee. Copies of the application may be mailed to other agencies or utility companies. Within forty-five (45) days following the submittal of a complete application, the technical review committee shall meet to review the application, or, in lieu of a meeting, the planning department shall compile the written comments of the technical review committee. If any deficiencies in the application warrant additional modifications by the applicant or require further discussion by the technical review committee and the developer, or if additional information from the developer is received too late to be adequately processed and reviewed, the planning director may defer processing the application until the applicant has addressed all issues, to enable the technical review committee to review the application. Based upon the comments of the technical review committee, the planning director shall provide a summary of all comments to the applicant within 10 days of the Technical Review Committee meeting, or if no meeting is conducted, the date of the planning departments's compilation of comments. 
(5)  Revised Plans. Based on comments received from the Director, the applicant may revise and re-submit the application to address the comments/concerns of the technical review committee. Prior to re-submittal the applicant shall schedule a re-submittal pre-application conference. If the applicant elects to not revise the application, the application will be forwarded to the planning commission in accordance with sub-section (7) below, with an appropriate recommendation from the staff. 
(6)  Technical review committee. Upon receipt of a complete revised application, the planning director shall refer the application to the representatives of various departments and agencies assigned to the technical review committee. Copies of the application may be mailed to other agencies or utility companies. Within twenty (20) days following the submittal of a complete revised application, the technical review committee shall meet to review the application, or, in lieu of a meeting, the planning department shall compile the written comments of the technical review committee. If any deficiencies in the revised application warrant additional modification by the applicant or require further discussion by the technical review committee and the developer, or if additional information from the developer is received too late to be adequately processed and reviewed, the planning director may defer sending the matter to the planning commission until the applicant has addressed all issues, to enable the technical/policy review committee to review the application. Based upon the comments of the technical review committee, the planning director shall then prepare a report and recommendations to the planning commission. 
(7)  Planning commission action. The planning commission, at its next regular meeting that is scheduled to take place a minimum of thirty (30) days after the planning department provides the applicant with the technical review committee comments, or, if the applicant has elected to submit a revised application in response to the technical review committee comments, at its next regular meeting that is scheduled to take place a minimum of thirty (30) days after the filing of the complete revised application, shall hold a public hearing on the application and consider the recommendations of the planning staff and the merits of the proposed application. Using the criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances, the planning commission may approve the application as submitted, approve it with modifications, deny the application, or refer the matter back to the applicant for further study. In approving any application, the planning commission may impose any reasonable conditions to ensure that the proposal satisfies the criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances. A written notice of the planning commission action shall be submitted to the city council. 
(8)  Appeal to city council. 
a.  Decisions by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council by the applicant, or by any property owner entitled to notice. Any such appeal shall be filed with the Planning department, in writing, within fourteen (14) days following the planning commission decision and shall include the following information: name of the person submitting the appeal; date of the appeal; a statement regarding the grounds for the appeal; and a statement as to the desired modifications being requested. 
b.  All costs associates with the public hearing for an appeal shall be at the expense of the appellant. Such cost shall be limited to the cost of mailing public hearing notices to adjacent property owners and the publication of a public notice. 
(9)  City Council initiated review. Decisions by the planning commission may also be called-up and reviewed by initiation of the city council upon the request of three (3) city council members. In the case of a call-up, the call-up shall be initiated by city council at a regularly scheduled city council meeting occurring no later than the second regularly scheduled city council meeting after the planning commission decision. 
(10)  For those matters appealed to the city council, the city council shall, after giving ten (10) days' written notice to applicant and appellant, review the planning commission's decision at a public meeting at which the applicant and/or appellant shall be entitled to present argument. The written notice to the applicant and appellant shall include a copy of any document filed to initiate an appeal; however, any stated grounds for the appeal shall not limit the scope of review by the City Council. Using criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances, and based on the record before the planning commission, the city council shall approve the application as submitted, approve it with modifications, or deny the application. In approving any application, the city council may impose any reasonable conditions to ensure that the proposal satisfies the criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Sketch plans; no vested rights. The approval of the sketch plan does not bind the planning commission or city council to approve the preliminary plan, nor does it confer on the applicant any vested rights. 
(d)  Official development plans (ODPs). The city has approved certain plans, usually called "Official Development Plans" or "ODPs" following various processes which may or may not have complied with the requirements of this chapter. As of the effective date of this amendment, any approved ODP shall be considered an approved sketch plan for all purposes. 
(e)  Withdrawal of approval. 
(1)  Sketch plans. Unless extended by the planning commission, for good cause shown, approval of a sketch plan shall be valid for two (2) years. If the developer fails to submit to the planning director a preliminary plan for at least the first phase of development, together with a phasing plan for the balance of the development, conforming to the approved sketch plan within two (2) years after final approval of the sketch plan, approval of the sketch plan by the city shall be deemed withdrawn. 
a.  Existing sketch plans or official development plans. For any sketch plan or official development plan approved more than two (2) years prior to the effective date of this amendment, for which no preliminary plan has been filed during the two-year period preceding the effective date of this amendment, approval of the sketch plan or official development plan by the city shall be deemed withdrawn six (6) months from the effective date of this amendment, unless the owner obtains an extension of approval from the planning commission prior to that date. 
(2)  Preliminary plans. Unless extended by the planning commission, for good cause shown, approval of a preliminary plan shall be valid for ninety (90) days, unless a longer phasing plan is approved as a part of the preliminary plan. If the developer fails to submit to the planning director a final plan conforming to the approved preliminary plan within ninety (90) days after final approval of the preliminary plan, or as otherwise required by a longer phasing plan, approval of the preliminary plan by the city shall be deemed withdrawn. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 5, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2011-33, §§ 13, 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2018-17, §§ 3, 4, 7-3-18; Ord. No. 2019-06, §§ 2, 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-16-5. - Final plan. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the final plan, which includes the final plat, is to provide legal documents that will be a part of the city and/or county records. The final plan shall include the development agreement and all other final agreements between the owner or developer and the City of Lafayette. 
(b)  Review procedure. 
(1)  City council action. On a finding by the planning director that a complete plan has been submitted and approved by all applicable departments and public agencies, the final plan will be scheduled for consideration by the city council. Using criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan and the Code of Ordinances, the city council may then approve the application as submitted, approve it with modifications or deny the application. In approving any application, the city council may impose any reasonable conditions to ensure that the proposal satisfies the criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Recording and filing requirements. The city clerk shall cause the final plat, the development agreement, and any other written agreements or recordable documents to be recorded with the county clerk and recorder and shall return one (1) executed copy to the applicant. The clerk shall also file copies of the plats and annexation ordinances as required by state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-16-6. - Staff review of certain applications. 
(a)  Purpose. Many review procedures do not require a public hearing due to the limited impacts of the request on surrounding properties. This procedure has been designed to expedite minor review procedures. 
(b)  Review procedure. 
(1)  Conference with planning director. The applicant shall schedule an informal conference with the planning director prior to completing an application. 
(2)  Staff review. 
a.  The planning director shall refer the application to any appropriate representatives of various departments and agencies assigned to the technical review committee for review and comment fifteen (15) days prior to making a decision. The planning director may require that the applicant reimburse the city for the cost of any legal or technical consultant fees incurred by the city in connection with reviewing the application. 
b.  The planning director shall mail a notice to all real property owners who own property located within the distance specified in subsection 26-16-9(a) of the subject property. In the case of an oil and gas special use application, said notice shall be mailed to those people whose names are listed in accordance with section 26-22.1-4(3)(xvii). Such notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the decision of the planning director and shall contain those items specified in section 26-16-9(d)(2) and (3). 
c.  Any property owner entitled to notice may submit oral or written comments on the application to the planning director. 
d.  Using the criteria set forth in this chapter, specifically Section 26-22.1 for oil and gas operations and access thereto, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances, the planning director may approve the application as submitted, approve it with modifications, or deny the application no sooner than ten (10) days after mailing notice to neighboring property owners. In approving any application, the planning director may impose any reasonable conditions to ensure that the proposal satisfies the criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances. A written notice of the planning director's decision shall be submitted to the planning commission. 
e.  Unless extended by the planning director, for good cause shown, approval of any application under this section 26-16-6 shall be valid for ninety (90) days, unless a longer time period was approved as part of the application. The applicant must submit to the planning director final documents and evidence that all conditions or requirements for approval are satisfied within ninety (90) days after conditional approval was granted, or such longer time period approved as part of the application, otherwise approval of the application by the city shall be deemed withdrawn. 
(3)  Referral to planning commission for action. The planning director may refer any application to the planning commission. 
(4)  Appeal to planning commission. The action of the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission by the applicant, any property owner entitled to notice, or three (3) members of the planning commission. Any such appeal shall be filed, in writing, within fourteen (14) days following the director's decision. 
(5)  For those matters appealed or referred to the planning commission, the planning commission shall review the application at a public hearing. Using criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances, the commission shall approve the application as submitted, approve it with modifications, or deny the application. In approving any application the planning commission may impose any reasonable conditions to ensure that the proposal satisfies the criteria set forth in this chapter, specifically Section 26-22.1 for oil and gas operations and access thereto, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Minor subdivisions with dedications. When a minor subdivision is proposed that includes dedications such as utility or access easements, street rights-of-way, or public land, such minor subdivision shall be referred to the city council by either the planning director or the planning commission for approval of the subdivision and acceptance of the dedications. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1994-7, § 5, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 20, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2006-24, §§ 1, 2, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2014-14, § 3, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-16-6.1 - Special use review. 
(a)  Staff Review/Decision: Except as provided in subparagraph (b) of this section, the planning director shall review each special use review application against the criteria provided herein and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny said application. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the planning director may refer any special use review application to the planning commission and city council for a decision in accordance with subparagraph (c) of this section. 
(1)  The planning director shall refer the application to any appropriate representatives of various departments and agencies assigned to the technical review committee for review and comment fifteen (15) days prior to making a decision. The planning director may require that the applicant reimburse the city for the cost of any legal or technical consultant fees incurred by the city in connection with reviewing the application. 
(2)  The planning director shall mail a notice to all real property owners who own property located within the distance specified in subsection 26-16-9(a) of the subject property. Such notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the decision of the planning director and shall contain those items specified in section 26-16-9(d)(2) and (3) as well as the date that the director will make a decision on the application. 
a.  Any property owner entitled to notice may submit oral or written comments on the application to the Planning director, and may request that that he or she be mailed a copy of the director's decision. 
b.  Using the criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances, the planning director may approve the application as submitted, approve it with modifications, deny the application, or refer the application pursuant to subsection c. below. In approving any application, the planning director may impose any reasonable conditions to ensure that the proposal satisfies the criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances. A written notice of the Planning director's decision shall be submitted to the planning commission and city council and mailed to the applicant and those property owners requesting a copy of the decision. 
c.  Referral to planning commission and city council for action . Based upon input received by the planning director from comments provided prior to the Director's decision, the Director may refer the special use application to the planning commission and city council for a decision in accordance with subparagraph (c) of this section. 
d.  Appeal to planning commission and city council. The action of the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission and city council by the applicant, any property owner entitled to notice, or three members of the planning commission or city council. In the event of such an appeal, the decision on the application shall be processed and a decision rendered in accordance with subparagraph (c) of this section. Any such appeal shall be filed, in writing, within fourteen (14) days following the director's decision. 
(b)  Planning commission and city council review/decision. The planning commission and city council shall, in accordance with subparagraph (c) of this section, review each special use review application for the development of (i) the proposed use of any residential structure containing five or more dwelling units; and (ii) any use that also entails a site plan/architectural review referred to or processed by the Planning Commission and City Council; and (iii) any use that is subject to Section 26-22.1 (Oil and Gas Development) of this Code. 
(c)  Planning commission and city council review process. The planning commission shall review each special use review application submitted or referred to it pursuant to this section after a public hearing. Using criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances, the planning commission shall recommend that the city council approve the application as submitted, approve it with modifications, or deny the application. In recommending approval of any application the planning commission may recommend any reasonable conditions to ensure that the proposal satisfies the criteria set forth herein. 
(1)  Following a recommendation from the planning commission, the city council shall consider the planning commission's recommendation and review the application after a public hearing. Using criteria set forth in this chapter the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances, the city council shall render a final decision finally approving, approving with conditions, or denying the application. In approving any application, the city council may impose any reasonable conditions to ensure that the proposal satisfies the relevant. 
(d)  Termination of an approved special use. 
(1)  By nonuse . If an approved special use is not implemented on a property subject to an approved special use application in accordance with the approved time schedule, or within two (2) years, whichever is longer, the special use approval shall expire unless the applicant is in jeopardy of losing such special use approval can demonstrate to the planning commission that commencement of the special use has suffered an unavoidable delay, that the applicant still intends to implement the use, and that an extension of said special use approval would be in the best interests of the city. If the planning commission finds that the applicant suffered an unavoidable delay, intends to implement the special use and that extension of the special use approval is in the city's best interest, the planning commission may extend to a date certain the time for completion of construction and establishment of the special use. 
(2)  By owner's action . The owner of a property subject to an approved special use application may petition the planning director to rescind approval. Upon receipt of such petition, the planning director shall terminate approval of the special use. Thereafter, only those uses permitted by right within the applicable zoning district will be allowed on the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09, § 4, 3-20-18; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-16-7. - Site plan and architectural review. 
(a)  Staff review. Upon referral by the building official pursuant to section 26-29-4 of this chapter or upon application in connection with a subdivision, PUD or other development application, and except as provided in subparagraph (b) of this section, the planning director shall review each site plan and architectural application against the criteria provided in section 26-16-7.1 of this chapter and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny said application. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the planning director may refer any site plan and architectural application to the planning commission and city council for review in accordance with subparagraph (c) of this section. 
(b)  Planning commission and city council review. The planning commission and city council shall, in accordance with subparagraph (c) of this section, review each site plan and architectural application for the development of any residential structure containing five or more dwelling units, any commercial or industrial structure, and any application for the development of structures on five (5) or more lots or distinct parcels of land. 
(c)  Planning commission and city council review process. The planning commission shall review each site plan and architectural application submitted to it pursuant to subparagraph (a) or (b) of this section against the criteria provided in section 26-16-7.1 of this chapter and shall recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of the application to the city council. Thereafter, the city council shall consider the planning commission's recommendation and review said application against the criteria provided in section 26-16-7.1 of this chapter before finally approving, approving with conditions or denying the application. 
(d)  Approval of site plan and architectural review . Unless extended by staff or the planning commission and city council, depending upon the original review and approval process, for good cause shown, approval of a site plan and architectural review shall be valid for two (2) years or as long as there exists a valid building permit. If the owner fails to submit to the planning and building department a complete application for a building permit within two (2) years after the final approval of the site plan and architectural review, or if a timely issued building permits expires, then the approval of the site plan and architectural review by the city shall be deemed void. Upon a finding of good cause, the two-year period provided for by this section may be extended by the authority originally approving the site plan and architectural review (i.e. planning director or city council). 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, valid site plans and architectural reviews approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance (August 12, 2005) valid for a period of two (2) years at which time the approval shall become void, unless extended as provided for in this section. 
(e)  Final site plan and architectural review plan set. Prior to submitting an application for a building permit, the applicant or owner shall submit a final, revised site plan and architectural review plan to the planning and building department complying with all conditions of approval. Staff will review such final, revised plan set for compliance with all conditions of approval. The planning and building department will not accept applications for building permits until it has been determined that all conditions of approval have been met. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1995-21, § 3, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 2001-43, § 3, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 6, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 7, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-16-7.1. - Site plan/architectural review criteria. 
    The following criteria shall be used in the review of all site plans and projects pursuant to section 26-16-7: 
(a)  The scale is appropriate to the site and function of the project and/or building. 
(b)  The architecture promotes a harmonious transition in scale and character of the proposed building to surrounding land uses. 
(c)  The quality and overall design is compatible with the location and proposed use as demonstrated by building elevations. 
(d)  Any diverse architectural treatments are integrated into the overall architectural theme in order to avoid a cluttered appearance. 
(e)  The landscape design has been incorporated into the plan and takes into consideration the function and use of open areas and buffering. 
(f)  The overall landscape treatment of exterior spaces enhances the quality of the project and creates usable open areas. 
(g)  The traffic and pedestrian circulation system, including parking lots, contributes to the orderly and aesthetic quality of the site. 
(h)  The screening of service yards, rooftop mechanical equipment and other items which tend to be unsightly has been accomplished through the placement of walls, fences, plantings, or a combination thereof; further, the screening is effective during all seasons of the year. 
(i)  Monotony of design within a project has been avoided by providing variation of detail, form and siding that provides visual interest. 
(j)  The building materials are suitable to the type of building and design for which they are to be used. The building exteriors have the same materials, or those which contrast in pleasing ways as to be architecturally harmonious. Metal materials as a primary architectural feature have not been used. 
(k)  The materials selected are of a durable quality and offer protection from rot and/or corrosion through the use of commonly accepted maintenance procedures. 
(l)  For any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials are durable and compatible within themselves and harmonious to their surroundings. 
(m)  Building articulation and rooflines are varied by the use of architectural and site design. 
(n)  Building components such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets are visually attractive in proportion, scale and relationship to one another in each building. 
(o)  The colors, including accents, are harmonious and compatible. 
(p)  The materials used to buffer mechanical equipment, electrical equipment or other utility hardware on the roof, ground or building, are harmonious with the building. 
(q)  Exterior lighting, which is a part of the architectural concept, is harmonious with the building design, and does not shine directly on adjacent properties. 
(r)  Service yards, storage yards and exterior work areas are buffered from view from any public street, public pedestrian access or other public way, and from adjacent properties with less intensive uses through the placement of the building or buildings on the site or with the use of screening walls or enclosures constructed with materials that are harmonious to the building to which it is associated. 
(s)  Refuse, waste, and recycling collection areas shall be enclosed and screened from view from any public street, public pedestrian access or other public way, and from adjacent properties. The enclosure shall be constructed of materials harmonious to the building to which it is associated. Gates on the enclosure shall be of metal or some other comparable durable material and shall be finished to match the enclosure. 
(t)  Drive-up restaurants, and restaurants that include an outdoor eating area, shall develop a litter collection plan and submit such plan as part of the site and architectural plan review. Such plan shall obligate the restaurant operator to keep the area immediately surrounding said restaurant free of restaurant litter. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 7, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 1, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2006-10, § 2, 5-2-06) 
Sec. 26-16-7.2. - Additional site plan/architectural review criteria for drive-up restaurants, gas stations (fuel facilities), car washes, and drive-up facilities. 
    In addition to the site plan/architectural review criteria specified in section 26-16-7.1 the following site plan/architectural review criteria shall apply to all drive-up restaurants, drive-up gas stations (fuel facilities) car washes, and drive-up facilities. 
(a)  For facilities containing a drive-up window, the drive-up windows, drive-up aisles, menu boards, and directional signs shall be orientated away from public street rights-of-way and to the interior of commercial subdivisions, where practical. In cases where a drive-up window or aisle is orientated to, or visible from, a public street right-of-way, the view of the drive-up facility shall be screened from the public street right-of-way by the use a minimum three-foot high berm, slope or masonry wall, or other site design techniques. Landscaping shall be used to soften the berm, slope or masonry wall. In cases where menu boards and directional signs are orientated to, or visible from, a public right-of-way the view of the signage shall also be screened through the use of landscaping, berms, walls, or other site design techniques. 
(b)  The solid wall of a car wash facility shall be sited parallel to any public street right-of-way. 
(c)  Detached canopy structures shall be designed in such a manner to create a strong architectural association with the principal building. Columns shall provide a visual appearance of substance. 
(d)  Drive-up restaurants, gas stations (fuel facilities), car washes, and drive-up facilities shall be designed to minimize interference with access and circulation on public street rights-of-way, pedestrian and bicycle access, and within the parking lot. All drive-up restaurants, drive-up gas stations (fuel facilities), car washes, and drive-up facilities shall provide efficient traffic flow through the site. 
(e)  Pedestrian walkways and/or bicycle paths shall not intersect the drive-up aisles, unless there is no other reasonable alternative. When no reasonable alternative exists such walkways or paths shall be identified by signage, lighting, raised crosswalks, special paving or similar type of treatment. 
(f)  Drive-up restaurants, gas stations (fuel facilities), car washes, and drive-up facilities shall provide stacking spaces for vehicles entering the facility. Stacking space is the minimum parking length of an on-site drive aisle necessary to allow for the movement of vehicles within a parking lot to a drive-up window service or other drive-up service without impeding the flow of traffic on-site and off-site. Information, such as studies or other forms of documentation, shall be submitted by the applicant in order to demonstrate that adequate stacking space is being provided. 
(g)  The entrance to each drive-up lane/aisle and the direction of traffic flow shall be clearly designated by signs and pavement marking or raised curbs. 
(h)  Drive-up banks shall not contain greater than four (4) drive-up lanes/aisles for the purposes of window tellers, remote tellers, or automatic teller machines (ATMs). 
(Ord. No. 2006-10, § 3, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2011-15, § 4, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 26-16-8. - Zoning/rezoning criteria. 
    For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development within the city, this chapter, including the zone district map, may be amended with respect to the uses allowed within a certain area of land if one (1) or more of the following criteria is met: 
(a)  The land to be rezoned was initially zoned in error or the rezoning is of a technical or corrective nature in order to conform zone district boundaries with lot lines; 
(b)  Because of changed or changing conditions in a particular area or in the city generally, it is in the public interest and reasonably necessary in promotion of the public health, safety or welfare to rezone a property to encourage development or redevelopment; 
(c)  The rezoning is necessary to conform to the Lafayette Comprehensive Plan; or 
(d)  The rezoning is necessary to provide land for a community related use that was not anticipated at the time of adoption of the Lafayette Comprehensive Plan, but which use is generally consistent with the policies and goals of said plan, is in the public interest and is reasonably necessary in promotion of the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 26-16-8.1. - Zoning/rezoning procedures. 
    Amendments to this chapter concerning the uses allowed within a certain area of land shall be considered by the city only when the following requirements have been complied with: 
(a)  Requests for amendment. Requests for amendment may only be presented by an owner of real property within the area proposed for change or by the city planning commission or the city council. Requests for changes of the boundary of any zone district made by one (1) or more owner(s) of real property within the area proposed for change shall be accompanied by a petition requesting the change signed by the owners of at least fifty-one (51) percent of the land proposed for rezoning. 
(b)  Preapplication conference. Prior to requesting any amendment to this chapter, an applicant shall confer with the planning director or the director's representative in accordance with section 26-16-3 of this chapter. Requests for amendment shall be submitted no less than thirty (30) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the applicant desires the request to be heard. Any of the foregoing notwithstanding, the planning director shall have the discretion to schedule the application for the next planning commission meeting at which adequate time shall be available to consider the application in accordance with good planning practice and in consideration of then-existing agenda items. 
(c)  Technical review and agency referral. Upon receipt of an application for an amendment, properly and completely made as set forth in this chapter, the planning department shall refer the application to the representatives of various departments and agencies assigned to the technical review committee and to any other agencies, either public or private, which might be affected by the amendment. If considered necessary, any such agency may require the applicant to furnish additional information of a pertinent and reasonable nature. Any such agency may transmit comments and recommendations concerning the application to the planning department. The technical review committee shall meet to review the application, or the planning department shall compile the written comments of the technical review committee. If any deficiencies in the application warrant additional work by the applicant or require further discussion by the technical review committee and the applicant, or if additional information from the applicant is received too late to be adequately processed and reviewed, the planning director may defer sending the matter to the planning commission until the applicant has adequately addressed all issues, to enable the technical review committee to review the application. Based upon the comments of the technical review committee, the planning director or the director's representative shall then prepare a report and recommendations to the planning commission. 
(d)  Planning commission hearing. The planning commission, not less than thirty (30) days after the filing of the complete application, shall hold a public hearing on the application and consider the recommendations of the planning staff and the merits of the proposed application. Using the criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances, the planning commission may: 
1.  Recommend approval of the application as submitted; 
2.  Recommend approval of the application with modifications or conditions; or 
3.  Recommend denial of the application. 
A written notice of the planning commission action shall be submitted to the city council. 
(e)  City council hearing. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the application and consider the recommendations of the planning staff and the planning commission and the merits of the proposed application. Using the criteria set forth in this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and the Code of Ordinances, the city council may: 
1.  Approve the application as submitted; 
2.  Approve the application with modifications or conditions; 
3.  Deny the application; or 
4.  Refer the matter back to the applicant for further study and reconsideration on a date certain. 
A written notice of the city council action shall be submitted to the applicant. Any approval by the city council shall result in the adoption of an ordinance amending the zone district. 
(f)  Approval of reasonable conditions. Whenever public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice justifies the attachment of reasonable conditions to an application for an amendment, the city council may adopt such conditions as a part of the ordinance amending the zone district map. Upon adoption of such ordinance, no zoning or building permits shall be issued except in strict compliance with the aforesaid conditions. Every ordinance containing conditions and changing the zoning classification of an area of land shall contain an exact description of such conditions and shall be recorded by the planning department among the records of the city clerk and in the real property records of Boulder County, Colorado. 
(g)  Limitation on filing. No application for the change of a zoning classification shall be made by a property owner or an agent concerning any land area which land area or any portion thereof shall have been the subject of a public hearing conducted by the city council within the immediately preceding twelve-month period and which public hearing resulted in a rejection of the proposed zoning provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to those land areas or portions thereof for which a different zone district classification is proposed than that which was rejected by council. 
(Ord. No. 2000-43, § 3, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2011-33, §§ 13, 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, §§ 2, 3, 2-19-2019) 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 2017-54, adopted Nov. 27, 2017 allowed for § 26-16-8.1 to be amended to be consistent with the provisions of said ordinance. Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 2017-54 states: 
"Notwithstanding the procedures set out in sections 26-16-8.1 and 26-30-2 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances, City Council may consider and enact amendments to section 26-22.1 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances pertaining to the land use regulation of oil and gas development activities without such proposed amendments first being submitted to the City Planning Commission for a planning commission public hearing and the City Council shall, however, hold its own public hearing on such proposed amendments, as required by the Code of Ordinances. 
This provision will be automatically repealed without further action of the City Council on December 31, 2018. 
Sec. 26-16-8.2. - Waiver of certain rights. 
(a)  Whenever the zoning classification of an area of land is changed by legislative action and such change, in whole or in part, is based upon a representation by the applicant that the applicant will waive certain rights available to the applicant under the proposed district classification and that the applicant will use the area of land involved or erect structures thereon in a manner more restricted than otherwise would be required, no zoning permits or building permits shall be issued except in strict compliance with the aforesaid waivers. Any applicant for a change in zoning classification and any person who applies for a permit to alter or erect a structure in such area, including the successors and assigns thereof, shall be deemed conclusively to have assented to all such waivers and shall be deemed to have waived all objections to the same. 
(b)  Every ordinance changing the zoning classification of an area of land and based, in whole or in part, upon waivers as set forth in subsection (a) shall contain an exact description of such waivers and shall be recorded by the planning department among the records of the city clerk and in the real property records of Boulder County, Colorado. Such ordinance, either before or after having been recorded, may be amended by the city council upon application for an amendment either by the original applicant or by a successor in interest; provided, however, that prior to such amendment notice, posting and other publication shall be given similar in all respects to the notice and publication required for every change in zoning classification. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed as a requirement that all applications for rezoning must contain waivers by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2000-43, § 4, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 13, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-16-9. - Public notice requirement. 
    For all actions requiring a public hearing, the following public notices are required: 
(a)  Notice shall be sent by first class mail to all real property owners owning property located within seven hundred and fifty (750) feet of the property in question, and, in the event of a PUD Amendment, all properties within seven hundred fifty (750) from the exterior boundary of the original PUD and all properties within the PUD, at least ten days (10) days prior to the public hearing; however, the inadvertent failure to send or receive the notice shall not be deemed to deprive the city council, planning commission or board of adjustment of jurisdiction to conduct the public hearing. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. 
(c)  Notice shall be prominently posted on the subject property at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. 
(d)  All notices shall include: 
(1)  The date, time and place of the public hearing; 
(2)  A statement of the nature of the matter to be considered, including a description of the location of any property directly affected by the subject matter of the hearing; 
(3)  The agency or office and telephone number where further information may be obtained. 
A public hearing fee shall be included with all applications requiring a public hearing. Such fee shall be established by a resolution of the city council. This fee does not include the cost of publishing public notices. Such cost shall be borne by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1, 8-3-04; Ord. No. 2009-01, § 2, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 2011-15, § 6, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 26-16-10. - Amendments to approved applications. 
    Modification or amendments to an approved application shall be permitted by following the same procedures and application requirements as are required for approval of the original application, except as follows: 
(a)  For minor variations in the location of structures, improvements or open areas caused by engineering or other unforeseen difficulties, the planning director may authorize a modification of an approved plan. Such changes authorized by this section shall not exceed ten (10) percent of any measurable standard or modify the use, character, or density of an approved application. All plans so modified shall be revised to show the authorized changes and shall become a part of the permanent records of the city. 
(b)  The planning director may authorize an extension of the initial time schedule for the completion of the improvements for a period not to exceed one (1) year. An extension beyond one (1) year must be approved by the planning commission. 
(c)  The planning commission shall be notified in writing of all actions of the planning director authorizing changes to approved applications or for time extensions. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 8, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 8, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-16-10.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-09, § 5, adopted March 20, 2018, repealed § 26-16-10.1, which pertained to the termination of an approved special use and derived from Ord. No. 1993-6, adopted March 2, 1993; Ord. No. 1995-4, adopted March 21, 1995; and Ord. No. 2011-33, adopted September 20, 2011. 
Sec. 26-16-11. - Vested property rights. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide procedures necessary to implement Article 68 of Title 24, Colorado Revised Statutes, title "Vested Property Rights." 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Site specific development plan means an approved plan which creates a vested property right. 
(2)  Vested property right means the right to undertake and complete the specific development and use of property under the terms and conditions of a "site specific development plan." 
(c)  Plans which may be recognized as a "site specific development plan." The following plans may be recognized as a "site specific development plan": 
(1)  Planned unit developments as defined by this chapter. 
(2)  Minor subdivisions as defined by this chapter. 
(3)  Subdivisions as defined by this chapter. 
(4)  Final plats as defined by this chapter. 
(d)  The following may not be recognized as a "site specific development plan": 
(1)  Site plan reviews as defined by this chapter. 
(2)  Architectural reviews as defined by this chapter. 
(3)  Sketch plans as defined by this chapter. 
(4)  Preliminary plans as defined by this chapter. 
(5)  Preliminary plats as defined by this chapter. 
(6)  Special use reviews as defined by this chapter. 
(7)  Variances. 
(8)  Any zoning classification or district. 
(e)  No "site specific development plan" shall be approved until after a public hearing, which hearing shall be requested by the landowner and which hearing follows the successful approval of the development at all other required stages of the development review process as required by this chapter. The request for such a hearing must be made in writing by the landowner to the city planning director prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. Unless the landowner requests such a hearing, the approval of the development shall not be considered a "site specific development plan," and no vested property right shall be deemed to have been created. 
(f)  The public hearing shall be preceded by written notice of such hearing. Such notice may, at the city's option, be combined with any notice required by this chapter. At such hearing interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(g)  A "site specific development plan" shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the city council approval action relating thereto as set forth in paragraph (e) above. In the event amendments to a "site specific development plan" are proposed and approved, the effective date of such amendments, for purposes of duration of a vested property right, shall relate back to the date of the approval of the original "site specific development plan," unless the city council specifically finds to the contrary and incorporates such finding in its approval of the amendment. 
(h)  Each map, plat, site plan or other document constituting a "site specific development plan" shall contain the following language: "Approval of this plan may create a vested property right pursuant to Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended." Failure of the document to contain this statement shall invalidate the creation of the vested property right. In addition, a notice describing generally the type and intensity of use approved, the specific lots(s) or tract(s) of property affected and stating that a "vested property right" has been created shall be published once, not more than fourteen (14) days after approval of the "site specific development plan," in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(i)  A vested property right shall be valid for a period of three (3) years from its effective date of approval, unless a longer period is agreed to in writing between the city council and the developer. 
(j)  The approval of a "site specific development plan" by the city council shall contain such terms and conditions as are reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The failure of the developer to abide by such terms and conditions shall result in a forfeiture of the vested property right. 
(k)  In addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by this chapter, the applicant seeking approval of a "site specific development plan" shall pay all costs incurred by the city as a result of the developer's request for approval of a "site specific development plan," including publication of notices. 
(l)  The approval of a "site specific development plan" shall not constitute an exemption from or waiver of any other provisions of this chapter, or any other ordinances, codes and regulations of the city pertaining to the development and use of property. 
(m)  Nothing in this section is intended to create any vested property right, but only to implement the provisions of Article 68 of Title 24, C.R.S., as amended. In the event of the repeal of said article or a judicial determination that said article is invalid or unconstitutional, this section shall be deemed to be repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 9, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 21, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
SECTION 26-17. - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-17-1. - Application requirements, general. 
    The purpose of this section is to set forth submission requirements for all applications except that application submissions for special use for oil and gas operations and access thereto shall be governed by Section 26-22.1. Minimum requirements pertaining to all applications, except for special use applications for oil and gas operations and access thereto, are set forth initially, and any additional requirements for each application are then described. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1994-7, § 6, 6-21-94) 
Sec. 26-17-2. - Drawing and report requirements. 
(a)  Each map shall include: 
(1)  Name of the city, township, range, principal meridian, section and quarter section; 
(2)  Name of development; 
(3)  Name, address and phone number of applicant; 
(4)  Name, address and phone number of person or firm preparing map; 
(5)  North arrow; 
(6)  Date prepared. 
(b)  The scale of each map shall be one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet, or an equivalent scale divisible by ten (10). 
(c)  The dimensions of all maps shall be twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches, eight and one-half (81/2) inches by eleven (11) inches, eight and one-half (81/2) inches by fourteen (14) inches, or eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches. In the case of multiple sheets, a key map showing the relationship of individual sheets shall be provided on the first sheet of the set. 
(d)  Each map shall be drawn in black, waterproof ink. 
(e)  All reports required shall include: 
(1)  Name, title, business phone, and address of person(s)/firm(s) preparing the report; 
(2)  Date of preparation; 
(3)  Copy of any supporting map or clear key to relevant elements or maps submitted pursuant to other requirements; 
(4)  Pages numbered consecutively. 
(f)  All maps and reports must bear suitable evidence of the professional qualifications of the person or firm who prepared the statement. Maps containing water supply, sanitation, utilities, drainage, soils, grading, roads, structures, and other civil engineering work must be certified by a duly registered Colorado Professional Engineer. All required documents containing land survey descriptions and topographic maps must be certified by a duly registered Colorado Professional Land Surveyor. All data submitted regarding environmental studies and other disciplines, not currently requiring registration by the State of Colorado, must be accompanied by a resume of such qualifications sufficient to demonstrate the author's degree of expertise and experience. Geology maps and reports must be prepared and certified by a qualified engineer geologist. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-17-3. - Requirements applying to all applicants. 
(a)  The planning director shall make available at a reasonable cost, copies of pertinent codes, regulations and other related documents, and shall provide information to serve as a guide to the requirements of this chapter for the applicants. 
(b)  Applications shall be submitted on forms provided by the planning office. 
(c)  The number of copies shall be determined by the planning office at the preapplication conference. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in section 26-16-8.1 of this chapter, applications shall be signed by all fee owners of the land described in the application, including all tenants in common if the title to the property is held in such manner, except, however, that where the fee is held by more than one (1) owner in joint tenancy with right of survivorship, such application may be signed by only one joint tenant. All other parties, including lien holders, who have an interest in the land described in the application shall be noted on the application. A title commitment for the land described in the application shall be submitted if requested by the planning director. 
(e)  For applications requiring public hearings or notification of nearby property owners, the names and addresses of all real property owners within the distance specified in subsection 26-16-9(a) of the subject property shall be provided on stamped and addressed envelopes. 
(f)  Each application shall be submitted with the fee established for that application pursuant to resolution of the city council. 
(g)  Only complete applications shall be scheduled for action. An application will be determined to be complete for processing by the planning director if it includes information sufficient to meet all application requirements. Nothing herein shall prevent the technical review committee, the planning commission, city council or planning director from requesting additional information in the course of the review if it is deemed necessary to determine compliance with review criteria. 
(h)  Amendments to applications will be accepted, providing that a public hearing has not yet been advertised. Any substantive amendment to an application offered after the public hearing has been advertised will be treated as a new application, requiring a new review process on the amended application. 
(i)  The planning director may require that the applicant reimburse the city for the cost of any legal or technical consultant fees incurred by the city in connection with reviewing the application, which costs exceed the application fee. 
(j)  The planning director may accept application materials prepared in compliance with Boulder County requirements for TDR/PUDs, provided that they are accompanied by an application on Lafayette's form, and provided that all necessary information is included to permit review of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1993-6, § 10, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1994-22, § 1, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1995-21, § 4, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 5, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2002-26, § 1, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 2, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 9, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-17-4. - Applications-Sketch plan. 
    The sketch plan shall include a site plan drawn to scale, and supporting maps and written materials, with the following information: 
(a)  A legal description of the property. 
(b)  A list of the names and addresses of all fee owners and lienholders having an interest in the land described. 
(c)  A statement of the existing and proposed zoning. 
(d)  Information and description of the land areas adjacent to the proposed development including land uses, zoning and traffic patterns. 
(e)  The existing site conditions including topography and unique natural or manmade features. 
(f)  Proposed street system with approximate right-of-way width. 
(g)  Generalized lot layout with approximate lot areas. 
(h)  Location of existing and proposed utilities. 
(i)  The generalized location of all existing and proposed land uses. 
(j)  The approximate location and area of land to be used for public or private open areas, recreation areas, public parks, school sites or other public uses. 
(k)  A statement of intent concerning the dedication of open areas and streets for public use. If streets are to be retained for private ownership and maintenance, an easement shall be granted for access of police, fire, and other emergency services. 
(l)  A statement of plans or programs that demonstrate the means by which all open areas and recreational areas, walkways and private streets are to be maintained. 
(m)  Proposed landscaping plan. 
(n)  The existing and proposed vehicular circulation system including arterial, collector and local streets, off-street parking areas, and major points of access to public rights-of-way. 
(o)  The existing and proposed pedestrian and bicycle circulation system including the relationship with the vehicular traffic system indicating proposed treatment at points of intersection. 
(p)  Numerical data shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Estimate of the number of proposed occupants; 
(2)  The total number and type of dwelling units; 
(3)  The proposed maximum residential density stated as dwelling units per gross acre; 
(4)  The maximum area of proposed nonresidential construction; 
(5)  The total area of all open areas and the percentage of the open area to the gross site area; 
(6)  The amount of off-street parking for use by residents and guests for residential uses or by employees and customers for business and/or industrial uses. 
(q)  A statement describing the planning objectives to be achieved by the P.U.D. and the relationship of the P.U.D. and its objectives to the comprehensive plan. 
(r)  A statement indicating the owner's and/or developer's intentions with respect to the future sale or lease of all or portions of the P.U.D., including identification of land area and dwelling units proposed for sale and lease. 
(s)  A development schedule indicating the estimated timing and phasing of construction activities and proposed buildout rate. The schedule shall include the estimated area allocations for each land use in each phase of development. The total area of open areas provided for any phase of the development shall be identified. 
(t)  In the case of a sketch plan application that is subject to the requirements of Section 26-18.5, a community housing plan as described in the City of Lafayette Community Housing Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 1, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 9, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 2, 6-3-03) 
Editor's note- Section 11 of Ord. No. 1993-6, adopted Mar. 2, 1993, amended § 26-17-4 to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 26-17-4 pertained to special requirements and derived from § 2 of Ord. No. 1986-01, adopted Feb. 4, 1986. 
Sec. 26-17-5. - Same-Preliminary plan. 
    The preliminary plan shall include, in updated and more detailed form, the information required for the sketch plan, together with the following information: 
(a)  Information to be included on a preliminary plat, unless otherwise authorized by the planning director: 
(1)  The location of existing available water and sewer facilities and the location of proposed extensions of water and sewer lines. 
(2)  Preliminary information sufficient to indicate that the final plat will meet the requirements established pursuant to C.R.S. 38-51-102, Land Survey Plat. 
(3)  Contours of the land proposed for subdivision at five-foot intervals (ten-foot intervals on rugged topography), and unique natural features. 
(4)  The location of the 100-year floodplain and floodway as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). If not available, such information shall be defined through mutual agreement of the city engineer and the subdivider's/developer's engineer. 
(5)  Intersecting property lines and the names and addresses of the owners of record of all lots or tracts adjacent to the proposed subdivision, including lots or tracts separated by a public right-of-way from the subject land. 
(6)  Existing and proposed zoning and zoning district boundaries for the subdivision and land adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
(7)  Street layout of the proposed subdivision, including the relationship to existing public rights-of-way and the width, proposed classification and names of proposed streets. 
(8)  Lot and block layout of the proposed subdivision, including a block and lot numbering system, and in the case of a planned unit development, the area and setback information on each lot if at variance with the underlying zone district regulations. 
(9)  The development intensity expressed as the ratio of the floor area to the gross area of each lot or tract. 
(10)  Sites to be reserved or dedicated for public parks, schools and existing public buildings, public facilities and public uses. 
(11)  A vicinity map, at a scale of one inch to two thousand (2,000) feet, or equivalent scale to allow accurate location of the property. 
(12)  Acreage. A schedule showing the total acreage of the land to be subdivided and the acreage intended for each type of use, along with proposed density and percentage of the total acreage. The acreage for each lot or tract shall be indicated on the map. 
(b)  Information to be filed separately from the preliminary plat: 
(1)  Preliminary engineering plans, including, unless otherwise authorized by the planning director, 
a.  Utility plan. A plan corresponding to the preliminary plat showing the line location, and size for the proposed water distribution and sewage collection mains within the proposed subdivision in relation to existing city installations. 
b.  Street and utility profiles. Center line profiles of proposed streets shall be plotted at a horizontal scale consistent with the preliminary plat and a distorted vertical scale, with sufficient detail to demonstrate that the proposed streets meet gradient limitations established by this chapter and bear a logical relationship to the grade of existing public streets and rights-of-way at the points of intersection. Sewer profiles shall be shown to verify operation within the City of Lafayette collection system. Reference to at least one Lafayette datum control point will be made in the drawing set. 
c.  Drainage plan. In conformance with section 5.05 of the City of Lafayette Storm Drainage Design and Technical Criteria Manual. 
d.  Geological stability information. The subdivider shall furnish geological stability information and soil data if the subdivider has any objection to any current report of geologic and soil information recognized by the city or by the Boulder County Planning Department, or upon the request of the planning director, where no such report is available for the land being subdivided. The subdivider shall present plans for the correction or avoidance of any problem noted in the report. 
e.  Construction drawings showing proposed cut and fill as applicable to the proposed site plan and existing topography. 
(2)  Proposed terms of reservations or dedications of public rights-of-way, easements and other public lands. 
(3)  Proposed covenants, homeowner association articles of incorporation and bylaws. 
(4)  Complete water rights dedication plan as required by the city. 
(5)  A traffic study, analyzing the impacts of the proposed development on surrounding streets, trails, bicycle and pedestrian ways. The study shall incorporate traffic assumptions for surrounding undeveloped land based on either approved development plans or on proposed land uses identified in the Lafayette Comprehensive Plan. 
(6)  Additional material, data or studies as required by the planning director which will facilitate an understanding of the development concept plan and the planning objectives of the development. These may include, but are not limited to, fiscal impact evaluations, market studies and transportation studies. 
(7)  In the case of a preliminary plan application that is subject to the requirements of Article II. Affordable Housing of Chapter 28, a community housing plan as described in the City of Lafayette Community Housing Guidelines. 
(8)  In the case of a preliminary plan application that is subject to the requirements of Article XV, Visitability, of Chapter 30 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances, a map indicating which units will be constructed in compliance with the visitability regulations. Required visitable dwelling units shall be geographically dispersed throughout the development, to the extent possible based upon the topography or other justified reasons. If the proposed development includes diversity of dwelling unit types then the visitable dwelling units shall be dispersed within the various types of dwelling units proposed, to the extent possible based upon the topography or other justified reasons. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 12, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 22, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 3, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 2007-15, §§ 1-3, 4-3-07; Ord. No. 2007-39, § 1, 8-4-07; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-17-6. - Same-Final plans and plats. 
    Following the approval of the preliminary plan and preliminary plat, the applicant shall file a final development plan and final plat containing, in final form, the information required in the preliminary plan. The following material shall also be required: 
(a)  Two (2) permanent, reproducible mylar copies and fifteen (15) print copies of a drafted plat of the proposed subdivision drawn at a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch. Maps consisting of two (2) or more sheets shall be referenced on an index map and all certifications and dedications need appear only on the title or cover sheet. All sheets shall measure twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches with a two-inch clear left margin and a one-half inch margin along the remaining edges of the sheet and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Subdivision boundaries. Street right-of-way lines and lot lines in solid lines, easements or other right-of-way lines in dashed lines; all with accurate dimensions to the nearest 0.01 foot. Bearings and distances of all lines, center line angles, radius length, chord length, and arc length of all curves shall be shown. 
(2)  The location and description of all permanent survey control points required by this chapter and state statutes. 
(3)  Legal description of the subdivision inclusive of the reception number in the records of Boulder County. 
(4)  Street names, block and lot numbers. 
(5)  The use, area and setback restriction on each lot of a planned unit development. 
(6)  Name of the subdivision. 
(7)  Notarized certification of ownership. 
(8)  Surveyor's certificate signed by a licensed surveyor responsible for the survey and plat. 
(9)  City engineer/director of public works certificate. 
(10)  Planning commission certificate of approval. 
(11)  City council certificate of approval and acceptance. 
(12)  Clerk and recorder's certificate for time and date of recording. 
(13)  City administrator's certificate of review and approval of the plat. 
(14)  Areas of street rights-of-way, areas of land dedicated for public use, the area of each lot, and the total lot area. 
(15)  Either a licensed attorney's or title company's certificate ensuring that the applicant's dedication of all lands to the public is free and clear of all encumbrances, and the applicant has marketable title to the property. If the submittal reveals any encumbrance against the property to be dedicated, the owner shall also submit properly executed releases of each encumbrance. 
(b)  Material to supplement the final plat shall include the following: 
(1)  A final site plan incorporating all information required for a preliminary plan in final form, unless the information is set forth elsewhere in the final plan submission. 
(2)  Three (3) copies of any protective covenants or restrictions to be placed on the subdivision. 
(3)  Three (3) copies of any homeowner association articles of incorporation or bylaws. 
(4)  Engineered plans and preliminary cost estimates for all utility, street, and drainage improvements to be installed on dedicated land; rights-of-way, and/or easements certified by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Colorado. 
(5)  A developer agreement shall be executed between the property owner and the city wherein the property owner shall agree to install drainage structures, fire hydrants, curb and gutter, complete paving, sidewalks, bicycle paths, culverts and bridges, streetlights, signs, and other improvements where required, at his expense, in conjunction with acceptance of the final plat, as approved by the city council; such agreement shall also define the responsibility for and describe terms and conditions for water and sewer improvements, and transfer of water rights from the owner, as required by city ordinances. Any such development agreement shall include guarantee provisions in the form of an escrow, letter of credit, or other financial guarantee acceptable to the city administrator and city attorney, ensuring that the property owner will complete all public improvements to be constructed on the property. The guarantee provisions shall include an additional fifteen (15) percent of the total cost of the public improvements for contingencies, and an additional ten (10) percent for engineering. 
(6)  A reproducible eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches mylar of the final plat. 
(7)  Digital data containing the approved plat and engineering plans, if available, on media acceptable to the city. 
(8)  In the case of a final plan application that is subject to the requirements of Article XV, Visitability, of Chapter 30 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances, a map indicating which units will be constructed in compliance with the visitability regulations. After approval of the final plan by city council minor adjustments to the visitability portion of the plan, such as relocating a visitable dwelling unit from one (1) lot to another or changing the dwelling unit type, may be approved administratively per section 26-16-6. 
(c)  Only that part of the preliminary plat which is proposed by the subdivider for development at any one time must be submitted in final form. Separate development agreements and review fees are required for each portion of the final plat which shall be separately presented for final approval. 
(d)  The following certificates shall be in the form established by the planning director: 
(1)  Certificate of dedication and ownership. 
(2)  Surveyor's certificate. 
(3)  Planning commission certificate. 
(4)  City council certificate. 
(5)  Clerk and recorder's certificate. 
(6)  City engineer/director of public works certificate. 
(7)  City administrator's certificate. 
(8)  Attorney's and/or title company's certificate. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 13, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1994-22, § 2, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1998-29, §§ 23, 24, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2000-26, § 2, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 2007-15, §§ 4, 5, 4-3-07; Ord. No. 2007-39, § 2, 8-4-07; Ord. No. 2009-09, §§ 10-13, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2012-20, §§ 2, 3, 8-21-12; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-17-7. - Same-Minor subdivision. 
    A minor subdivision shall include those items required of a final subdivision plan. The planning director may waive certain requirements if they are deemed unnecessary for the purposes of minor subdivision review. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 14, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-17-8. - Same-Special use. 
    Application for special use approval shall include a site plan showing the following: 
(a)  The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and other improvements on the real property. 
(b)  Architectural elevations of the buildings including all material and colors to be used for the project. 
(c)  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
(d)  The location of all points of ingress and egress to the site area, buildings, and parking areas. 
(e)  The location of service and refuse, waste, and recycling collection areas. 
(f)  The location of fences, landscaping and screening, both proposed and existing. 
(g)  The size, shape, height and location of all signs. 
(h)  The area and location of open areas and recreation areas. 
(i)  The location and type of outdoor lighting. 
(j)  The character and type of landscaping to be provided and how it is to be maintained. The landscaping data shall be indicated in tabular form showing the type, size and quantity of plant materials; the general location of the landscaping shall be shown on the site plan or on a separate plan. 
(k)  The estimated date of completion of the improvements shall be indicated on the site plan. 
(l)  Additional material, data or studies as required by the planning director, which will facilitate an understanding of the special use application and its planning objectives, and permit review of the application under the criteria established by this Code. 
(m)  A grading and site drainage plan, which plan shall be prepared by a professional if required by the city engineer. 
(n)  The location of all proposed utility connections. 
(o)  A professionally-prepared report on traffic likely to be generated by the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 15, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 10, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 3, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 1, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-17-9. - Same-Site plan/architectural review. 
    Application for site plan or architectural review shall include all items required of a special use above, except for the requirement of subsection 26-17-8(l). 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 16, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 4, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 14, 3-3-09) 
Sec. 26-17-10. - Same-Annexation map. 
    An annexation map shall be drawn in accordance with the guidelines contained in C.R.S. § 31-12-107(d), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1998-29, § 25, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-17-11. - Same-Zoning/rezoning. 
    Without in any way limiting the right to file or request additional material, all applications for amendments to this chapter concerning the uses allowed within a certain area of land shall contain, at least, the following: 
(a)  The applicant's name, address and interest in the application, and the names and addresses of all the owners of the property proposed for change, and the name and address of the holders of deeds of trust over such property as evidenced by an ownership and encumbrance report from a title company, and a statement identifying which owners and holders of deeds of trust are represented by the applicant; 
(b)  The nature, description and effect of the proposed amendment; 
(c)  If the proposed amendment would require a change to the zone district map, a plat showing the land area which would be affected by the proposed amendment, the present zoning classification of the area, the present zoning classification of adjoining areas, all public and private rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting the designated area and the abutting districts; 
(d)  If the proposed amendment would require a change to the zone district map by rezoning an area to a type of district not already established in this chapter at the time the amendment is proposed, the applicant shall furnish all regulations and restrictions for the proposed district; 
(e)  If the proposed amendment would require a change to the zone district map by rezoning an area from an existing residential district to a freestanding business district, would more than double the area of an existing business district entirely surrounded by one (1) or more residential districts or would enlarge the area of an existing business district by more than twenty-five (25) percent, the applicant shall furnish a written description of the market area intended to be served by the development, the population thereof, the effective demand for the proposed facilities and any other information describing the relationship of the proposed development to the needs of the applicable area; 
(f)  The error, if any, in this chapter that would be corrected by the proposed amendment; 
(g)  The changed or changing conditions in the applicable area or in the city generally that make the proposed amendment in the public interest and reasonably necessary to the promotion of the public health, safety or general welfare; 
(h)  All other circumstances, factors and reasons that the applicant offers in support of the proposed amendment; 
(i)  When required by the planning director, such application shall contain an accurate metes and bounds or other legal description of any area contained in the application, which description shall be certified to be accurate by a licensed land surveyor or engineer upon the basis of a survey actually made by or under the supervision of the person so certifying; and 
(j)  All rights available under the proposed district classification which the applicant commits himself/herself to waive and which shall be the representations to be considered by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2000-43, § 6, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11) 
SECTION 26-18. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 17 of Ord. No. 1993-6, adopted Mar. 2, 1993, amended § 26-18 to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 26-18 consisted of §§ 26-18-1-26-18-14, which pertained to planned unit developments and derived from § 2 of Ord. No. 1986-01, adopted Feb. 4, 1986; § 7 of Ord. No. 1987-02, adopted Feb. 17, 1987; and § 6 of Ord. No. 1991-31, adopted Nov. 19, 1991. 

Sec. 26-18-1. - Intent. 
    It is the intent that planned unit developments (P.U.D.) promote the most beneficial and creative development of land within the City of Lafayette. Through the use of P.U.D. regulations, it is intended to permit greater flexibility in the location of buildings, mixtures of land use, open areas and consequently, more imaginative design for development than would be generally possible under conventional zoning or subdivision regulations. These regulations are also intended to promote a high level of landscaping and common area amenities, convenient and safe vehicular circulation, and creative residential, commercial and industrial development consistent with the Lafayette Comprehensive Plan and other approved plans of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 17, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 11, 3-20-01) 
Sec. 26-18-2. - Applicability. 
(a)  Approval of a P.U.D. shall be required for the development of a mixed use building complex and all residential development, except residential development qualifying as a minor subdivision. As of the effective date of this amendment, any residential development for which only an approved sketch plan exists shall be required to develop as a P.U.D., commencing with the preliminary plan. As of the effective date of this amendment, any residential development for which a preliminary plan or plat has been approved, without a P.U.D., may obtain approval of a final plan or plat without P.U.D. approval. 
(b)  A P.U.D. may be permitted in any nonresidential zoning district within the corporate boundaries of the City of Lafayette, subject to review and approval by the planning director, the Lafayette Planning Commission and/or city council, as required by this Chapter 26. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 17, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2000-25, § 4, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2000-48, § 1, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2017-36, § 1, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-18-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 2000-25, adopted Sept. 5, 2000, deleted § 26-18-3, which pertained to where P.U.D.s are permitted, and derived from Ord. No. 1993-6, adopted March 2, 1993. 
Sec. 26-18-4. - Approval. 
    Approval of a P.U.D. shall be accomplished as follows: 
(a)  Approval of a sketch plan, preliminary plan, and final plan, pursuant to the procedures outlined in sections 26-16-4 and 26-16-5. Provided, however, that any property for which a sketch plan has been approved prior to the effective date of this amendment, may accomplish a P.U.D. approval through the approval of a preliminary plan and final plan only; or 
(b)  Commercial or industrial projects of less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area, and residential developments of fewer than twenty (20) units, provided that any such project or development is less than or five (5) acres in size may be approved through the procedures defined in section 26-16-6. 
(c)  In any designated Lafayette urban renewal area, commercial or industrial projects of less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area, residential developments of fewer than twenty (20) units or lots, and mixed-use building complex projects, provided that and such project or development is less than or five (5) acres in size may, be approved through the procedures defined in section 26-16-6. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 17, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2018-17, § 4, 7-3-18) 
Sec. 26-18-5. - Review criteria. 
(a)  A P.U.D. shall be reviewed against the following criteria and the general criteria of this chapter. Any approval of a P.U.D. shall include findings with respect to all criteria applicable to that P.U.D. 
(b)  The following criteria shall apply to all residential P.U.D.s: 
(1)  Water and water reclamation. The city shall have a projected capacity to serve fully all subdivided lots with water and water reclamation. 
(2)  Other utilities. The city shall receive adequate assurance from all nonmunicipal service providers of adequate, imminent service for all subdivided lots. 
(3)  Public safety. The city shall have the capacity to provide an appropriate level of fire and police protection to all subdivided lots. 
(4)  Recreation. The city shall ensure sufficient recreational opportunities for all of its current residents and the future residents of the proposed subdivision. 
(5)  Economy of service. City services shall be provided in the most efficient manner practicable. 
(6)  Schools. The city shall support and encourage the best quality education for Lafayette children. 
(7)  Prior agreements. To the extent any prior development and/or annexation agreements do not conflict with the provisions of this ordinance, the city shall consider any prior commitments made in such agreements in reviewing a P.U.D. 
(8)  Community housing needs. The city shall promote a variety of housing types, prices, and ownership forms to satisfy the needs of all segments of the community. 
(9)  Developer's ability to complete construction of the P.U.D. The city will commit city resources only to developments that are likely to be completed as proposed. 
(10)  Build-out rate. In order to manage residential growth in accordance with the city's ability to provide services and to allow a variety of housing developments to be completed, the city shall encourage building to occur subject to an agreed upon time schedule and build-out rate. 
(11)  Community amenities. The city shall encourage residential developments that contribute significant amenities to the development itself, and to the community at large. 
(12)  Goal fulfillment. The city shall encourage residential developments that fulfill specific Comprehensive Plan or city council goals. 
(13)  City's financial ability to serve. The city shall demonstrate that it is financially able to provide general municipal services to all new residential development. 
(14)  Transportation. The city shall encourage an efficient and environmentally sound transportation system. 
(15)  Environment. The natural environment assets of a property shall be preserved to the extent practicable. 
(16)  Cultural. The city values its existing historical and/or cultural facilities, including its library, theatre, etc. 
(17)  Strong homeowners associations. The city shall encourage the development of strong homeowners associations to promote a sense of community and to ensure the continued existence of a viable entity responsible for maintenance of open space, open areas and other similar duties. 
(18)  Diversity and quality of development. The city shall encourage residential developments that present a diversity of design, a feeling of spaciousness, and an enhanced quality of life. 
(c)  The following criteria shall apply to all mixed use building complex P.U.D.s: 
(1)  Water and water reclamation. The city shall have a projected capacity to serve fully all subdivided lots with water and water reclamation. 
(2)  Other utilities. The city shall receive adequate assurance from all nonmunicipal service providers of adequate, imminent service for all mixed use building complexes. 
(3)  Public safety. The city shall have the capacity to provide an appropriate level of fire and police protection to all mixed use building complexes. 
(4)  Recreation. The city shall ensure sufficient recreational opportunities for all of its current residents and the future residents of the proposed mixed use building complex. 
(5)  Economy of service. City services shall be provided in the most efficient manner practicable. 
(6)  Schools. The city shall support and encourage the best quality education for Lafayette children. 
(7)  Prior agreements. To the extent any prior development and/or annexation agreements do not conflict with the provisions of this ordinance, the city shall consider any prior commitments made in such agreements in reviewing a mixed use building complex P.U.D. 
(8)  Community housing needs. The city shall establish, by resolution, that ratio of residential area to nonresidential area in a mixed use building complex that is appropriate to meet the needs of the community for housing in the areas in which mixed use building complexes are permitted. Further, the city shall promote a variety of housing types, prices and ownership forms to satisfy the needs of all segments of the community. 
(9)  Developer's ability to complete construction of the P.U.D. The city will commit city resources only to developments that are likely to be completed as proposed. 
(10)  Build-out rate. In order to manage growth in accordance with the city's ability to provide services, the city shall encourage building to occur subject to an agreed upon time schedule and build-out rate. 
(11)  Community amenities. The city shall encourage mixed use building complexes that contribute significant amenities to the development itself, and to the community at large. 
(12)  Goal fulfillment. The city shall encourage mixed use building complexes that fulfill specific Comprehensive Plan, Urban Renewal Authority, or city council goals. 
(13)  City's financial ability to serve. The city shall demonstrate that it is financially able to provide general municipal services to all new development. 
(14)  Transportation. The city shall encourage an efficient and environmentally sound transportation system. 
(15)  Environment. The natural environmental assets of a property shall be preserved to the extent practicable. 
(16)  Cultural. The city shall value its existing historical and/or cultural facilities, including its library, theater, etc. 
(17)  Strong owners associations. When a mixed use building complex is proposed to consist of multiple owners, the city shall encourage the development of a strong owners association to promote a sense of community and to ensure the continued existence of a viable entity responsible for maintenance of private open space and other similar duties. 
(18)  Design guidelines. The city shall ensure that the development of a mixed use building complex meets any applicable adopted guidelines, including but not limited to the urban renewal architectural review criteria. 
(19)  Compatibility. Each mixed use building complex shall be compatible with and respect the context of its location and the character of surrounding existing neighborhoods. 
(d)  The following criteria shall apply to all P.U.D.s: 
(1)  The city finds the project is unique and/or necessary for the economic development of the city. 
(2)  The development is in the best interests of the city. 
(3)  The modifications to the code by the P.U.D. are in the best interests of the city and the neighborhood in which the development is occurring. 
(4)  The planning commission and city council may apply any of the criteria enumerated in subparagraph (b) above to nonresidential developments, to the extent that such criteria are relevant to the proposed development and may be used to guide the planning commission's and city council's discretion in reviewing a proposed nonresidential P.U.D. 
(e)  Upon recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall adopt, from time to time, by resolution, both mandatory and aspirational standards by which a proposed P.U.D.'s ability to fulfill the criteria set forth in this section shall be measured. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 17, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2000-48, § 2, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 12, 3-20-01) 
Sec. 26-18-6. - Uses permitted. 
    A P.U.D. may allow only an approved or special review use permitted within the underlying zone, except that any P.U.D. may allow an office, limited retail space of under four thousand (4,000) square feet, intended primarily to serve the P.U.D. or recreational use associated with the P.U.D. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 17, 3-2-93) 
Sec. 26-18-7. - Effects of the designation. 
(a)  Approval of a P.U.D. shall have the effect of overlaying the existing zoning and thereby adding to and modifying the existing zoning regulations. If there is conflict between the provisions of the underlying zoning district and the P.U.D., the regulation of the underlying zone shall apply unless specifically addressed in the provisions of the approved P.U.D. 
(b)  A P.U.D. may modify any of the measurable standards of this chapter, except those specified in this section 26-18. 
(c)  When a P.U.D. is approved by the city council, the zoning designation for that lot or tract on the official zoning map shall include the suffix "(PUD)." For example, an approved site for a P.U.D. that is zoned R1 would then have the designation "R1-PUD." 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 17, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 26, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-18-8. - Increased lot coverage. 
    The planning commission may grant an increase in lot coverage upon finding that such increase meets the following criteria: 
(a)  The increase meets the intent of a planned unit development as defined in section 26-18-1; 
(b)  The increase will not have a significant adverse effect on the surrounding area; 
(c)  The increase is not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare; 
(d)  The increase promotes efficient use of land and its resources; 
(e)  The increase is not inconsistent with the city's comprehensive plan; 
(f)  The project in which the increase is proposed provides creative and innovative design; and 
(g)  The property is not located within the Old Town neighborhood overlay district. 
    An increase in lot coverage shall not be permitted if such increase will be detrimental to the character of the proposed P.U.D. or character of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 17, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2002-26, § 2, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 5, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 26-18-9. - Maintenance of open space, open areas, recreational areas, walkways or private streets. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or developer to provide an acceptable program for the continuing maintenance of open space, open areas, recreational areas, walkways and private streets within a P.U.D. Such provisions may include any type of organizational structure acceptable to the city which clearly defines the responsibility for continuing maintenance including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The landowners within the P.U.D. may provide for and establish a corporation, duly incorporated in accordance with the laws of the State of Colorado for the ownership and/or maintenance of all open space and common open areas, walkways, recreational areas and private streets within the development which corporation shall have as its members all landowners within the P.U.D.; or 
(2)  An agreement may be drafted which provides assurances that all such areas will be accessible to all residents of a residential planned unit development and that the areas will be maintained by the existing or future property owners. Any such agreement shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney. 
(b)  All agreements for the maintenance of said areas shall provide that if said areas are not properly maintained, the City of Lafayette may file a lien against properties within the P.U.D. to pay for maintenance costs, which lien shall be subject to foreclosure as provided by state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 17, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 13, 3-20-01) 
Sec. 26-18-10. - Minimum spacing between structures. 
(a)  Minimum spacing between structures is required to ensure adequate privacy, light, ventilation and fire protection while encouraging more creative and imaginative design. 
(b)  No residential building shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of another residential building within the same P.U.D. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the planning commission may grant approval of residential building separation of no less than ten (10) feet when the planning commission finds that the decrease in spacing meets the intent of a planned unit development as defined in section 26-18-1, and will not have a significant adverse effect on the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 17, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2002-26, § 3, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 2015-20, § 1, 7-7-15) 
Sec. 26-18-11. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    Except as provided in this section, parking in an P.U.D. shall comply with the general requirements of this chapter. 
(a)  The planning commission may grant parking reductions of not more than twenty (20) percent in a P.U.D., except for elderly housing where not more than a seventy-percent reduction may be granted; provided, however, no parking reductions shall be granted for developments requiring three (3) or fewer parking spaces. In granting any parking reduction, the planning commission and city council shall consider at least the following factors: 
(1)  Probable number of cars owned by occupants of dwellings in the P.U.D. (e.g., elderly housing). 
(2)  Parking needs of any nonresidential use. 
(3)  Varying time periods of use, whenever joint use of common parking areas is proposed. 
(b)  Whenever the number of off-street parking spaces is reduced because of the nature of the occupancy, the P.U.D. approval shall be subject to the condition that the nature of the occupancy will not change. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 17, 3-2-93; Ord. No. 2002-26, § 4, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 2016-05, § 6, 3-15-16) 
Sec. 26-18-12. - Conflicts with other provisions of the Municipal Code. 
    In case of conflict between the provisions of this section 26-18 and other provisions of the Lafayette Municipal Code, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1993-6, § 17, 3-2-93) 
Sec. 26-18-13. - Review and approval of TDR/PUDs. 
    Review and approval of a TDR/PUD pursuant to the "Intergovernmental Agreement for City of Lafayette-Boulder County TDR Comprehensive Development Plan" shall, at a minimum, be subject to the requirements and provisions of sections 26-18-4 and 26-18-5 of this chapter. The planning commission and city council may, in their discretion, apply any other relevant standard found in the Lafayette Code, comprehensive plan, or any other ordinance or resolution to review and approval of a TDR/PUD. 
(Ord. No. 1995-21, § 5, 12-5-95) 
SECTION 26-18.1. - OLD TOWN NEIGHBORHOOD OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-18.1-1. - Purpose. 
    The Old Town neighborhood overlay district, and the regulations in this section, are intended to: 
(a)  Promote future infill, redevelopment, and additions that are compatible with the traditional scale and massing of development traditionally found in Lafayette's Old Town residential neighborhoods; 
(b)  Mitigate potential impacts associated with future infill, redevelopment, and additions on existing single-family homes; and 
(c)  Encourage the preservation of historic buildings in Lafayette's Old Town residential neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 2017-30, § 4, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 26-18.1-2. - Applicability. 
    The "schedule of requirements" set forth in section 26-18.1-3 below shall apply to all new development, infill development, redevelopment, additions, and/or substantial improvements to buildings located on properties within the Old Town neighborhood overlay district boundary, by reference to the underlying basic zone district that would otherwise apply. Except as modified by this section 26-18.1, or a planned unit development, all other provisions of chapter 26 of the Code of Ordinance of Lafayette, Colorado, as applicable to the underlying basic zone district, shall apply to the properties in the Old Town neighborhood district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-30, § 4, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 26-18.1-3. - Schedule of requirements. 
    The following density requirements apply to properties within the Old Town neighborhood overlay district: 
R1 - Medium Density Residential R2 - Single- and Two-Family Residential OTR - Old Town Residential T1 - Transitional Business Setbacks Front yard setback - Arterial street 45 45 45 45 Front yard setback - Collector street 35 35 35 35 Front yard setback - Local street 25 20 20 20 Side yard setback 5 5 5 5 Rear yard setback 25 20 20 20 Side street setback - - 10 Minimum Lot Area Single-family 7,000 7,000 7,000 7,000 Duplex - 7,000 7,000 7,000 Maximum lot coverage 30% 30% 30% 30% Maximum dwelling units/acre 6 10 13 13 Building height 24 24 24 24 Accessory Building or Structure Rear yard setback 5 5 5 5 Maximum height 16 16 20 20 Accessory Dwelling Unit Rear yard setback - - 5 - Maximum height - - 20 -  
(a)  Unenclosed covered porches that face the primary street frontage and/or the side street frontage (corner lots only) shall not count towards lot coverage and may encroach into the front yard setback up to a distance of six (6) feet from the dwelling but in no case closer than three (3) feet from the property line. 
(b)  Lot coverage may be increased as follows, provided the total lot coverage resulting from the application of one (1) or more of the following incentives does not exceed thirty-five (35) percent: 
(1)  Limiting construction to one-story (sixteen (16) feet or less) for all primary and accessory structures, including accessory dwelling units: A lot coverage increase of five (5) percent; 
(2)  Limiting construction to a one and a half-story (twenty (20) feet or less) primary and accessory structures, including accessory dwelling unit: A lot coverage increase of two (2) percent; 
(3)  Obtaining local historic landmark status for the primary structure on the lot in conjunction with the construction of an addition or accessory dwelling unit: A lot coverage increase of five (5) percent, provided that such designation is obtained prior to granting of lot coverage increase, and all additions comply with the United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation; 
(4)  Preserving historic buildings: A lot coverage increase of five (5) percent when all proposed additions or accessory dwelling units: 
i.  Incorporate buildings over fifty (50) years old; and 
ii.  Preserve the full width of the front street-facing façade and at least seventy-five (75) percent of the front depth of the building, including all walls, porches, windows, roof forms, and other architectural elements located within these areas. 
(5)  Preservation of significant trees: A lot coverage increase of two (2) percent for projects that preserve one (1) or more significant trees in conjunction with the construction of a primary dwelling, addition, and/or accessory dwelling unit. For the purposes of this incentive, applicants must demonstrate what steps were taken as part of the site planning process to preserve the significant tree(s), and provide a letter from a certified arborist indicating that the significant tree(s) are free from disease and have an anticipated lifespan of at least ten (10) years. Significant trees shall be defined as follows: 
i.  A minimum of six (6) inches in caliper measured twelve (12) inches above soil line for a deciduous tree; or 
ii.  A minimum of ten (10) feet in height for a needled evergreen tree. 
For the purposes of (1), (2), (3) and (4) in this subsection, the use of finished basements as a means to expand the livable area of a primary dwelling or accessory dwelling unit without expanding overall lot coverage is consistent with the intent of these incentives, as is the incorporation of a full finished basement in conjunction with the replacement of a failing foundation on a historic building. 
(c)  Modifications to maximum heights established by Table 26-B of this chapter may not be granted as part of a planned unit development. 
(d)  A "bulk plane" analysis shall be applied to define the three dimensional area to which development will be limited. The "bulk plane" extends twelve (12) feet up from all four lot lines and angles in at forty-five-degree angles from the side lot lines. The "buildable area", or area in which development may occur, consists of the area within the required front, side and rear yard setback and the defined bulk plane. (Figure 2 and Figure 3) 

Figure 2 - Bulk Plane as viewed from primary street frontage
(1)  Individual dormers (shed or gable) may extend up to six (6) feet beyond the buildable area, with a maximum width of eight (8) feet. The portion(s) that extend beyond the buildable area shall have a combined width no greater than fifty (50) percent of the length of the roof upon which they are located. The width of the dormer shall be measured at the point that it intersects the bulk plane. 
(2)  The end(s) of a side-gabled roof may extend up to five (5) feet beyond the buildable area with a maximum width of twenty (20) feet or no more than fifty (50) percent of the length of the home, whichever is less. The width of the side-gabled roof shall be measured at the point that it intersects the bulk plane. 
(Ord. No. 2017-30, § 4, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 26-18.1-4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-18.1-5. - Site plan/architectural review criteria. 
    The following supplemental criteria shall be used in conjunction with the Old Town Lafayette Design Resource Book, dated October 2001, and is hereby adopted by city council, as guidelines, in the review of all site plans and projects located in the Old Town neighborhood overlay district pursuant to section 26-16-7: 
(a)  All development. 
(1)  A similar level of design treatment shall be provided on all four (4) sides of a building. Blank walls devoid of windows or other details are prohibited. 
(2)  The percentage of the front façade that is occupied by window and door openings shall be between twenty-five (25) and thirty (30) percent, as is typically found on traditional homes in Old Town. A minimum of ten (10) percent of all other facades shall be occupied by window and door openings. 
(3)  Within twenty (20) feet of each side property line, the cumulative length of walls that exceed twelve (12) feet in height shall be limited to thirty (30) feet. The remaining walls shall: 
i.  Be set back at least four (4) feet from portions of the wall plane that exceed twelve (12) feet in height; or 
ii.  Not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 

Figure 3 - Required side wall articulation through stepdown (top) or variation in wall plane (bottom)

Figure 4 - Required side wall articulation through stepdown (top) or variation in the wall plane (bottom)
(4)  Air-conditioning units or other HVAC equipment mounted at the ground level must mitigate noise and heat impacts on adjacent residents through one (1) or more of the following strategies: 
i.  Locating equipment a minimum of ten (10) feet from ground level bedroom windows and unenclosed patios or porches on the adjacent home; 
ii.  Locating equipment in a sound-buffering enclosure; and/or 
iii.  Using equipment certified with a sound rating of the proposed equipment, not to exceed an A-weighted sound pressure level of sixty-five (65) DBA. 
(5)  The primary entry of single-family homes shall face the primary street frontage. 
(b)  Additions. 
(1)  Additions shall incorporate roof and building forms similar to those found on the principal building. 
(2)  Additions shall be designed to appear secondary to the principal building in terms of their mass and form when viewed from the public right-of-way. This standard may be accomplished through one (1) or more of the following techniques. (Figure 5 and Figure 6) 
i.  Concentrating the mass and height of the addition behind and/or to the side of the principal building; 
ii.  Using sloped roof forms, dormers, or other creative approaches to accommodate additional square footage on a second story without obscuring the original form and scale of the principal building; 
iii.  Avoiding the use of building forms that would obscure, remove, or significantly modify the predominant roof form of the principal building, particularly those roof forms that are visible from the public right-of-way; 
iv.  Incorporating a smaller scale building module or similar transition between the principal building and a larger addition to maintain the traditional form of the principal building; and/or 
v.  Aligning or stepping down the height of an addition where it meets the principal building. 

Figure 5 - Additions shall be designed to appear secondary to the principal building in terms of their mass and form when viewed from the public right-of-way
(3)  For buildings that are greater than fifty (50) years old, a change in architectural detailing (e.g., materials, color) or offset in the building wall shall be provided where the addition meets the original building to provide a subtle distinction between old and new building forms. (Figure 6) 

Figure 6 - Use of change in building massing to provide a subtle distinction where an addition (shown in yellow) meets the original building form
(c)  Duplexes. 
(1)  At least one (1) primary entrance shall face the primary street frontage. If both entrances face the primary street frontage, an offset in the front façade or other variation in building massing shall be provided to avoid the appearance of an identical or "mirrored" pair of units aligned at the front setback. (Figure 7) 

Figure 7 - Offsets and variation in building massing should be used to distinguish between entrances in street-facing duplex units (right) to avoid the appearance of an identical or "mirrored" pair of units aligned at the front setback (left)
(d)  Garages. 
(1)  Garages shall be located at the rear of the lot and accessed from an alley where one exists. 
(2)  On corner lots, garage doors may face a side street and/or toward an alley where one exists. The number of continuous garage doors facing a side street is limited to two (2) single-car garage doors, or one (1) double-car garage door; however, additional garage doors may face an alley. 
(3)  Developments encompassing two (2) acres or more shall incorporate alley access to allow for alley-loaded garages when feasible and when connecting to existing alleys. 
(Ord. No. 2017-30, § 4, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 26-18.1-6. - Landscaping regulations and guidelines. 
(a)  Tree replacement. Preservation of significant trees is encouraged. For the purposes of this standard, significant trees shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  A minimum of six (6) inches in caliper measured twelve (12) inches above soil line for a deciduous tree; or 
(2)  A minimum of ten (10) feet in height for a needled evergreen tree. 
(b)  Each significant tree that is not preserved shall be replaced on site in a location that can accommodate the anticipated width of the tree at maturity without pruning. 
(c)  Replacement deciduous trees shall be a minimum of two (2) caliper inches measured six (6) inches above soil line. Replacement evergreen tree shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2017-30, § 4, 9-5-17) 
SECTION 26-19. - DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 26-19-1. - Suitability of land for subdivision. 
    Land subject to natural hazards such as flooding shall be considered unsuitable for residential occupancy or other uses which impair the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants. Where such hazardous conditions exist on or adjacent to lands proposed for subdivision, the proposal shall be disapproved unless design of lots, streets and improvements eliminates all such hazards in the opinion of the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-2. - Boundary survey and monumentation. 
    The boundary survey, internal property lines and monumentations shall meet all of the requirements of Articles 50-53, Title 38, C.R.S. Survey data shall be checked by the city engineer prior to approval of the final plat. The location of all monuments required by this section shall be indicated on the plat, and shall be installed as follows: 
(a)  All street center line monuments shall be iron pin monuments five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch in diameter and eighteen (18) inches long, set in concrete at least eight (8) inches in diameter and located in the ground at all points on street center lines where there is a change in direction or curvature, at all street intersections and at the radius point of a cul-de-sac. 
(b)  All quarter corner, section corner monuments shall be set in monument boxes of a type approved by, or obtained through, the city, and shall be set to the finished grade before acceptance by the city. 
(c)  All monuments shall have a cap bearing the number of the land surveyor setting the monuments. 
(d)  Accuracy between all monuments shall be not less than one (1) part in ten thousand (10,000). 
(e)  In no case shall monuments be set more than one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet apart. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-3. - Lot and block design. 
    Each lot shall be designed to provide an adequate, accessible building site for a structure devoted to the intended use of the land. Except as provided in Section 26-18 (Planned Unit Development), each lot shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements of applicable zone district regulations and shall have a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet of frontage on a dedicated public street; the use of a private easement for principal access to a lot shall not be allowed. Lots with double frontage shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation from major arterials or because of the slope. Side lot lines shall be substantially at a right angle or radial to street lines when feasible. All lots shall have a defined rear yard. Blocks shall be at least three hundred (300) feet in length and not more than one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet in length between street intersections. Pedestrian crosswalks or easements may be required in blocks whose lengths exceed one thousand (1,000) feet. Corner lots shall contain sufficient area to accommodate a building devoted to the intended use of the lot, plus a minimum front yard pursuant to the applicable zone district regulation adjacent to each bordering street. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-4. - Planned unit development. 
    The planning commission may recommend approval of a subdivision which departs from the usual design of regularly platted lots and blocks as a part of a planned unit development in accordance with the provisions of Section 26-18 of this chapter. 
Sec. 26-19-5. - Landscaping regulations and guidelines. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to new residential and new nonresidential development, and any development requiring a site plan review, commenced after the effective date of Ordinance No. 2004-1 [March 2, 2004]. All landscape plans approved under prior ordinances of the City of Lafayette shall remain subject to fulfillment of all terms of such plans and to the provisions of subsection (c)(1)h., of this section, entitled "Maintenance". 
(b)  Definitions. The words used in this section have the meaning set forth below: 
    Annual water budget/water budget means the target maximum amount of irrigation water applied to a landscaped area measured in gallons per square foot per year. 
    Application rate means the amount of water applied to a given area over a given time, usually measured in inches per hour. 
    Automatic controller means a timer, capable of operating valve stations to set the days and length of time of a water application. 
    Backflow prevention device means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of a water supply due to the reverse flow of water from an irrigation system. 
    Common open area means areas held in private ownership and designated for shared use by common owners, their guests and invitees, and/or members of an owner's association, and that is improved with paved plazas or patios, landscape plantings, or natural plant restoration. 
    Established landscape means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed roots into the soil adjacent to the root ball. 
    Establishment period means the first three hundred sixty-five (365) days of growing season after installing the plant in the landscape. 
    Evapotranspiration (abbreviated as ET) means water evaporated from adjacent soil surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific time. 
    ET reference location means the major city identified within the State of Colorado as the reference for evapotranspiration rates based on the area's climatic conditions. (e.g. Denver Colorado Springs, Grand Junction, Pueblo). 
    Flow rate means the rate at which water flows through pipes and valves (gallons per minute or cubic feet per second). 
    Hydrozone means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a single irrigation valve or set of irrigation valves with the same schedule. 
    Infiltration rate means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour). 
    Landscaped area means an entire parcel of real property less the building footprint, driveways, nonirrigated portions of parking lots, hardscapes (such as decks and patios), and other nonporous areas. Water features are included in the calculation of the landscaped area. 
    Landscaping and/or landscape improvements means plantings of grass, shrubs, trees or similar living plants, with minimal use of other ground surface treatment such as decorative rock, bark, or stone. These inert materials are allowed to be used in conjunction with live material in planting beds, but do not count toward the calculations of required landscaping and/or landscaping improvements. 
    Mulch means any organic material such as leaves, bark, wood chips, straw, or inorganic material such as crushed stone or gravel, or other materials left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purpose of reducing evaporation. 
    Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems means those sprinkler irrigation systems characterized by high flow rates including but not limited to pop-ups, impulse sprinklers, rotors, and similar devices. 
    Overspray means the water that is delivered beyond the landscaped area, wetting pavements, walks, structures, or other nonlandscaped areas. 
    Station means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
    Street tree means a shade or ornamental tree planted along public or private streets and drives to provide shade to reduce heating of pavements, provide spatial definition and visual enhancement. Trees of a Salicacease, genus Salix (willow), Populus (poplar, cottonwood), and Acer negundo (female boxelder), and all fruit-bearing trees do not qualify as street trees. 
    Turf means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass with its roots. 
    Valve means a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system. 
(c)  Landscape design. 
(1)  Landscape plan. All land development applications required to be accompanied by a landscape plan per section 26-17 shall have such landscape plan comply with the requirements of section 26-19-5. The required landscape plan shall be prepared and stamped by a Colorado licensed landscape architect, except plans for a single-family residence or multi-family residential developments containing four (4) or fewer units, not including common areas. Building permit applications for individual single-family residences do not require landscape plans, but shall comply with section 26-19-5(d)(1) and (3). 
a.  Street trees. Landscape improvements shall create an orderly, irrigated, managed landscape. All neighborhoods shall have tree-lined streets. Street trees shall include a mix of species and be aligned in straight rows. Street trees shall be placed within the right-of-way tree lawn or within ten (10) feet of the back of curb where no tree lawn exists. Trees installed along streets that will be widened in the future, to the extent that such widening is known, shall take into account plans for future widening of streets so that established trees will not be disturbed during future construction. 
b.  Landscape design criteria. Landscape improvements shall be an integral part of the overall site design for each property. Landscape improvements shall be deemed to be water-efficient when the approved landscape plan indicates an annual water budget of fifteen (15) gallons per square foot per year. Landscape improvements shall be designed to complement and enhance the character of neighborhoods and shall follow these guidelines: 
1.  Landscaped areas shall be configured to maximize their interconnectivity within the site, and to natural areas and landscaped areas in adjacent developments. Small, isolated islands of landscaping shall be avoided except as required in parking lots and for screening along roadways. 
2.  Enhance functional open area through the creation of outdoor rooms appropriate to the location and purpose of the open area within the development. This can be accomplished through a combination of plantings, fencing, berms, and by using natural features on the site. 

Figure 19-1 
Use plantings and berms to create outdoor rooms in common open-area areas. 
3.  Landscape improvements in all developments shall be compatible with the character of the proposed development and the surrounding area to reinforce neighborhood identity. 
4.  Landscape design shall enhance natural features, drainage ways and environmental resources. 
5.  Spacing of trees shall allow for their mature spread. 
6.  All landscape improvements shall incorporate the elements of gateway, path and destination into the design of landscapes. Gateways are entries that provide transitions from one space to another. Pathways are routes that lead to a destination. Destinations are focal points that can include anything from a garden bench at the end of a path to a civic building at the end of a street. 
7.  Landscaping shall be no more than thirty-six (36) inches high in mature height when located in a sight distance triangle as defined in section 26-14-16. 
8.  Property owners shall use the following water efficient design principles to facilitate water conservation: 
i.  Design planting schemes for water conservation; 
ii.  Create lawns of appropriate size, shape, and type of turf; 
iii.  Use of mulch to maintain soil moisture and reduce evaporation; 
iv.  Group plants by hydrozone; 
v.  Improve the soil with organic matter if needed; 
vi.  Design and maintain efficient irrigation systems as described in section 26-19-5(c)(1)c., entitled "Irrigation Design Criteria" below; and 
vii.  Maintain the plantings and irrigation system for water efficiency, as described in section 26-19-5(c)(1)c., entitled "Irrigation design criteria" below. 
9.  Plants of any water need may be used in the landscape, provided that the total annual water use of the landscaped area does not exceed the annual water budget of fifteen (15) gallons per square foot per year. 
10.  Plants having similar water use shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones (see Appendix A), which shall be shown on the landscape plan. 
11.  High hydrozones shall be separated from low and very low hydrozones by moderate hydrozones whenever possible. 
12.  Plants shall be selected appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the site. Protection and preservation of native species and natural areas is encouraged. The planting of trees is encouraged wherever it is consistent with the other provisions of this section. 
13.  Landscaped areas less than eight (8) feet wide shall be landscaped with moderate, low, or very low hydrozone plants (see Appendix A). Public street right-of-way plantings are excepted from this requirement. 
14.  All plantable areas not covered with turf or other suitable plants shall be covered with a minimum of four (4) inches of a mulch to retain water, and inhibit weeds. Exceptions to the provision of mulch for low and very low water areas shall be considered based on individual plant requirements in those areas. Nonporous fabrics (e.g. plastic) shall not be placed under mulches. 
15.  Soil preparation shall be provided for all plants. Soil preparation shall include scarification to six (6) inches, with organic or other planting soil amendments as specified by the landscape designer or landscape architect. 
16.  Recirculating water shall be used for decorative water features. 
17.  Artificial plants, artificial grasses, and other artificial plant material are prohibited as a means of complying with these landscaping regulations. Such artificial materials are not entirely prohibited. They may be used for athletic fields and other uses, but shall not be used in any manner to satisfy the requirements of these landscape regulations. 
c.  Irrigation design criteria. Except as otherwise allowed by this section, all required landscaping shall be irrigated for plant establishment and maintenance. Irrigation system improvements shall be designed in conformance with the following criteria. Additional advisory technical design criteria are available in the planning and building office. 
1.  Required landscaping in developments shall be irrigated with a permanent irrigation system, provided however, an exception for hand watering may be provided for low and very low hydrozones in accordance with section 26-19-5(c)(1)i., entitled "Adjustment of requirements". Exemptions shall be considered by the planning director for low and very low hydrozone plantings in accordance with section 26-19-5(c)(1)i., entitled "Adjustment of requirements". 
2.  Temporary irrigation (less than one (1) season) may be used to establish native grasses and native vegetation. 
3.  Use of nontreated water for irrigation is encouraged if a permanent, legal, suitable supply is available. 
4.  The property owner shall use the following criteria for irrigation design. 
i.  Each valve shall irrigate a landscape with similar site, slope and soil conditions and plant material with similar hydrozone watering needs. 
ii.  Adjustment of soil types, infiltration rate and slopes shall be undertaken in order to prevent runoff onto adjacent property, and overspray. Proper irrigation equipment, schedules, and repeat cycles shall be used to minimizing runoff. 
iii.  Turf and nonturf areas shall be irrigated on separate valves. 
iv.  Drip emitters and sprinklers shall be placed on separate valves. 
v.  Bubblers for trees shall be placed on a separate valve. A bubbler shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5) gallons per minute (gpm) for each device. 
5.  The property owner shall use the following hydraulic principles when designing the irrigation system. 
i.  When practical, separate landscape water meters are encouraged to be installed for all regulated landscapes. 
ii.  The irrigation system shall be designed to provide peak season irrigation during night hours. 
iii.  The tap size shall be based on the water demand of the site and shall take into consideration the areas of each plant type (e.g., turf, native seed, perennials and annuals and shrubs), the evapotranspiration for the site, the water demand of each plant type at peak season, and the water window. 
iv.  Turf and grass area irrigation shall be designed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(aa)  No single zone shall mix head types, such as rotors and pop-up spray heads on the same zone. 
(bb)  Sprinklers shall be spaced for "head-to-head" coverage, where the spray pattern from one head will reach to the next head; all sprinkler heads shall be spaced at a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the design performance diameter of the sprinkler. 
(cc)  No overhead sprinkler irrigation systems shall be installed in landscaped areas less than eight (8) feet wide. Public street right-of-way landscaping shall be excepted from this requirement. 
(dd)  Small landscaped areas (twenty-five (25) feet wide or less) shall be irrigated with fixed nozzle pop-up spray heads with matched precipitation nozzles. Nozzles shall be sized to provide head to head coverage. Heads shall pop-up a minimum of four (4) inches in turf areas. Heads can be specified with pressure reducing features, where needed. 
(ee)  Large landscaped areas (wider than twenty-five (25) feet) shall be irrigated with gear driven rotor heads with a minimum precipitation rate of forty-five hundredths (0.45) of an inch per hour for a full circle head. Heads shall pop-up a minimum of four (4) inches in turf areas. 
v.  Shrub bed areas with plant material of one (1) gallon in size or larger shall be irrigated with a drip or subsurface system. 
vi.  Perennial and annual beds shall be spray irrigated with twelve-inch pop-up spray heads with a maximum spacing of ten (10) inches on center. 
vii.  All irrigation control systems shall be equipped with an automatic rain shut-off device. 
6.  Irrigation control systems shall be employed that offer flexibility in programming as follows: 
i.  All irrigation systems shall include an electric automatic controller with multiple programs and multiple repeat and rest cycle capabilities and a flexible calendar program. 
ii.  All controllers shall be capable of temporarily shutting down the system by utilizing internal/external options such as rain and wind sensors. 
iii.  The controller shall have the ability to adjust run times based on a percentage of maximum evapotranspiration rate. 
iv.  Each zone/valve shall have its own station on the controller. The exception is drip valves, which may be doubled on the controller. 
7.  Installation of irrigation systems shall be in accordance with an approved final irrigation plan. 
8.  Property owner shall keep a set of "as-built" drawings of irrigation system with dimensions shown for irrigation components. 
9.  Property owners shall operate their irrigation system in accordance with the approved final landscape plan. 
10.  Water features shall be considered as high water zones (see Appendix A). The total amount of water for irrigation, plus water needed for any water features, shall be combined in the annual water budget. 
d.  Environmental criteria. 
1.  Landscapes shall consist of a variety of species to enhance biodiversity. No one species may make up more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total nongrass plant materials within the landscaped area. 
2.  All healthy trees having a caliper of four (4) inches in size or larger shall be preserved whenever possible they do not substantially interfere with the construction of buildings on the property or with the grading of the property as may be necessary for the construction of buildings on the property. Trees having a caliper of four (4) inches in size which are removed shall be replaced by trees of no less than two-inch caliper, with the total gross caliper inches of the replacement trees being equal to or greater than the total caliper inches of those trees removed. This requirement shall not prevent the removal of unhealthy trees in conjunction with site development. 
3.  Trees shall be located to provide summer shade and limit winter shade on walks, parking lots, and streets. 
4.  A combination of plantings, berms, walls and fences shall be used as appropriate to buffer sensitive habitat and noncompatible uses. 

Figure 19-2 
Use buffers to protect the physical integrity of riparian ecosystems. Try to preserve vegetation and trees in streamside zone and middle zone. Encourage grass and landscaping in outer zones to filter runoff from backyards, parking areas, roads, etc. 
  
5.  Provide a twenty (20) foot wide minimum area of landscaping as a buffer between nonresidential and residential uses. 
6.  Plants shall be selected to blend with the native vegetation for development at the border between developed area and nonirrigated natural open area. Plants with high fuel volume and/or high flammability shall be avoided. 
7.  All areas disturbed by construction shall be reseeded to prevent erosion. Native noninvasive grasses shall be used for revegetation where practical. 
8.  Use native seed mixes for natural area restoration. 
9.  Trees of the Ulmaceae (elm) family and all species of ash (Fraxinus spp.) white, purple, green and their cultivars, shall not be planted with[in] the Lafayette city limits. 
e.  Transition landscaping. The property owner shall use trees, shrubs and groundcover as a means of integrating structures within the development site and surrounding area. The size and intensity of plantings shall be appropriate to the size and context of the improvements. 
1.  The property owner shall screen adjacent land uses of different intensities through a combination of berming, plantings and fencing. Opaque screening shall be used only when necessary to mitigate the impact of noise, light, unattractive aesthetics and traffic. If a fence is used as screening, then plant material shall also be used, except in industrial zones where a fence may be used alone. 

Figure 19-3. Combination of berming, planting and fencing to screen uses 
2.  The property owner shall use landscaping to provide a transition from developed, managed landscape to more natural vegetation. 
3.  The property owner shall provide a tree canopy by installing shade trees within and adjacent to paved areas. 
f.  Plant materials. 
1.  The minimum plant sizes on all required landscaping shall be two-inch caliper deciduous trees, one and one-half-inch caliper ornamental trees, six-foot tall evergreen trees and five-gallon shrubs. 
2.  Required plant materials shall be grown in a nursery in accordance with proper horticultural practice. Plants shall be healthy, well-branched vigorous stock with a growth habit normal to the species and variety, and free of diseases, insects and injuries. 
3.  All plant schedule listings of proposed plant material shall include the respective hydrozone category that reflects the water requirements of that plant. Plant lists with hydrozone categories are maintained in the city's planning and building department. 
g.  Guarantee of installation. Required landscape improvements shall be installed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy (C.O.) for all structures. The property owner may, in the sole discretion of the city, post a financial guarantee for the improvements equal to one hundred fifteen (115) percent of the cost of improvements. Installation shall then occur within the next planting season. This guarantee shall be released upon completion of the installation of the landscaping. 
h.  Maintenance. The property owner shall maintain landscape improvements in good health and attractive condition. All property owners shall be responsible for maintenance of landscaping within the portion of the public right-of-way between the back of the curb or street pavement and their property. 
1.  A maintenance statement satisfying the following conditions shall be placed on the landscape plan, stating: 
"Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall include but not be limited to checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment; resetting the automatic controller; aerating and de-thatching turf areas (only if needed); replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning, and weeding in all landscaped areas." 
2.  The property owner shall maintain the landscaping as approved in the final landscape plan. 
3.  The property owner shall provide all regular and normal maintenance of landscaping including weeding, irrigation, fertilization, pruning and mowing necessary to comply with subsections (aa) and (bb) above. 
4.  The property owner shall not use plant materials which exhibit evidence of insect, pest, disease, and shall appropriately treat any and all damaged plants, and shall remove and replace any and all dead plant material with living plant materials. 
5.  If the required maintenance is not being performed pursuant to the terms of this section, the owner of the property shall be notified in writing of the failure to properly maintain landscaping by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall give the owner not less than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days in which to bring the landscaping into compliance with this section. In the event that the owner fails or neglects to comply with the above notice, the city planning director may cause the necessary work to be performed and shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner of the cost thereof plus the charges as authorized in this section; provided that in no event shall failure of the owner to receive notice of the cost and charges void the lien provided for in this section. The actual cost of such work plus fifteen (15) percent for inspection and other costs in connection therewith shall, in the event the payment thereof is not made to the city within thirty (30) days after completion of said work, become a lien against said property as of the date the city treasurer certifies the cost of and charges to the office of the county treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. The amount of the assessment for the costs and charges provided for in this section may be paid to the city treasurer at any time prior to certification of the same by the city treasurer to the office of the county treasurer, but thereafter payment shall be made only to the office of the county treasurer. In the event any owner desires to object to an assessment made pursuant this section, the owner shall within thirty (30) days after completion of the work on the property file a written objection thereof with the city clerk, who shall thereupon designate the next regular meeting of the city council as the date when said objector may appear before the council and have the objection heard. Upon receipt of the assessment pursuant to this section, the county treasurer shall proceed to collect the amount as assessed and certified against the property affected thereby in the same manner as the collection of the general property taxes and the redemption thereof. 
i.  Adjustment of requirements. 
1.  The planning director is authorized to allow a variance from the strict application of this section in cases which involve practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship, provided however, that: 
i.  The variance granted is the minimum necessary to alleviate such practical difficulties or undue hardship upon the owner of the property; 
ii.  Such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the general plan of this chapter; 
iii.  The circumstances found to constitute a hardship were not created by the appellant, are not due to or the result of general conditions in the district and cannot be practically corrected; 
In granting such variance, the planning director may attach thereto reasonable conditions. The grant of any variance shall not constitute or be construed as a precedent, ground or cause for any other variance. 
2.  Appeals from this section shall be considered by the zoning board of adjustment pursuant to the provision of this chapter. 
(d)  Landscaping minimum requirements. 
(1)  Right-of-way. The property owner shall provide: 
a.  One (1) deciduous or ornamental street tree for every forty (40) linear feet of street frontage or portion thereof. Street trees shall be planted within the tree lawn portion of the right-of-way with adequate spacing to allow for the mature spread of the trees. When a tree lawn is not provided, trees shall be planted within ten (10) feet of the back of curb. 

Figure 19-4 
Provide one (1) tree for every forty (40) feet of street frontage or portion thereof. Space trees to account for mature spread. 
b.  Live groundcover as appropriate to the use and function of the area described in subsection a. above, including grass, trees, flowers, or shrubs. In commercial areas such area may be paved if it functions as pedestrian access to storefronts and is integrated into the overall design of the other improvements on the site. 
c.  With the exception of the owners of single family homes, the property owner shall install an automatic irrigation system meeting the requirements of section 26-19-5(c)(1)c. for all landscaping within public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Common open area. Landscaping shall be appropriate to the use and function of the area and include trees, shrubs, groundcover, irrigation (where necessary) and paving. 
(3)  Single-family residential. 
a.  In addition to the right-of-way landscaping described in section 26-19-5(d)(1)a. above, the property owner shall: 
1.  Provide landscaping in the front yard of each home. There shall be a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the gross front yard area, excluding driveways, landscaped with live materials. 
2.  Install landscaping within the side and rear yard and is encouraged to plant additional trees, shrubs and flowers using waterwise principles and the general provisions set forth in this section. 
3.  Maintain the landscaping within the adjacent road right-of-way. 

Figure 19-5 
Small lot single-family residential landscaping with hydrozone groupings indicated. Provide seventy-five (75) percent minimum live plant materials between front of house and street curb. 
(4)  Multifamily. 
a.  The property owner shall provide right-of-way landscaping pursuant to section 26-19-5(d)(1). 
b.  Landscape improvements shall be designed to enhance the overall appearance of the development and integrate the project with adjacent land uses and the surrounding neighborhood. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the gross site area shall be landscaped area. Refer to section 26-20-16(k) for additional landscape requirements. 
c.  The property owner shall install site trees, a minimum of one (1) tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet of landscaped area, distributed on the site. 
d.  The property owner shall install a minimum of one (1) shrub per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of landscaped area. Shrubs shall be grouped and distributed throughout the site. Trees may be substituted for up to one-half (1/2) of the required shrubs at the rate of one (1) tree for ten (10) shrubs and vice versa, subject to planning commission approval. 
e.  The property owner shall install groundcover, either irrigated turf maintained to appropriate standards for active recreation in active recreation areas, or where appropriate, use native grass for areas that will not function as active recreation areas. Native grass must be weed free and maintained at an appropriate height according to species. 
f.  Parking lot landscaping as required in section 26-19-5(d)(6). 

Figure 19-6 
(5)  Nonresidential. 
a.  The property owner shall provide right-of-way landscaping pursuant to section 26-19-5(d)(1). 
b.  Landscape improvements shall be designed to enhance the overall appearance of the development and integrate the project with adjacent land uses and the surrounding neighborhood. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the gross site area shall be landscaped area. Refer to section 26-20-16(k) for additional landscape requirements. 
c.  The property owner shall provide: 
1.  A minimum of one (1) tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet of landscaped area, distributed on the site. 
2.  A minimum of one (1) shrub per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of landscaped area. Shrubs shall be grouped and distributed throughout the site. Trees may be substituted for up to one-half (1/2) of the required shrubs at the rate of one (1) tree for ten (10) shrubs, and vice versa, subject to planning commission approval. 
3.  Irrigated grass turf for active recreation areas. Where appropriate, native grass may be used for areas that will not function as active recreation areas. Native grass must be weed free and maintained at an appropriate height for each species. 
4.  Parking lot landscaping as required in section 26-19-5(d)(6). 
d.  Property owner shall screen industrial and commercial loading areas, including vehicle loading areas, and service and storage areas visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent property, with an opaque screen that is an integral part of the building architecture, by landscaping, or a combination of fencing and landscaping. Chain link fencing with slats, tires or building materials shall not be used as screening materials. 
e.  Integrate activities on the subject property with adjacent land uses by utilizing a combination of landscaping, building orientation and appropriate architectural elements. 
f.  The property owner shall maintain the yard and landscaping within the adjacent road right-of-way. 

Figure 19-7 
Create pedestrian-friendly commercial areas by: 
  Providing open areas for gathering places. 
  Creating a tree canopy between on-street parking and store fronts to provide a separation between cars and sidewalks. 
  Landscaping parking lots. 
(6)  Parking lots. 
a.  Parking lot landscaping shall break up large expanses of pavement, create shade, buffer views of parking lots from adjacent streets and development, and enhance the overall appearance of each project. 
b.  All parking lots with ten (10) spaces or more shall be subject to the requirements of this section 26-19-5(d)(6). Refer to sections 26-20-16(b) and 26-20-16(k) for additional landscape requirements. 
c.  The property owner shall provide: 
1.  A minimum of one (1) tree per fifteen (15) parking spaces, to be placed in islands which are a minimum of ten (10) feet wide, and shall use the landscaping to break up large expanses of pavement and to create a tree canopy for summer shade. (See Figure 19-8.) 

Figure 19-8 
Possible configuration of parking lot, with islands. 
2.  A minimum of one (1) shrub per parking space, to be grouped in landscape islands or around the parking lot perimeter. 
3.  Shrubs and ornamental grasses in areas less than ten (10) feet wide. 
4.  A landscape setback to parking lots, twenty (20) feet from arterial street rights-of-way or fifteen (15) feet from any other street right-of-way. The purpose of the setback is to provide a buffer between the street and parking areas and to screen the parking from the street. This setback may be reduced to ten (10) feet if used in combination with a three to four (3-4) foot articulated masonry or stone decorative wall with trees and shrubs on both sides of the wall to soften its appearance. 
5.  Plant material intended as buffer shall be planted at a density so as to provide effective screening within two (2) years. 
(7)  Stormwater detention. 
a.  Intent. To promote innovative and effective land and water management techniques that protect and enhance water quality. 
b.  General provisions. 
1.  All stormwater detention facilities shall be appropriately landscaped in coordination with the planning director after consultation with the public works director. 
2.  Landscaping associated with stormwater detention facilities shall be integrated into the overall design of the project. 
3.  Landscaping shall enhance the overall appearance of the project, prevent erosion and improve water quality of storm water runoff whenever possible. 
4.  Stormwater detention facilities may function as open area for active recreation, trail corridors or habitat enhancement areas if they are designed appropriately and approved by the planning director after consultation with the public works director. 
5.  The use of planting strips and shallow, landscaped depressions in parking lots and along roads is encouraged to help trap and remove pollutants from stormwater runoff. 

Figure 19-9 
Develop storm drainage systems as landscape amenities which can enhance the overall project. 
c.  Minimum requirements. 
1.  All stormwater detention facilities shall be planted with grass appropriate to the function of the area. Areas to be used for active recreation shall be turf-type grass and irrigated with a permanent irrigation system. Areas to be maintained for habitat enhancement shall be seeded to native grasses and wildflowers. The property owner shall establish a complete, weed free stand of grass. Trail corridors may be seeded with native grasses if appropriately integrated with adjacent improvements. 
2.  Landscape improvements shall be designed to enhance the function of the facility. Areas designed for recreation shall include clusters of trees to provide shade, located so they do not impair the function of the facility. 
3.  Habitat and water quality enhancement, including wetland plantings in low wet areas is encouraged. 
d.  All detention facilities shall be owned and maintained by the property owner unless otherwise approved by the city council. 
(e)  Submittal standards for landscape plans. Landscape plans required by Section 26-17 of this chapter shall be submitted in accordance with the following chart: 
Type of Plan Landscape Sketch Plan Landscape Preliminary Plan Landscape Final Plan Sketch Plan ? Preliminary Plat/PUD ? Final Plat/PUD ? Special Use Review ? Site Plan ?  
(1)  Sketch plan. Intent: To illustrate the overall design concept for landscaping and depict how it relates to the overall development. 
a.  The landscape sketch plan shall describe the general landscape design intent and the water conservation concept statement of the proposed landscape improvements. 
b.  At a minimum, the landscape sketch plan shall include the information as set forth in Table A below. 
(2)  Preliminary plan. Intent: To illustrate the master landscape plan for the development. 
a.  The landscape preliminary plan shall state how the proposal is consistent with the intent of these regulations, i.e. how it will preserve the city's special character, and integrate and enhance new development by promoting quality landscape design that reinforces the identity of the community and each neighborhood; will provide tree-lined streets in urban areas; will anchor new buildings in the landscape; provide tree canopies within paved areas; will screen adjoining conflicting uses; will screen parking areas, service yards and stormwater management facilities to provide an attractive streetscape; and will be environmentally sensitive by preserving existing trees, uses water conservation techniques, plants native species (when appropriate), and enhances valuable habitat. 
b.  At a minimum, the preliminary landscape plan shall include the information set forth in Table A below. 
(3)  Final plan. Intent: To ensure each phase of the final landscape plan is consistent with the master landscape plan for the development and to illustrate the specific landscaping details for each phase. 
a.  The final landscape plan shall describe the design intention and shall state how the proposal is consistent with this section, and/or with the preliminary landscape plan, if one was required. 
b.  The final landscape plan shall be on a separate page from the final plat map. The scale shall not greater than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'). 
c.  At a minimum, the final landscape shall include the information required in Table A below: 
TABLE A 
1.  Cover Sheet "Y" indicates Information Required Sketch Preliminary Final Project title Y Y Y Preparation date and issue/revision/date table Y Y Y Name, address, phone, fax and email of preparer Y Y Y Name, address, phone, fax and email of owner Y Y Y Site vicinity and location map Y Y Y Sheet index Y Y Y General landscape design intent statement including the general character and location of proposed landscaping and open area and how it meets the intent of these regulations Y Y Y Annual water budget worksheet Y Y Y Soils analysis and proposed soils amendments Y Signature block for landscape package approval Y Signature block for certification of substantial completion Y  
2.  Grading and Drainage Plan Sheet "Y" indicates Information Required Sketch Preliminary Final Scale, north arrow, site boundary including adjacent property lines and public street names Y Y Y Existing and proposed adjacent uses Y Y Y Existing and proposed private driveways, parking lots, service areas walkways, and other paved areas Y Y Y Existing and proposed buildings and structures general location Y Y Y Existing and proposed utilities and easements Y Y Limits of proposed site disturbance Y Y Existing and proposed buildings and structure finish floor elevation Y Spot elevations as required to determine high points and low points, positive drainage of paved surfaces, wall heights and other vertical control Y Y Existing landscaping, including location, type and size Y Y Y Any existing landscaping proposed to be removed Y Y Y  
3.  Landscape Plan Sheet "Y" indicates Information Required Sketch Preliminary Final Base plan consisting of information included on the grading and drainage plan Y Y Y Limits of proposed site disturbance and a calculation of the total landscaped area Y Y Y General landscape improvements with planting symbols clearly drawn to indicate location, and general plant category (deciduous tree, evergreen tree, deciduous shrub, evergreen shrub, groundcovers, etc.) Y Y Y Legend of plant category symbols keyed to general plant material schedule indicating quantities of each plant category and a listing of plant species (include Latin name) included in each category. Plant species shall be labeled and grouped by their respective hydrozone rating (high, moderate, low, or very low) Y Y Typical detail drawings at 1" = 20' to illustrate perimeter treatment, buffering, typical front yard, and any special treatment areas on the site Y Y All hydrozone boundaries and total area within each hydrozone with each hydrozone clearly labeled high, moderate, low, or very low Y Y Detailed landscape improvements with planting symbols clearly drawn to indicate each plant (deciduous tree, evergreen tree, deciduous shrub, evergreen shrub, groundcovers, etc.) Y Y Detailed plant material schedule with abbreviation identification key, quantity of each plant, botanical name, common name, hydrozone rating (high, moderate, low, or very low), plant/container size, spacing and notes Y Y Define areas to be considered open area and if they will be public or private. Indicate how open area will be maintained including: erosion control, revegetation, and weed management both during and after construction Y Y Plant installation, mulching, tree staking, and any other applicable planting and installation details Y Y Soil preparation details including instructions to scarify planting pit bottom and sides and surface ground planes to promote root penetration in compacted soils. Y Y Protection of existing plant and other site features to remain Y Y Y  
4.  Irrigation Plan Sheet "Y" indicates Information Required Sketch Preliminary Final The irrigation plan shall be prepared using the Landscape Plan as a base sheet Y Accurate and clear identification of location and size of separate water meters for the landscape Y Accurate and clear identification of the location, type, and size of all components of the irrigation system, including automatic controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, and backflow prevention devices Y Accurate and clear identification of source of water and static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply Y Accurate and clear identification of flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (psi) for each station Y Irrigation system equipment and installation details Y Monthly irrigation schedules for: 
   Plant establishment period 
   Established landscape 
   Any temporarily irrigated landscape Y Irrigation system audit schedule, if any Y Source of water Y  
Appendix A. Calculating an Annual Water Budget 
    An annual water budget is the target maximum amount of water a landowner should use in a typical watering season. This target provides simple-to-achieve, realistic goals for landscape irrigation. Water budgeting focuses less on watering time limits, and is more concerned with a user's water allotment and reducing over-watering. This form can help any user create a target annual water budget from which to work. 
    The information below will help guide you through the annual water budget worksheet on the following page. 
Step 1. Gallons of Water Needed by Plant Category: 
    Different plants have different water needs. A plant list that identifies the water needs of landscape plants (high, moderate, low, very low) is available in the planning and building department. 
    Due to variability in plant water requirements due to location of the plant on a site, a range of hydrozone categories has been shown for many plants. For purposes of calculating the water budget for each hydrozone, the lowest hydrozone category for each plant shall be used. 
Step 2. Irrigation Areas (Zones) Based on Plant Water Need Category: 
    Both automatic irrigation systems and hand-placed yard sprinklers deliver water to plants by watering areas or "zones", and have set watering amounts determined by you, the user. If you have high water need plants within low or very low water plant groupings, the entire area must be considered a high-water area and irrigated as such; however some plants may be over-watered if this occurs. The area of each watering zone can be determined by physically measuring the zone, and multiplying length (in feet) by width (in feet). The resulting areas (in square feet, or S.F.) can be entered in Step 3 below. 
Step 3. Water-Use Calculations: 
    Fill in the blanks with area and water need per zone. For example, you might have an area of 300 S.F. in a High Water Zone that would require 20 gallons of water per S.F. After multiplying you would find that area requires 6,000 gallons of water per season. 
    After calculating the irrigation needs of all areas, determine your average overall water needs per season. To do this, add the total gallons needed for all zones, and divide by the total square footage for all zones. The average for the overall site must be no more than 15 gallons per S.F. per season. If your average is more than this, you must modify your planting layout to create more low/very low water zones that would balance your high/moderate water zones, and reduce over-watering. 
Annual Water Budget Worksheet 
1. Gallons of Water Needed by Plant Category: 
    Determine the water needs of the various plants in your design. A plant list that identifies water needs (high, moderate, low, very low) is available at the planning and building department. 
Plant Water Need Category Irrigation: Denver 
H = High water plants 20 gallons/SF/season M = Moderate water plants 10 gallons/SF/season L = Low water plants 3 gallons/SF/season VL = Very Low water plants -0-  
2. Irrigation Areas (Zones) Based on Plant Water Need Category: 
    Identify each zone requiring irrigation, and calculate the area (in square feet) of each zone. If plants are already installed and/or not grouped together by water need, pick the highest water need category included in each zone. 
3. Water-Use Calculations: 
High Water Zones: ___S.F. × (___gals/S.F.) =___gals/season Moderate Water Zones: ___S.F. × (___gals/S.F.) =___gals/season Low Water Zones: ___S.F. × (___gals/S.F.) =___gals/season Very Low Water Zones: ___S.F. × (___gals/S.F.) =___gals/season Total gallons needed by All Zones: =___gals/season Total square feet (S.F.) of All Zones: =___S.F. * Average gals/S.F./season, All Zones: Total Gals/Total SF =___gals/season  
*  The average shall be a maximum of 15 gals/S.F./season. 
(Ord. No. 2004-1, § 1, 3-2-04; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 8, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2012-29, § 2, 11-5-12; Ord. No. 2014-14, § 4, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2004-1, adopted March 2, 2004, repealed and reenacted § 26-9-5 to read as herein set out. Former § 26-19-5 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1986-01, adopted Feb. 4, 1986; Ord. No. 1987-17, adopted Aug. 18, 1987; Ord. No. 1988-18, adopted Sept. 20, 1988; Ord. No. 1989-01, adopted Feb. 21, 1989; Ord. No. 1990-4, adopted April 17, 1990; Ord. No. 1998-24, adopted Aug. 18, 1998; and Ord. No. 2001-9, adopted March 20, 2001. 
Sec. 26-19-5.1. - Revegetation required. 
    All land excavations, fills or stockpiles that remain unused for a period of time in excess of thirty (30) days shall be revegetated to assure that dust and debris do not blow off the site and cause a nuisance to surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 2001-43, § 7, 12-4-01) 
Sec. 26-19-6. - Street design. 
    Construction of streets shall conform to the following design standards and regulations: 
(a)  The street pattern shall conform to any transportation plan or comprehensive plan adopted by the city and shall afford safe and convenient access to all lots within the subdivision. 
(b)  Streets shall be designed to join with planned or existing streets: 
(1)  Intersections of streets shall be at right angles unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  No more than two (2) streets shall intersect at one (1) point. 
(3)  Two (2) streets meeting a third street from opposite sides shall meet at the same point, or their center lines shall be offset at least three hundred (300) feet. 
(c)  Streets shall have the names of existing streets which are aligned in the city. 
(d)  Streets which are extensions of existing or platted streets shall bear the same classification as that assigned to the existing or platted street in any adopted transportation or comprehensive plan, and shall conform to any special standards pertaining to such classifications. 
(e)  Local residential streets shall be laid out to discourage through traffic, and where a proposed subdivision borders on or includes a street designated arterial, intersections of proposed streets with such arterials shall be held to a minimum. Lots bordering arterial roadways may be either reverse-facing on an interior street within the subdivision, or served by a frontage road. 
(f)  Streets shall be designed to bear a logical relationship to the existing topography. 
(g)  Deadend streets shall not be permitted. A street may end in a permanent cul-de-sac providing that the street is not longer than five hundred (500) feet and that the radius of the turning area is at least forty-five (45) feet to the curb, and fifty (50) feet to the edge of the right-of-way. Where a street is designed to connect with a future street, a temporary turn-around shall be provided with a radius equal to that required for a permanent cul-de-sac or of an alternate design approved by the city engineer based on the traffic movement generated by the street in question. If the temporary turn-around is to exist or exists for a period longer than six (6) months, then the developer shall pave the temporary turn-around and construct a curb, gutter and sidewalks if so directed by the city engineer. When the connection is finally made, the developer shall be responsible for re-constructing the turn-around area to fit the normal street design, and the city shall reassign the excess right-of-way back to the owners of the adjacent property. Surface drainage on a cul-de-sac shall be towards the intersecting street unless a drainage easement is provided from the cul-de-sac. 
(h)  All subdivision streets shall comply with city resolutions, ordinances and regulations which may be adopted and amended from time to time by the city council. Street designs, including pavement width and right-of-way widths shall comply with the minimum width standards of Table 26-E. 
(1)  Drainage easements shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet, or larger if required by the city engineer. 
(2)  Utility easements shall be ten (10) feet unless otherwise required at a lesser or greater width. 
(3)  Half-streets shall not be permitted, except when required to complete a half-street already in existence. 
(4)  Minimum street gradient for all streets shall be three-quarters (3/4) of one (1) percent. Maximum street gradient shall be eight (8) percent. Streets shall not exceed a gradient of four (4) percent within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection. Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding one (1) percent and shall be designed to provide a minimum sight distance of two hundred (200) feet, except for arterial streets which shall be subject to state and federal standards. To ensure adequate sight distance, when street roadway lines deflect more than five (5) degrees, connection shall be made by horizontal curves. 
(5)  Where a street classified as arterial intersects with any other arterial street, no on-street parking shall be allowed on the arterial street within one hundred (100) feet of the intersection. If the arterial street consists over its general length of only two (2) traffic lanes, then a third lane shall be provided and stripes painted to the specifications of the city engineer to enable vehicles to make left turns at intersections without impeding other traffic. 
(6)  All utilities shall be installed before streets or alleys are surfaced. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 9, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2007-15, §§ 6, 7, 4-3-07; Ord. No. 2011-15, § 7, 5-3-11) 
Sec. 26-19-7. - Alleys and easements. 
    Alleys in residential subdivisions are not encouraged. Paved alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial areas and shall be required unless other provisions are made and approved for service access. Easements for utility purposes shall be required along all side and rear lot lines except those bordering dedicated streets and alleys. Drainage easements shall be designed to accommodate excepted runoff and shall comply with the provisions of section 26-19-9. 
Sec. 26-19-8. - Street improvements. 
    All street improvements are the financial responsibility of the developer, subject to the provisions of section 26-19-6 unless specifically exempted by written agreement with the city council. All streets and alleys proposed for dedication to the public shall be laid out, graded and paved from curb to curb, and painted to the specifications of the city. Curb, gutter and sidewalks shall be installed on all streets unless otherwise approved by city council. In cases where an existing street which has not been brought up to city specifications is located within a subdivision, such street shall be paved and curb, gutter and sidewalk and other improvements shall be installed in order to meet city specifications. If any subdivision is located adjacent to any existing street right-of-way, the developer shall develop such street with improvements as required to bring such street up to city specifications. The developer shall provide and install street signs at all street intersections and traffic control signs as requested by the city traffic engineer. Permanent reference monuments and monument boxes shall be installed by the developer to city specifications, as shall bicycle paths where required by city. Street lights when required by the city shall be installed by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-9. - Drainage. 
    Drainage easements and drainage improvements shall be designed by a registered engineer to accommodate expected run-off as determined by the drainage plan. Improvements shall be installed to specifications approved by the city engineer. All drainage improvements described herein shall be the financial responsibility of the developer. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-10. - Water distribution. 
    The water main distribution system shall be designed to connect with the city water system and make water available to each lot in the proposed subdivision. Fire hydrants shall be located to ensure protection to each lot, but under no circumstances shall a building be located more than two hundred fifty (250) feet in single-family residential areas and one hundred seventy-five (175) feet in multifamily, commercial and industrial areas from the nearest hydrant based on straight line distance. Design of the system shall be the responsibility of the developer and all plans are subject to approval of the city engineer. Installation of the system shall be to city specifications and at the direction of the city council through their designated representatives. Financial responsibility for the water distribution system shall be subject to city regulations and agreements relating thereto between the city council and the developer. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-11. - Sanitary sewage collection. 
    The sewage collection system shall be designed to connect with the city system and provide service to each lot in the proposed subdivision. Design of the system shall be the responsibility of the developer and all plans are subject to the approval of the city engineer. Financial responsibility for the sanitary sewage collection system shall be subject to city regulations and agreements relating thereto between the city council and the developer. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-12. - General utilities. 
    All utilities, except major power transmission lines, shall be underground, unless specifically exempted by the city council, who shall grant such exemption only in cases of extreme difficulty. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-13. - Oversize reimbursement. 
    In the event oversized utilities are required, agreements for reimbursement shall be made, whereby the developer shall be allowed to recover the cost of the utilities that have been provided by him beyond the needs of his development and standard city specification. The method and time of payment shall be established in accordance with the current policies of the city and/or agreement between the developer and city council. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-14. - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks are required on both sides of all streets and shall be at least four (4) feet wide. Residential and collector streets may have mountable curb and gutter and attached sidewalk. Construction of sidewalks shall be to specifications set by the city engineer. All sidewalks shall be ramped at all street intersections or other pedestrian crossing areas. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-15. - Bicycle paths. 
    Developers shall install a bicycle path at least six (6) feet in width along the right-of-way of any subarterial street and any arterial street which is not bordered by a frontage road. The initial site of the path along any street shall be determined by the city engineer. Each developer who extends the path shall keep the path continuous and with as little change in grade as possible. If topography necessitates that the path change from one side of the street to the other, or if the path intersects with another arterial or subarterial street, crosswalks shall be provided. All bicycle paths shall be ramped at intersections. Paths and crosswalks shall meet construction and design standards set by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-16. - Street lighting. 
    The developer shall have street lights installed at points designated by the city or public service company. The poles for such lights shall be material approved by the city. The design of both poles and the lights shall meet specifications established by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-17. - As-built plans. 
    These guidelines shall be used by subdividers, builders and/or others who are required to submit final as-built drawings by the city engineer or by this chapter. The content of these guidelines will be complied with in all cases where applicable, but shall not be construed as being all inclusive. 
    These are guidelines only and do not in any way relieve subdividers, builders, contractors and/or others of the responsibility to submit as-built drawings that are accurate and complete in detail. 
(a)  Pre-final as-builts shall be submitted on completion of all work within a phase of the development, and the final as-built plans shall be received before any certificates of occupancy are issued for the project. 
(b)  Pre-final as-builts shall be submitted for review and/or correction. Pre-finals will be a minimum of two (2) blue line prints. One (1) copy will remain on file with the City of Lafayette and one (1) copy will be returned to the parties responsible for any revision. 
(c)  Final as-builts will be submitted on mylar and will become property of the City of Lafayette and a part of permanent city records. 
(d)  Subdivision as-builts shall show dedicated rights-of-way. 
(e)  All sewer and water utility as-builts shall clearly show: 
(1)  Inv. in, inv. out, rim elevation on all manholes. 
(2)  Location of all valves, manholes, fire hydrants and/or other utilities with at least two (2) ties from discernible objects. 
(3)  Distance and slope between manholes shall be noted as offsets to mains from curbs or property lines. 
(4)  Dimensions for existing and/or added water and sewer taps from lot corners or readily discernible objects. Sewer taps shall have additional dimensions from the tap to the downstream manhole. 
(5)  All dimensions shall be from fixed permanent or readily discernible objects. Where water and sewer taps are located from lot lines, front footage shall be noted from a fixed and permanent point of origin. 
(6)  Depth of the lateral or service line shall be noted at the property line. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-18. - Warranty time. 
(a)  All public improvements shall have a three-year warranty time, beginning on the day that the city has made an initial inspection and found that all public improvements, including but not limited to streets, utilities and fiber optic conduits, to the extent that such conduits are to be owned and maintained by the city, except the final one and one-half (1.5) inch top lift of asphalt, have been installed to city specifications. Ten (10) percent of the total value of the escrow, letter of credit or other financial guarantee provided to the city pursuant to section 26-17-6(b)(5) of this Code shall be retained by the city during the warranty period. The final one and one-half (1.5) inch top lift of asphalt paving shall be installed only after the construction of all structures that may be built within a subdivision or particular filing thereof is complete or after the initial three-year warranty period has expired, whichever is last to occur. After the expiration of the three-year warranty period, the city engineer may, at his discretion, approve the construction of the final one and one-half (1.5) inch top lift of asphalt on a street-by-street basis upon finding that substantially all of the structures have been built, the occupants of which are likely to use the street in question. The final one and one-half (1.5) inch lift of asphalt shall also have a three-year warranty period for which ten (10) percent of the total value of the escrow, letter of credit or other financial guarantee applicable to the one and one-half (1.5) inch lift shall be retained by the city during the warranty period. The subdivider/developer shall be responsible for requesting an initial inspection of all public improvements to begin the warranty period, and a final inspection of all public improvements at the end of the three-year warranty period. At the subdivider's/developer's request, the city engineer shall make an inspection of the public improvements. When the city engineer finds that the public improvements meet city standards, the city engineer or public works director shall, by way of a written letter to the subdivider/developer, acknowledge the acceptance of the public improvements and authorize the reduction or elimination of the escrow, letter of credit or other financial guarantee, which shall occur after the three-year warranty period. Any repairs to or replacements of public improvements made by the subdivider/developer at the end of the three-year warranty period, including but not limited to repairs or replacements necessitated by damage due to construction traffic or activities, shall themselves be warranted for a period of three (3) years from the date of repair or replacement and an escrow, letter of credit or other financial guarantee acceptable to the city attorney shall be provided to the city, in an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the value of such repairs or replacements, for such three-year period. 
(b)  The city council hereby ratifies and affirms all previously approved escrows, letters of credit or other financial guarantees for public improvements along with any development agreements, requirements or any conditions of approval heretofore entered into by the city and expresses its intent that the adoption of this section not affect the validity of such preexisting contracts, requirements or conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1999-40, § 1, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 2007-15, § 8, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 26-19-19. - Land dedication, general requirements. 
    Every annexation, subdivision or residential or commercial development shall require the dedication of certain sites for parks and recreation use, and may require reservation of sites for school and other public purposes. Land dedicated may include the one hundred year floodplain, national and state historical or natural features, and proposed public areas set aside in state, regional, county or city comprehensive plans. Land dedicated shall not include sites for technical, private or public schools sites, public agencies, sites for service organizations which are not open to the general public, and sites unsuitable for public use due to steep slopes, rock formations, adverse topography, utility easements, or other features which may be harmful to the health and safety of the public. 
    These requirements shall not apply in cases where dedication arrangements were made and approved by the city council at the time of annexation or previous subdivision of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-20. - Method and amount of land dedicated. 
(a)  The subdivider/developer of residential property shall convey to the city, by means of a final plat dedication or deed land to be used for public recreation at locations designated by the city in the following manner: The subdivider shall dedicate fifteen (15) percent of the total land area to the city, except in cases where satisfactory dedication arrangements were made and approved by the city council at the time of annexation and/or prior subdivision. 
(b)  In the case of commercial and industrial development, the subdivider or developer shall dedicate and convey to the city by means of final plat dedication or deed, at locations designated by the city, twelve (12) percent of the total gross lot area to be used as public recreation. 
(c)  A minimum of eighty (80) percent of land dedicated shall lend itself to utilization for public recreation purposes which include, but are not limited to, the following: playfields, tennis courts, and picnic sites. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1991-31, § 7, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 2017-4, § 1, 3-7-17) 
Sec. 26-19-21. - Credit for private recreation facilities. 
    The city may give the subdivider or developer credit for private recreation facilities in the development, provided that: 
(a)  The amount of land to be dedicated may be reduced by no more than fifty (50) percent of the requirements of this chapter. No portion of the land credit will be given for required drainage detention areas. 
(b)  The city council determines that the private recreation facilities offered will absorb a major portion of the recreational demands of the residents or employees of the proposed development. 
(c)  The private recreation facilities will be constructed at the same time as or prior to the housing, industrial or commercial facilities in the development. 
(d)  There are sufficient guarantees in the development agreement to ensure that the private recreation facilities are completed at the same time as or before the remainder of the development. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-22. - Cash payment in lieu of dedication. 
(a)  If the city council, in its sole discretion, determines that there is insufficient, suitable land available within the subdivision to meet the dedication requirement of section 26-19-19 of this chapter, the subdivider or developer shall be required to pay to the city cash, or transfer other suitable property, in lieu of land dedication requirements. Such cash payment shall be in an amount equal to the fair market value of the property that was to be dedicated pursuant to section 26-19-20 of this chapter. If the city council determines to accept other property instead of, or as a partial payment toward the cash payment hereunder, the fair market value of the other property shall be used as the basis of the satisfaction of the requirement. 
(b)  A payment in lieu of land dedication shall be made prior to final approval of the subdivision, and such payment shall be used for the acquisition of land and for the improvement of parks, playgrounds and recreation areas in the city, which may benefit the residents of the city in general, as well as those of the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2007-38, § 1, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 2017-4, § 2, 3-7-17) 
Sec. 26-19-22.1. - Land dedication deferral. 
    The payment of all fees and costs and the accomplishment of certain actions contained within sections 26-19-19 through and including 26-19-22 may be deferred pursuant to Article XIV of Chapter 30 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1990-17, § 21, 8-21-90) 
Sec. 26-19-23. - Reservation of land for schools and other public agencies. 
(a)  If requested by a public agency, the city council may require a subdivider or developer to reserve land areas sufficient for development of public schools or other public agency facilities. A public agency includes the State of Colorado and any political subdivision thereof. 
(b)  Land reserved shall, by the nature of its natural topography, soil condition and connecting utilities, lend itself to development of the desired facility. 
(c)  Land reserved shall be purchased by the public agency at its fair market value according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Within ninety (90) days following approval of the final plat, the requesting agency and the subdivider or developer shall enter into an option agreement for a period of no greater than one (1) year, with a renewal provision for one (1) additional year, unless other terms are mutually agreed upon between the developer and the requesting agency. 
(2)  When the option is signed, the public agency shall deposit with an escrow agent an amount which shall be determined by the public agency and the developer to equal the actual costs and expenses of replatting the subdivision if the option is not exercised, plus ten (10) percent. In the event the public agency and developer cannot agree upon the estimated expenses, the city administrator shall make the determination. In the event the option is extended for an additional year, the public agency shall deposit an additional ten (10) percent of the estimated costs and expenses with the escrow agent. 
(3)  For the purpose of this section, the fair market value of the land reserved shall be the value of the raw, undeveloped land, plus a proportionate share, as they benefit the reserved land, of the actual cost of the improvements required of the subdivider or developer. 
(4)  In the event the public agency and the subdivider or developer cannot agree as to the fair market value, the parties shall submit the matter to binding arbitration, under such rules and regulations as prescribed by the American Arbitration Association. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-19-24. - Public art in lieu of fee. 
    A subdivider or developer may, pursuant to section 28-27, propose to provide public artwork within their subdivision, development or elsewhere in lieu of paying the public art fee that would otherwise be payable pursuant to Chapter 30. 
(Ord. No. 2005-18, § 1, 6-7-05; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 10, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 26-19-25. - Refuse, waste, and recycling collection area. 
    Every development shall provide one (1) or more areas for refuse, waste, and recycling receptacles for solid waste collection, except single-family detached development or multifamily development where there are no central or communal refuse, waste, and recycling collection or storage facilities, and where refuse, waste, and recyclable materials are stored and collected on an individual unit basis. Where such refuse, waste, and recycling receptacles are required, the receptacles shall be located to facilitate collection and minimize negative impacts on public rights-of-way, adjacent properties, and within the development. 
(Ord. No. 2005-22, § 1, 8-2-05) 
SECTION 26-20. - OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 26-20-1. - Duty to provide off-street parking. 
    No property shall be used, nor shall any structure be erected, altered or added to, unless off-street parking space is provided by the owner of such property or structure in such minimum amount as is specified in section 26-20-2, or as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2016-05, § 1, 3-15-16) 
Sec. 26-20-2. - Off-street parking spaces required. 
    Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, the following minimum number of off-street parking spaces are required for any structure with the corresponding use listed: 
(a)  Residential. 
Single-family and two-family: 
Two (2) parking spaces per unit. 
Exemption: Lots zoned OTR that do not have alley access shall be exempt from fifty (50) percent of the above off-street parking requirement. 
Accessory dwellings: 
One (1) per unit-Seven hundred fifty (750) square feet or less 
Two (2) per unit-Greater than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet 
Multifamily: 
For multifamily developments that include a common, central parking lot the following shall apply: 
One and one-half (1.5) parking spaces per each one-bedroom unit; 
Two (2) parking spaces for each two-bedroom unit; 
Two and one-half (2.5) parking spaces for each three-bedroom unit. 
For multifamily developments that do not include a common, central parking lot the following shall apply: 
Two (2) parking spaces per unit plus one-half (0.5) spaces per unit conveniently located for guest parking. 
(b)  Commercial residential uses. 
Hotels, motels, and board and care facilities: One (1) space per sleeping unit plus one (1) space for every two (2) employees. 
Bed and breakfast/boarding homes: One (1) space per dedicated bed and breakfast/boarding home bedroom plus two (2) spaces for the original dwelling unit. 
(c)  Institutions. 
Nursing homes/convalescent homes: One (1) space per three (3) beds. 
Hospitals: One (1) space per bed. 
(d)  Places of public assembly. 
Churches, theatres, auditoriums, stadiums or meeting rooms: One (1) space for every three (3) seats in the principal place of assembly. 
Library, reading room or museum: One (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of floor space, plus one (1) space per every two (2) employees. 
(e)  Commercial amusements. 
Bowling: Five (5) spaces per alley plus one (1) space for every two (2) employees. 
Dance halls and skating rinks: One (1) space for every 200 square feet of floor area. 
(f)  Educational facilities. 
Preschools, nurseries and child care centers: One (1) space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet. 
Kindergarten, elementary school, intermediate school, senior high school: One (1) space per teacher and one (1) space per administrative employee, plus, in the case of a senior high school either: a) one (1) space for each five (5) students, or b) one (1) space per each three (3) seats in the main auditorium (bench capacity figured as one (1) seat per every twenty (20) inches). 
Vocational or commercial schools: One (1) space per teacher, plus one (1) space per administrative employee, plus one (1) space per every three (3) students. 
Colleges and universities: One (1) space for each employee, plus one (1) space for every five (5) students. 
(g)  Commercial. 
Retail business and commercial uses: One (1) space for every two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
Wholesale commercial uses: One (1) space for every five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. 
Motor vehicle sales and service: One (1) space for every four hundred fifty (450) square feet of floor area. 
Business and professional offices: One (1) space for every three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
Medical and dental offices: One (1) space for every two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
Restaurants: One (1) space for every one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area or one (1) space per table, whichever is greater. Within the Lafayette Old Town Urban Renewal Area, seasonal outdoor dining areas (that are not enclosed) shall not count toward the off-street parking requirements. 
Indoor recreational and health facilities: One (1) space for every one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area. 
Drive-in or fast food restaurants: One (1) space for every one hundred (100) square feet of floor area. 
Small animal hospitals and clinics: One (1) space for every three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
Medical laboratories: One (1) space for every four hundred fifty (450) square feet of floor area. 
Membership clubs and lodges: One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
Service, commercial, including shoe repair, key shop, dry cleaners, etc.: One (1) space for every three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
(h)  Industrial. 
Manufacturing or industrial: One (1) space per each one and one-half (1.5) employees on the maximum shift, or one (1) space for five hundred (500) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater. 
Warehouse and storage building: One (1) space per every two (2) employees plus parking as required for office use. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1987-02, §§ 8, 9, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 1996-11, §§ 4-6, 4-16-96; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 15, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2006-01, § 3, 3-7-06; Ord. No. 2010-22, §§ 1, 2, 9-21-10; Ord. No. 2016-05, § 2, 3-15-16; Ord. No. 2017-30, § 6, 9-5-17) 
Sec. 26-20-2.1. - Off-street parking space calculation/Old Town nonconforming properties. 
(a)  Uses or structures in existence on May 1, 2016, within the Lafayette Old Town Urban Renewal Area whose existing off-street parking is inadequate under the specifications of section 26-20-2, need not provide the minimum number of off-street parking space specified in this chapter, provided that: 
(1)  The number of off-street parking spaces does not decrease from the number provided on May 1, 2016; 
(2)  Such structure is not enlarged by more than twenty-five (25) percent or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is lesser, or such enlargement would otherwise require additional parking space; and 
(3)  The use of the property is not changed to a use that would result in an increase in the number of parking spaces required. 
(b)  In the event that such a structure is enlarged, additional off-street parking spaces in the incremental amount specified for such enlargement shall be furnished. In the event that such a structure or property undergoes a change of use to a use that requires more off-street parking spaces, additional off-street parking spaces shall be furnished in a number equal to the number of spaces that the new use would otherwise require pursuant to section 26-20-2, less the number of spaces the use of the structure on May 1, 2016, was required to provide pursuant to section 26-20-2 without adjustment pursuant to sub-section (a) above. See example: 
Example: An one thousand eight hundred-square-foot building undergoes a change of use from office to retail with two (2) off-street parking spaces on site. On May 1, 2016, the office use was required to provide six (6) off-street parking spaces in accordance with section 26-20-2, without the adjustment pursuant to subsection (a) above. (One thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet divided by three hundred (300) square feet of floor area = six (6) off-street parking spaces. The new retail use would require nine (9) off-street parking spaces in accordance with section 26-20-2.1, off-street parking space/two hundred (200) square feet of floor area = nine (9) off-street parking spaces.) The change of use would need to furnish three (3) additional off street parking spaces: Nine (9) spaces - six (6) spaces = three (3) spaces. 
(c)  If an existing structure within the Lafayette Old Town Urban Renewal Area is vacant on May 1, 2016, the last known use of the structure shall be treated as the structure's then existing use for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, § 3, 3-15-16) 
Sec. 26-20-2.2. - Cash in lieu fee. 
(a)  For properties within the Old Town Urban Renewal Area a property owner or developer may, prior to the issuance of the building permit or a change in use of the property, submit an application to the planning department in accordance with section 26-17-3 for payment of a cash in lieu of off-street parking requirements fee. 
(b)  The submitted application shall be presented by the planning department to city council for a determination as to whether sufficient public parking to serve the proposed structure or use exists, or can be made available to serve the structure or use. This determination shall be at the sole discretion of the city council, who may approve or disapprove the application. Upon approval of an application by the city council, and execution of a payment agreement, the property in the approved application may comply with the minimum off-street parking standards of this chapter by payment of such fee in lieu of providing such number of off-street parking spaces as specified in the agreement. 
(c)  At the option of the owner, an approved cash in-lieu fee may be paid in annual installments, including interest, over a multi-year period, subject to a payment agreement acceptable to the city attorney with an annual interest rate to be set by resolution of the city council. Such an agreement shall include provisions for termination of the certificate of occupancy for the affected structure if any periodic payments are not made, in addition to such other remedies that may be available under the Lafayette Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  The cash in lieu fee shall be established by a resolution of the city council in an amount that is calculated to approximate the cost of obtaining, developing and maintaining public parking space in the Old Town Urban Renewal Area, and that established cash fee shall be increased annually by an amount equal to the Denver-Boulder-Greeley Metropolitan Consumer Price Index. 
(e)  All cash in lieu fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a separate fund, which fund may, at the city council's direction, be made available to the Lafayette Urban Renewal Authority to undertake future projects to accommodate parking demand within the downtown commercial core. These fees may not be used for, the general expenses of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-05, § 4, 3-15-16) 
Sec. 26-20-3. - Mixed uses. 
    When a building is planned to include a combination of different uses, the minimum parking required will be determined by applying the above requirements based upon the floor area for each use. The minimum number of parking spaces required for the building shall be the sum of the requirements for each separate use. An off-street parking space in a business or industrial district may be used jointly for more than one (1) use, provided its occupancy ordinarily would not be used during the same hours, and a copy of a recorded agreement by owners involved in such joint use is presented to the planning director. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-20-4. - Parking requirements for uses not listed. 
    For specific uses not listed in section 26-20-2 above, the planning director shall determine the appropriate number of parking spaces required based upon the type of activity, intensity, number of employees, square feet of floor area, and similarity to listed uses. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-20-5. - Loading areas required for schools. 
    A driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading students shall be located on the site of any school having a capacity greater than twenty-five (25) students. 
Sec. 26-20-6. - Loading areas required; other. 
(a)  A minimum loading area of three hundred (300) square feet shall be provided for all commercial or industrial uses that use a building area in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet excluding the office and similar uses. 
(b)  Buildings or structures to be built or substantially altered containing uses which receive and distribute material or merchandise by truck shall provide and maintain off-street loading berths in sufficient numbers and size to adequately handle the needs of the particular use. 
(c)  No loading area for an existing use shall be eliminated unless the required loading area is re-established. 
(d)  Off-street parking areas used to fulfill the requirements of this section shall not be used for loading and unloading operations except during periods of the day when not required to be used for parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-20-7. - Maintenance required. 
    The providing of maintenance of off-street parking and loading areas is a continuing obligation of the property owner and/or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-20-8. - Plans required. 
    No building permit or other permit shall be issued until plans are presented to show the location of off-street parking spaces and loading areas as well as property that is and will remain available for exclusive use as off-street parking and loading space. The use of the property for which the building occupancy permit is issued shall be conditional upon the unqualified continuous availability of the amount of parking and loading space required as herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-20-9. - Change of use. 
    Should the owner or occupant of any lot or building change the use of the lot or building thereby increasing off-street parking and/or loading requirements, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to begin or to maintain such altered use until such time as the increased off-street parking and/or loading requirements are met. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-20-10. - Modification of requirements. 
    The city council may, by resolution, increase or decrease the required number of off-street parking spaces for a particular property and use after taking into consideration the following factors: 
(a)  Expected number of cars owned by occupants of dwellings in a planned unit development. 
(b)  Parking needs of any non-dwelling uses. 
(c)  Varying time period of use. 
(d)  The conveyance, dedication or lease to the city, or to the Lafayette Urban Renewal Authority, of real property for the purpose of providing public parking in a location, and under conditions, as are approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2012-38, § 1, 1-7-13) 
Sec. 26-20-11. - Deferral of parking requirements. 
    The city council, in its sole discretion, may authorize that construction and the providing of up to twenty (20) percent of the required off-street parking spaces be deferred and may set such conditions as necessary to guarantee the providing of such deferred spaces whenever the city council determines the need for the additional spaces to exist. The city council shall consider deferral where the need for off-street parking is lessened due to unusual characteristics of the use and comparable data is available to establish that there is not a present need for the additional parking. Land area required for the providing of deferred parking spaces shall be available and maintained in reserve and shall be landscaped pursuant to a plan demonstrating the ultimate provision of the deferred parking spaces which meets all requirements of this section and which plan shall require approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-01, § 2, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2016-05 § 5, 3-15-16) 
Sec. 26-20-12. - Parking reduction. 
    The city council may approve a parking requirement reduction of up to seventy (70) percent for governmentally supported projects such as elderly housing. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-20-13. - Location of parking. 
    Off-street parking spaces for dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling. Other required parking spaces shall be located not further than three hundred (300) feet from the buildings or use they are intended to serve which shall be measured by means of pedestrian access from the building or use. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-20-14. - Storage use prohibited. 
    Required off-street parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable passenger automobiles, trucks or motorcycles of residents, customers, patrons and employees and shall not be used for the storage of vehicles or material or for the parking of trucks used for conducting the business or use located on the property. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-20-15. - Site plan review. 
    Prior to the issuance of a building permit for all uses except single-family residences, a site plan shall be submitted as required by section 26-20-8 which shall include: 
(a)  Delineation of individual parking and loading spaces. 
(b)  Circulation area necessary to serve parking spaces. 
(c)  Access to streets and property to be served. 
(d)  Curb cuts. 
(e)  Dimensions, continuity and substance of screening. 
(f)  Grading, drainage, surfacing and subgrading details. 
(g)  Delineation of obstacles to parking and circulation in finished parking area. 
(h)  Specifications relating to signs and bumper guards. 
(i)  Lighting plan. 
(j)  Landscaping. 
(k)  Other pertinent required data. 
    The planning director shall make the initial determination as to whether or not the plans and specifications comply with the provisions of this section. The planning director's decision may be appealed in writing by any aggrieved party to the planning commission within fourteen (14) days after such decision pursuant to Section 26-16. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-20-16. - Design requirements. 
    Parking and loading areas shall be designed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Surfaces. All off-street parking spaces and maneuvering areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete material. 
(b)  Screening. All off-street parking areas with six (6) or more spaces shall be adequately screened from any adjoining residential zoned lot by landscaping and/or an opaque fence six (6) feet in height. The landscaping and fencing shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
Parking lots of six (6) or more spaces located adjacent to public rights-of-way shall be screened by either a minimum thirty-six-inch-high fence, wall or berm. A berm may average thirty-six (36) inches in height but may be no less than eighteen (18) inches in height from the top of the closest curb within a public right-of-way. 
(c)  Maneuvering space. All parking areas servicing a use requiring three (3) or more parking spaces shall be designed and traffic controlled so that access to and from a public street shall require vehicular traffic to be traveling in a forward direction when entering or exiting the parking area. The off-street parking area shall further be designed so that the parking area is separated from the public street or sidewalk by a physical barrier which is adequate to prevent a vehicle from entering or exiting the parking area except by access routes indicated on the parking plans. 
(d)  Service drives: 
()  Service drives to off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic to provide maximum safety for traffic access and egress and maximum safety for pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the site. The number of service drives shall be limited to the minimum that will allow the property to accommodate the traffic to be anticipated. 
(2)  Service drives shall not be more than thirty-five (35) feet in width and shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined through the use of rails, fences, walls or other barriers or markers on the lot frontage not occupied by the service drives. 
(3)  Service drives on the same lot frontage shall be separated by a minimum length of curb of fifty (50) feet unless designed for one-way access movements. The minimum required length of curb separation shall be increased by one (1) foot for every five (5) feet of lot frontage beyond one hundred (100) feet up to a maximum requirement of two hundred (200) feet. In the case of a corner lot, service drives shall not be located closer than thirty (30) feet to the intersecting street lines. 
(4)  The access from a street to a service drive for uses other than single-family residences shall be located no closer than fifteen (15) feet to a side lot line except that a common service drive to serve two (2) adjacent properties with a width not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet may be provided at the common lot line. 
(5)  Service drives on corner lots shall be placed no closer than thirty (30) feet from the intersection of the two (2) property lines adjacent to a street right-of-way. 
(6)  All service drives shall maintain a sight vision clearance area as defined by section 26-14-16. 
(7)  In the Old Town Residential zone district, service drive access for all garages constructed after the effective date of this subsection, November 15, 2002, shall be from the alley if an alley abuts the rear or side lot lines of the lot, or may be from a side street if a lot is bounded on two (2) adjacent sides by a street. In the Old Town Residential zone district, service drive access for all accessory dwelling units shall be from the alley if an alley abuts the rear or side lot lines of the lot, or may be from a side street if a lot is bounded on two (2) adjacent sides by a street. In the Old Town Residential zone district, if an alley or side street does not abut the lot, the service drive for an accessory dwelling unit shall share its access to a public street with the service drive for the principal dwelling unit. 
(e)  Lighting. A lighting plan shall be submitted to the city for review and approval with building permit application. All lighting shall be designed to minimize illumination onto adjoining residential property and glare directly onto streets. 
(f)  Small car spaces. A maximum of twenty (20) percent of a parking lot containing five (5) or more spaces may be designed for small cars. A small car space for ninety-degree parking shall be eight and one-half (81/2) feet by sixteen (16) feet. 
(g)  [Specific use.] All areas to be considered as off-street parking shall be unobstructed and free of other uses. 
(h)  [Access.] Unobstructed access to and from a public street shall be provided for all off-street parking spaces. 
(i)  Accessible parking. The minimum number of designated parking spaces for each parking area shall comply with the following table: 
MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES 
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Required Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces 1 to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2 percent of total 1,001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000  
The width and depth of an accessible parking space shall be as shown in Table 26C. 
(j)  [Buffer area.] All buildings shall be separated from parking lots and maneuvering areas by a minimum five-foot walkway or landscaped area. 
(k)  [Landscape area.] Parking areas in excess of twenty-five (25) spaces shall provide an additional landscaped area of two hundred (200) square feet per each twenty-five (25) required parking spaces over twenty-five (25) or portion thereof. 
(l)  Construction standards. See Table 26-C for design requirements. The standard space shall be nine (9) feet by nineteen (19) feet with a maneuvering area of twenty-four (24) feet in width of ninety-degree parking. 
    City council may, by resolution, exempt specific parking lots that are owned or operated by either the City of Lafayette or the Lafayette Urban Renewal Authority from complying with any of the specific design requirements of this section, except for the required minimum number and size of accessible parking spaces. In considering a resolution under this subsection, city council shall review the proposed site plan for the parking lot and consider the following factors: 
(1)  The necessity and demand for public parking spaces in the area that will be served by the lot; 
(2)  The ability to supply public parking spaces in the area to be served that would meet the design requirements of this section at a reasonable cost to the public; 
(3)  The impact that the modified or exempted design requirements will have on properties that are adjacent to, or in close proximity of, the parking lot; 
(4)  The impact that the modified or exempted design requirements will have on the health and safety of the general public, including impacts on pedestrians, motor vehicle traffic and users of the parking lot; 
(5)  The cost to the public that would be incurred to provide the design elements for which exemption or modification is requested. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1991-31, §§ 8-11, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 2002-31, § 8, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 2006-24, § 3, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2016-28, § 1, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 26-20-17. - Completion of improvements. 
    Required parking spaces shall be improved as required and made available for use prior to the final inspection being completed by the building official. An extension of time may be granted by the building official, provided a performance bond, or its equivalent, is posted with the city for one and one-quarter (11/4) times the cost of the parking improvements as estimated by the building official and provided that the parking space is not required for immediate use. In the event that the parking improvements are not completed and made available for use within one (1) year of the date of the extension, the bond or its equivalent shall be forfeited to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1991-31, § 2, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 27, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-20-18. - Interpretation of parking requirements. 
    The planning director may prescribe reasonable rules and regulations for the interpretation of this section including the preparation of maps and standards showing the size and arrangement of typical off-street parking locations. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
SECTION 26-21. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-21-1. - Legislative intent. 
(a)  The purpose of these regulations is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city by regulating the design, construction and installation of signs in the city. The council recognizes that signs are a necessary means of visual communication for the public convenience and that businesses, services and other activities have the right to identify themselves by using signs that are accessory and incidental to the use of the premises where the signs are located. In these regulations, the city council intends to provide a reasonable balance between the right of an individual to identify its business and the right of the public to be protected against the visual discord that results from the unrestricted proliferation of signs. The city council also intends by these regulations to ensure that signs are compatible with adjacent land uses and with the total visual environment of the community. Another purpose of these regulations is to protect the public from hazardous conditions by prohibiting signs that: 
(1)  Are structurally unsafe; 
(2)  Obscure or distract the vision of motorists; or 
(3)  Compete or conflict with necessary traffic signs and warning signals. 
In adopting these regulations, the council recognizes that the size of signs that provide adequate identification in pedestrian-oriented areas differs from that necessary in vehicular-oriented areas where traffic is heavy, travel speeds are greater and required setbacks are greater. 
(b)  The council also recognizes in adopting these regulations that instances may occur where strict application of its provisions may deprive a person of the reasonable use of a sign and that such person should have a procedure to obtain variances from the requirements of these regulations for good cause. 
(c)  [Reserved.] 
(d)  The city council finds that certain types of devices that might be considered to be signs are not appropriate for any regulation because they: 
(1)  Would not create a structural safety or traffic safety hazard; 
(2)  Would promote public safety or the dissemination of public information; or 
(3)  Do not impede aesthetic concerns. 
(e)  The city council further finds that certain other signs of a small size do not create traffic safety hazards or aesthetic disruption so as to require a permit and inspection pursuant to these regulations but must comply with structural and setback requirements of this section. With respect to real estate signs, the council finds that a small "for sale" or "for rent" sign is a viable means of advertising real estate and does not create a traffic hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2015-38, § 1, 11-2-15) 
Sec. 26-21-2. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to display, construct, erect, alter, use or maintain any sign in the city except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to perform or order the performance of any act contrary to the requirements of this chapter or fail to perform any act required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Signs that are not visible beyond the boundaries of the tract or parcel on which they are located or from any public thoroughfare or right-of-way, but such signs are not exempt from the safety regulations of the city building code. 
(2)  Official government notices and notices posted by government offices in the performance of their duties, government signs controlling traffic, regulating public conduct, identifying streets, or warning of danger. 
(3)  Works of art that in no way identify or advertise a product or business or impede traffic safety. 
(4)  Temporary decorations or displays, if they are clearly incidental to and are customarily and commonly associated with any national, local or religious celebration, but not freestanding structures. 
(5)  Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utilities or construction companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions in the public right-of-way as required, including without limitation, signs indicating the presence of underground cables, gas lines, and similar devices. 
(6)  Signs displayed on motor vehicles that are being operated or stored in the normal course of a business, such as signs indicating the name of the owner of the business, that are located on moving vans, delivery trucks, rental trucks and trailers; but only if the primary purpose of such vehicles is not for the display of signs and only if such vehicles are parked or stored in areas appropriate to their use as commercial or delivery vehicles. 
(7)  Signs carried by a person and not set on or affixed to the ground. 
(d)  For the purpose of determining the number of signs that may be subject to the provisions of this section, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements clearly organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered a single sign. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1987-02, §§ 10, 11, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 28, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 1999-41, §§ 1, 2, 10-19-99) 
Sec. 26-21-3. - Permits and application. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 26-21-8, no person shall display, erect, relocate or alter any sign without first applying to the planning director or his designee and obtaining a permit under this chapter. 
(b)  The owner of multi-tenant property or an agent of the owner shall apply for all sign permits for the property or shall develop a plan for apportioning permitted sign area among tenants and file such plan with the planning director, in which case each tenant may apply for a sign permit in conformity with the plan. 
(c)  No permit is required for maintenance, as defined in this chapter, but replacing or repairing a sign or sign structure that has been damaged to an extent exceeding fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost, as determined by the planning director, is maintenance only when the sign conforms to all of the applicable provisions of this chapter and only when the damage resulted from an act of God or violent accident. 
(d)  No person issued a sign permit under this chapter, shall change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions of the permit without first requesting and obtaining approval to do so from the planning director. 
(e)  The owner or tenant of the property on which the sign is to be located or an authorized agent thereof or a sign contractor shall apply for a sign permit in writing on forms furnished by the planning director, shall sign the application and shall pay the fee prescribed in section 26-21-7. 
(f)  Within five (5) working days of the date of the application, the planning director shall either approve or deny the application or refer it back to the applicant for further information. 
(g)  The applicant shall submit the following information as part of the application: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner or persons entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor or installer; 
(2)  The street address location of the proposed sign structure; 
(3)  Complete information required on application forms provided by the planning director, including a site plan and elevation drawings of the proposed sign, caption of the proposed sign and other data pertinent to the application; 
(4)  Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be done, including details of all connections, guy lines, supports, footings and materials to be used; 
(5)  A complete application for an electrical permit for all electrical signs if the person building the sign is to make the electrical connection; 
(6)  Verification of all existing signs and sign areas in existence on the property; and 
(7)  A statement of valuation (cost). 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1999-41, § 3, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-4. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  If the planning director finds that work under any permit issued does not comply with the information supplied in the permit application or violates any provision of this section or any other ordinance or code of the city, the planning director may notify the owner or installer of the sign by first class mail to the address on the sign permit application that if the violation is not corrected within thirty (30) days, the planning director will proceed to revoke the permit. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent or limit the authority of the city to seek enforcement of this section or any other ordinance or code of the city by citation of any person to the Lafayette Municipal Court. 
(b)  If the person so notified fails to make or commence the required corrections, the city planning director may revoke the permit after allowing in writing an opportunity for a hearing before the city council. 
(c)  If the person to whom a permit is granted under this section has not commenced work on the sign within sixty (60) days from the date the permit was issued or if substantial building operations under such permit are suspended for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days, the permit automatically expires, but the planning director may grant an extension of the time limits provided in this subsection for construction delays that are not the result of willful acts or neglect by the permittee, upon a written request for such an extension. 
(d)  The planning director may not refund any permit fees paid under this section if any permit is revoked or expires. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1999-41, § 3, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-5. - Identification and marking of signs. 
    Each sign erected or remodeled shall bear thereon a clearly legible identification plate not exceeding fifteen (15) square inches in area that states the name of the person responsible for its construction and erection, with installation date and permit number thereon. All electrical signs shall be marked with input amperes at full load input. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-6. - Inspections. 
(a)  In enforcing the provisions of this section, the planning director or her designee and any peace or code enforcement officer may enter any building structure or premises in the city at reasonable times to perform any duty imposed by this section. 
(b)  The planning director may require footing inspections on the day of excavation for all freestanding signs. 
(c)  The planning director may require inspection of electrical signs before their erection within forty-eight (48) hours after being notified that the sign is ready for inspection. 
(d)  The permit holder or agent thereof shall notify the planning director when signs are complete and ready for final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1999-41, § 4, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-7. - Sign permit fees. 
(a)  An applicant for a sign permit shall be assessed fees in accordance with the permit fee provisions of that version of the uniform building code that is currently adopted by the city. 
(b)  An applicant for an appeal or variance to the zoning board of adjustment shall pay a fee as set by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1999-41, § 5, 10-19-99) 
Sec. 26-21-8. - Sign permits not required. 
(a)  The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts and shall comply with all applicable provisions of this section, but no sign permit or sign permit fee is required: 
(1)  Nonilluminated, internally illuminated, or indirectly illuminated identification signs that do not exceed two (2) square feet per face or four (4) square feet in total surface area, up to a maximum of six (6) feet in height, and no more than one (1) such sign per use or per building, whichever is the greater number. 
(2)  Signs in the nature of cornerstones, commemorative tablets, and historical signs that do not except four (4) square feet per face in area and six (6) feet in height and that are not illuminated or that are indirectly illuminated. 
(3)  Temporary, nonilluminated real estate signs that do not exceed six (6) square feet per face in total area and four (4) feet in height and no more than one (1) such sign per street frontage, but only if the sign remains in place no more than seven (7) days after sale or rental of the subject property. 
(4)  Private traffic directional signs guiding or directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic onto or off of a lot or within a lot that do not exceed three (3) square feet per sign per face in area and eight (8) feet in height, do not contain any advertising or trade name identification, and are not illuminated, are not internally illuminated or are not indirectly illuminated; but private traffic control signs that conform to the standards of the "Traffic Control Manual", Colorado Department of Highways, may exceed three (3) square feet per face in area but shall not exceed seven (7) square feet per face or eight (8) feet in height. 
(5)  Signs required or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance of any type, number, area, height above grade, location or illumination authorized by the law, statute or ordinance under which such signs are required or authorized, but no such sign may be placed in the public right-of-way unless specifically authorized or required by law, statute, or ordinance; except for warning signs or barricades of a temporary nature, all such signs shall be permanently affixed to the ground, a building or another structure. 
(6)  Window signs, placed at or below the second floor level when the total area of such signs: 
a.  Does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total window area in the same vertical plane at the ground floor level on the side of the building or business unit upon which the signs are displayed; and 
b.  Does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total allowable sign area for the premises. 
(7)  Signs commonly associated with and limited to information and directions related to the permitted use on the lot on which the sign is located, but only if each such sign does not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square inches and is nonilluminated, internally illuminated, or indirectly illuminated, including, without limitation, such signs as "no smoking", "rest room", "no solicitors", "self-service" and "vacancy". 
(8)  Nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated signs that identify items as a courtesy to customers such as credit cards accepted, redemption stamps offered, menus, or prices, but no more than one (1) sign for each use and no more than four (4) square feet per face or eight (8) square feet in total area; such signs may be attached to the building, as projecting or wall signs, suspended from a canopy, or included as an integral part of a freestanding sign, but if any such sign is located in the area described in section 26-21-12, it shall meet the requirements of that section. 
(9)  Noncommercial signs in residential areas under six (6) square feet per face and four (4) feet in height and all noncommercial signs inside buildings. 
(10)  A flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, organization of nations, state, county, city, religious, civic or fraternal organization or any educational institution, except such flags used in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device. 
(11)  Sign faces which are a part of vending machines not exceeding fifteen (15) square feet per vending machine sign face. Vending machines must comply with principal building setbacks. A total of fifty (50) square feet of such signage per property ownership is permitted without a sign permit. Advertising on vending machines shall advertise only products sold in the machine. Additional signage associated with vending machines shall comply with the allocation requirements of the specific property and require sign permits as required by section 26-21-3. 
(b)  No permit is required for copy changes on a conforming bulletin board, poster board, display case, or marquee, for maintenance where no structural changes are made, or for copy changes on signs using interchangeable letters. 
(c)  The signs permitted without a permit in subsection (a) of this section are allowed in addition to the signs permitted by sections 26-21-20 through 26-21-21 and are not counted against the total allowable sign area or total number of signs permitted for the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1991-01, §§ 2, 3, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 1998-24, § 5, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-21-9. - Prohibited signs. 
    No person shall erect, install or maintain the following signs in the city: 
(1)  Animated or flashing signs with the exception of: 
a.  Electronic message signs that are a component of freestanding signs in the C-1 Zone District only; 
b.  Time-temperature-date signs; 
c.  Traditional barber poles; and 
d.  Gauges and dials that may be animated to the extent necessary to display correct measurement. 
(2)  Strings of light bulbs used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes, other than traditional holiday decorations during the holiday season, except when the following conditions are met: 
a.  Strings of light bulbs composed of miniature light bulbs which miniature light bulbs measure no larger than one and one-half (11/2) inches in length and three-eighths inch in width and which light bulbs have no more than three (3) volts or nine (9) watts in light output and which light bulbs are clear and produce only a white light; and 
b.  Light bulbs that do not flash, flutter, or in any way simulate movement; and 
c.  Light bulbs that are not placed upon signs or sign structures. 
(3)  Wind signs, except as permitted in section 26-21-21(h). 
(4)  Signs that incorporate projected images, emit any sound that is intended to attract attention or involve the use of live animals. 
(5)  Any sign, together with its supporting structure, that, ninety (90) days or more after the premises have been vacated, advertises an activity, business, product or service no longer produced or conducted upon the premises upon which such sign is located. If the sign or sign structure is covered or the identifying symbols or letters are removed, the planning director may grant an extension of time under this subsection upon a showing of good cause. But nothing in this subsection prohibits permanent signs accessory to businesses that are open only on a seasonal basis, if there is a clear intent to continue operation of the business. 
(6)  Any sign that is installed or erected in or projects into or over any public right-of way except in the case of a sign for which a permit has been issued under this section. 
(7)  Signs not permanently affixed or attached to the ground or to any structure except for real estate signs, noncommercial signs attached to posts driven into the ground, window signs, temporary barriers, signs carried by person, and sidewalk signs. 
(8)  Any sign or structure that is structurally unsafe, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation, is not kept in good repair, or is capable of causing electrical shock to persons likely to come into contact with it. 
(9)  Any sign or structure that: 
a.  In any way obstructs the view of, may be confused with or purports to be an official traffic sign, signal or device or any other official sign; or 
b.  Creates any other unsafe distraction for motor vehicle operators; or 
c.  Obstructs the view of motor vehicle operators entering a public roadway from any parking area, service drive, private driveway, alley, or other thoroughfare. 
(10)  Any sign that obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit way. 
(11)  Illegal nonconforming signs. 
(12)  Roof signs, except as specifically permitted by section 26-21-21. 
(13)  Off-premises advertising signs or any other sign not appurtenant and clearly incidental to the permitted use on the property where located, except for noncommercial signs and signs permitted under the provisions of section 26-21-33. 
(14)  No sign shall be attached to a tree or utility pole on public property. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1987-04, § 1, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 2000-6, § 1, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 2005-38, § 3, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2012-11, §§ 2, 3, 5-15-12; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-10. - Computation of sign area. 
(a)  In computing the area of a sign, standard mathematical formulas for common regular geometric shapes, including, without limitation, triangles, parallelograms, circles, ellipses or combinations thereof shall be used. 
(b)  In the case of an irregularly shaped sign or a sign with letters or symbols directly affixed to or painted on the wall of a building, the area of the sign is the entire area within a single continuous rectilinear perimeter of not more than eight (8) straight lines enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any other figure of similar character, together with any material or color forming an integral part or background of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. 
(c)  In computing the total sign area, the portion of the sign structure to be included is that which is visible and viewed in the same plane as the sign face and which either exceed fifty (50) percent of the area of the display or is made an integral part of the background of the display. 
(d)  Where a sign has two (2) or more display faces, the area of all faces is included in determining sign area. 
(e)  The total surface area of multiple-unit signs includes the vertical and horizontal spacing between the letters that constitute the word or words that convey the sign's message. 
(f)  Where three-dimensional figures are used as signs, the area is the total area, projected on a vertical plane, of each side of the figure that is visible beyond the boundaries of the lot upon which the figure is located. For purposes of this section, a figure is considered to have no less than one (1) nor more than four (4) sides, and the number of sides to be measured shall be determined by the location and visibility of the figure. 
(g)  Street or building frontage used as the basis of determining permitted sign area for one (1) building or use may not be used again as the basis for determining the permitted sign area for another building or use, but nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the additional building or use from erecting a sign that would otherwise be authorized by the provisions of this section. In the case of a lot or tract having two (2) or more multiple use principal buildings in existence, total sign area shall not exceed two (2) square feet for the first two hundred (200) total feet of building frontage and one-half (1/2) square foot of sign area for each addition lineal foot of building frontage. The calculation of building frontage shall be construed pursuant to provisions contained in Section 26-21 of this Code. 
(h)  All temporary and permanent riders or attachments to signs or sign structures are included as part of the total sign area for the sign to which they are attached. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1988-18, § 3, 9-20-88; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 29, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-21-11. - Required setbacks for freestanding signs. 
    Freestanding signs in any zoning district shall be set back the following distances, and no point on any such sign may extend beyond the required setback line: 
(a)  Sign up to and including seven (7) feet in height shall be set back ten (10) feet from any property line adjacent to a street except when buildings on adjoining lots have front setbacks of less than ten (10) feet in which event the setback of the adjoining buildings shall be the minimum sign setback; provided, however, that if the property is located on Public Road north of Spaulding Street and south of Baseline Road or on Simpson Street west of Michigan Avenue and east of Public Road, a zero-foot setback for all signs of seven (7) feet in height or less and a ten-foot setback for signs over seven (7) feet high to twenty-five (25) feet high or one and twenty-five one hundredths (1.25) times the height of the building, whichever is less, shall be allowed. 
(b)  The minimum setback distances for signs over seven (7) feet in height is twenty-five (25) feet from any property line adjacent to a street. 
(c)  No signs in business and industrial districts may be located less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line adjacent residential zoning district line. 
(d)  In planned unit developments, the city council may vary the setback requirements of this section. 
(e)  A flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, organization of nations, state, county, city, religious, civic or fraternal organization or any educational institution may be located closer to the required setback line if located on a building. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1987-02, § 15, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 1989-01, § 3, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 1991-01, § 4, 3-19-91) 
Sec. 26-21-12. - Signs at street intersections. 
    No person shall erect or maintain a sign, except a wall sign, or sign structure on a corner lot between a height of two and one-half (21/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the street elevation, other than a pole twelve (12) inches or less in cross-sectional area, within the sight vision clearance area as defined in section 26-14-16. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1991-31, § 13, 11-19-91) 
Sec. 26-21-13. - Illumination. 
    No person shall erect or maintain an illuminated sign except in conformity with the following requirements: 
(a)  Any light used for the illumination of a sign is shielded so that the beams or rays of light will not shine directly onto surrounding areas. 
(b)  Neither the direct nor the reflected light from any light source creates a traffic hazard or distraction to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares. 
(c)  Signs in residential and agricultural zoning districts shall be nonilluminated, not internally illuminated or not indirectly illuminated. 
(d)  Signs in public, business and industrial zoning districts may be indirectly, directly or internally illuminated. Any illuminated sign visible from and located within three hundred (300) feet of any lot in a residential zoning district shall be turned off no later than 11:00 p.m. or one-half hour after the use to which it is appurtenant is closed, whichever is later; but this time limit does not apply to any light primarily used for the protection of the premises or provision of light for safety purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-14. - Signs on fences and walls used as fences. 
    Signs displayed upon fences or upon walls that are not an integral part of a building or that are used as fences shall be erected or mounted in a plane parallel to the fence or wall and shall not extend above the top of the fence or wall or project more than fifteen (15) inches from the face of the fence or wall. Such signs shall be subject to all requirements of this Section applicable to freestanding signs, including, without limitation, maximum area per sign, maximum sign height, minimum setback and number of permitted signs. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-15. - Window signs. 
(a)  When permanent or temporary nonilluminated signs are displayed in a window so as to be visible beyond the boundaries of the lot upon which such signs are displayed the area of all such window signs exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the total window area in the same vertical plane at ground floor level on the side of the building or business unit upon which the signs are displayed or twenty-five (25) percent of the total allowable sign area for the premises is included in the total allowable sign area for the premises. Illuminated window signs are included in the total allowable sign area for the premises. 
(b)  No window sign exceeding four (4) square feet in area may be displayed in any window above the ground floor level, and no window signs may be displayed in any window area above the second floor level. 
(c)  Nothing in this section applies to temporary posters announcing or advertising events sponsored by noncommercial organizations. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-16. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Signs advertising subdivision, development, construction or other improvement of a property in any zoning district are permitted only if they are: 
(1)  Limited to freestanding, wall or window signs not exceeding sixty-four (64) square feet in total area or thirty-two (32) square feet per face and not exceeding eight (8) feet in height, with no riders or attachments. 
(2)  On-premises sign: An on-premises sign may be displayed on the property to which the sign pertains, up to one (1) such sign per street upon which the property either has frontage or has an entrance from a major thoroughfare, but the minimum distance between signs on any single subdivision or property is one thousand (1,000) feet. 
(3)  Off-premises signs: A permit may be issued for a temporary off-premises freestanding sign advertising subdivision, development, construction, or other property improvement projects to be placed at a major intersection located at a distance no greater than one-half (1/2) mile from the referenced location. The permit may be issued upon a finding by the planning director that (1) the signage placed within the development/subdivision project cannot be reasonably viewed from a major thoroughfare, and (2) the signage will not impede or otherwise interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. The permit for a temporary off-premises sign shall state the approved duration thereof, and shall not exceed one (1) year, subject to renewal by the city. The sign shall be limited to the promotion of residential and commercial subdivision developments that have received final plan approval within twenty-four (24) months of the permit application, and shall not be deemed appropriate for individual commercial businesses. No more than two (2) temporary off-premises signs shall be allowed per development, only one (1) of which may be permitted at any intersection. A maximum of two (2) temporary off-premises signs may be permitted at the same intersection corner. No permit shall be issued for a temporary off-premises sign within the city without the applicant providing the city with proof of permission from the property owner where such temporary off-premises sign is proposed to be located. Off-premises signs shall be set back from the street right-of-way a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(4)  In the case of a subdivision, displayed on or after the date of official filing of the subdivision plat and removed within two (2) years from the date of issuance of the first building permit in the project or within thirty (30) days from the time that seventy-five (75) percent of the lots or dwellings in the subdivision or filing thereof have been sold, whichever time period is shorter, or removed pursuant to time extensions granted by the city council. 
(5)  In the case of construction other than a subdivision, displayed only for the duration of construction until issuance of a certification of occupancy. 
(6)  In residential developments consisting of five (5) dwelling units or less, no more than six (6) square feet per face for each dwelling unit being constructed. 
(7)  In the case of a model home sign identifying each different model, limited to an area not exceeding six (6) square feet and no more than one (1) such sign on each lot upon which a model home is located and removed at the time the unit ceases to be a model home. 
(8)  In the case of an open house sign which is displayed for the purpose of advising the general public that a particular residential home may be viewed for the purpose of sale, the following shall apply: the total sign area of a real estate open house sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per face; and, no more than five (5) off-premises open house signs may be placed in conjunction with an open house. Such signs shall be placed for a time period not to exceed two (2) eight-hour periods in any two-week period. This subsection is not applicable and shall not apply to a subdivision being developed, model homes within a new subdivision, or to more than one (1) residential home under the same ownership. 
(b)  [Reserved.] 
(c)  Noncommercial signs are permitted only if they meet the requirements of sections 26-21-11, 26-21-20, 26-21-22 and 26-21-29. 
(d)  Signs in the right-of-way are permitted only if they are determined by the planning director to be necessary for traffic regulation or for special activities of general public interest. 
(e)  Temporary signs not specifically regulated by this section are permitted as follows: 
(1)  Any business may display one (1) or more temporary signs on the lot or tract of land on which the business is located, provided that the total temporary signage may not exceed thirty (30) square feet in the aggregate. Such temporary signs may be window signs, wall signs, not more than one (1) freestanding sign, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  A business or businesses at a single business mailing address shall not display temporary signs for more than sixty (60) days during the first half of each calendar year and sixty (60) days during the second half of each calendar year. 
(3)  The planning director must approve a permit for temporary signage prior to the placement of any temporary sign on a lot or tract. 
(f)  Signs advertising a garage sale shall not exceed two (2) square feet per face and a maximum of six (6) of such signs may be placed off the premises of the garage sale. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1987-02, § 16, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 1988-18, §§ 4-6, 9-20-88; Ord. No. 1989-35, §§ 2, 3, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 1998-24, § 6, 8-18-96; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 7, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 15, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2011-27, §§ 2, 3, 8-2-11; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2015-38, § 2, 11-2-15; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-16.1. - Sidewalk signs. 
    Nonresidential properties located within the shaded area defined by Figure 16-1 may display sidewalk signs under the following provisions: 
(a)  One (1) sidewalk sign is permitted for each physical business address. Multiple signs are allowed within multi-tenant buildings, however such signs for businesses in multi-tenant buildings must not be displayed together or side by side. 
(b)  Sidewalk signs may be displayed only during the business's hours of operation. 
(c)  Sidewalk signs must be placed outside of required Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) walkways, outside of any required exits and/or entrances, and outside of driveways. 
(d)  Prior to placement of a sidewalk sign, the design, size, and height shall be subject to the review and approval by the Lafayette Urban Renewal Authority if such sign is proposed within an urban renewal area or by the planning director if such sign is proposed outside any urban renewal area. 
(e)  The applicant shall propose some method to care for sign during windy weather to ensure the sign does not blow over, block walkways, and/or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Measures may include approved weighting material or removal during such conditions. 
(f)  Sidewalk signs may be allowed on sidewalks located in the public right-of-way of city streets if the proposed location does not inhibit the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and meets the provision of subsection (c) above. Sidewalk signs shall not be placed within the public right-of-way of a state highway unless the owner receives approval from the Colorado Department of Transportation. 
(g)  A no-fee sign permit shall be required in accordance with section 26-21-3 prior to placement of a sidewalk sign. 

(Ord. No. 2005-38, § 2, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2006-26, § 2, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2012-29, § 1, 11-5-12; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-17. - Signs accessory to nonconforming uses. 
    Signs accessory to legal nonconforming uses shall be permitted subject to all regulations of the zoning district wherein such signs and uses are located as set forth in section 26-21-20. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-18. - Signs in planned unit developments. 
    Signs located in planned unit developments shall conform to all regulations of this section, including those of the district in which the planned units are located, unless specifically exempted therefrom as a part of the site plan approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-19. - Signs accessory to uses permitted by special review. 
    Signs that are accessory to those uses specified in the zoning sections as "special review uses" shall conform to all requirements of this section, including those of the district in which the use is to be located, unless specifically exempted therefrom as a part of the special review approval procedure. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-20. - Use district sign regulations. 
(a)  The use districts set forth in this chapter shall apply to this section, and the boundaries of such districts are determined by reference to the zoning map of the city and to interpretation of such map. 
(b)  No person shall erect or maintain a sign except as provided in this section and in the district in which it is permitted, nor shall any person use any sign for any purpose or in any manner except as allowed in this section for the district in which such sign is proposed or maintained. 
(c)  The types of signs permitted, the regulation of the number, placement, area and use of signs in the use districts in the city, are shown in Table 26-D. The total signage on a site shall not exceed the total allowed by the calculation of the principal building frontage for all signage unless authorized through the provisions of a PUD or a variance. 
(d)  Within a multiple-use building or within a shopping center containing multiple uses, the maximum sign area may be exceeded if the average signage for all businesses with external entries and external display windows does not exceed an average of twenty-four (24) square feet per business or use. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1988-18, §§ 7, 8, 9-20-88) 
Sec. 26-21-21. - Additional regulations for signs in T1, B1, C1 and MI districts. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining total allowable sign area for uses with more than one (1) street or building frontage, the following criteria apply: 
(1)  Where a use has more than one (1) building or street frontage, the maximum sign area for that use is based on the total horizontal length of not more than two (2) contiguous building frontages; and 
(2)  Signs may be located on any side of the building involved, but the total sign area on any one (1) side of the building may not exceed the area permitted on the basis of that frontage considered independently of other frontages. 
(b)  Freestanding signs shall meet the following conditions: 
(1)  No more than one (1) freestanding sign is maintained for each street frontage of the premises involved. 
(2)  Where a lot has more than one (1) street frontage, the freestanding sign permitted for each lot is located adjacent to that frontage and the minimum horizontal distance between such signs on the same lot is seventy-five (75) feet. 
(3)  Except as provided in subsections (i) and (j) of this section, the maximum total area of all freestanding signs on a lot is one and one-half (11/2) square feet of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage or one (1) square foot of sign area for each linear foot of street frontage, whichever is greater; the maximum total surface area of any freestanding sign is one hundred (100) square feet; and the maximum area of any one (1) face of a sign is fifty (50) square feet. 
(4)  Unless otherwise specified in section 26-21-20, the maximum height of freestanding signs is the lesser of: Twenty-five (25) feet or one and one-fourth (11/4) times the height of the principal building on the lot where the sign is located. 
(5)  The horizontal distance between freestanding signs on adjacent lots is not less than the height of the taller sign. 
(6)  Freestanding signs in the C-1 Zone District only may use an electronic message sign module, subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Only one (1) electronic message sign shall be permitted per lot. 
b.  The maximum height of an electronic message sign shall be seven (7) feet. 
c.  The sign area of the electronic message sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet. 
d.  The displayed message shall not change more frequently than once per eight (8) seconds. 
e.  The sign shall contain static messages only, and may not otherwise have movement, or the appearance or optical illusion of movement, on any part of the sign structure, display or pictorial segment of the sign, including the movement or appearance of movement of any illumination or the flashing, scintillating, or varying of light intensity. The messages may be changed only through dissolve or fade transitions, and the change of messages using a dissolve or fade transition shall not exceed of one (1.0) second of time between each message displayed on the sign. 
f.  The sign shall have automatic dimmer software or solar sensors to control brightness for nighttime viewing. The intensity of the light source shall not produce glare, the effect of which constitutes a traffic hazard. Lighting from the message module shall not exceed five hundred (500) nits or candelas per square meter between dusk to dawn as measured by the equivalent "percentage of maximum brightness-nighttime" setting on the applicant's sign controlling software. Applications for sign permits containing an electronic message sign shall include the manufacturer's specifications and nit (candela per square meter) rating. 
g.  Commercial messages displayed on the module shall only direct attention to a business, product, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered on the premises on which the sign is located. 
h.  Any current or existing electronic message signs operating under separate authority within the city shall adjust said signage to conform to the provisions of this section upon making any modifications, changes, or revisions, structural or otherwise, to an existing electronic message sign. 
(c)  Signs displayed on canopies, awnings and architectural projections that extend more than fifteen (15) inches beyond the face of the building shall meet the following conditions: 
(1)  The total area of such signs does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the following described area: The width of the projections multiplied by the vertical height of the projection or one hundred fifty (150) square feet, whichever is less. 
(2)  Any sign displayed upon a nonvertical face of a canopy or other architectural projection is located within the upper three-fourths of that face. 
(3)  Except for suspended signs, the face of any such sign is in a plane parallel to the plane of the building wall to which the sign is oriented, and any such sign does not project above or below the face of the canopy, awning or architectural projection. But such signs may project horizontally beyond the face of a canopy or architectural projection the distance necessary to accommodate the letter thickness and required electrical equipment, but not more than a total of twelve (12) inches measured from the bottom of the sign. 
(4)  Signs displayed on awnings do not project beyond the surface of the awning. 
(5)  Signs displayed on architectural projections that extend fifteen (15) inches or less from the face of the building may be considered to be wall signs, subject to the requirements of subsection (f) of this section. 
(d)  Projecting signs shall comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  Signs projecting over public property shall not project more than forty-eight (48) inches from the face of the building and the maximum total area for any such sign is the lesser of: 
a.  One (1) square foot of sign area for each linear foot of frontage of the building or unit upon which such sign is displayed; or 
b.  Thirty (30) square feet per sign, with no face exceeding fifteen (15) square feet, with a minimum eight-foot clearance to public sidewalks, private drives or ground level. 
(2)  Signs projecting over private property do not project more than six (6) feet from the face of the building, and do not exceed thirty (30) square feet in total area, with no face of any sign exceeding fifteen (15) square feet. 
(3)  Projecting signs have a minimum clearance above the sidewalk of eight (8) feet and do not extend above an elevation of fifteen (15) feet above the sidewalk on a multi-story building nor above the roof line on a one-story building. 
(4)  No more than one (1) projecting sign is maintained on the face of a building. 
(e)  Suspended signs are subject to the safety standards of this Section; may not exceed ten (10) square feet in total surface area, nor five (5) square feet per face; may not project beyond the outside limits of the arcade, marquee, or canopy to which they are attached; and shall have a minimum clearance above the sidewalk of eight (8) feet. The minimum horizontal distance between suspended signs shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(f)  Wall signs shall comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  The total area of all wall signs on any face of a building does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of that portion of the building facade between ground level and the roof line or twenty-five (25) feet above grade level, whichever is less, upon which the signs are located. 
(2)  No part of a wall sign is located more than twenty-five (25) feet above grade level, but a wall sign may project above the roof line or parapet wall of the building upon which the sign is located, if the maximum vertical projection is no more than twenty-four (24) inches or one-third of the total height of the sign. 
(3)  No wall sign is attached to or displayed against any parapet wall that does not extend around the entire perimeter of the building. 
(4)  Any sign erected upon or against the side of a roof having an angle of forty-five (45) degrees or less from the vertical, complies with the provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection and does not project more than a total of fifteen (15) inches horizontally, measured at the bottom of the sign, from the side of the roof upon which it is displayed. 
(g)  Except as provided in section 26-21-2, subsection (c)(vi), vehicle-mounted signs are subject to the requirements of this Section and persons maintaining them shall obtain permits therefor. Such signs may not be located in any public right-of-way and shall comply with the setback requirements of section 26-21-11. The area of a vehicle-mounted sign is determined by the broadside dimensions of the vehicle upon which the sign is displayed, and such area is included in the total allowable sign area for the premises upon which the sign is located. 
(h)  Wind signs may be permitted in connection with a bona fide grand opening for any permitted use in a business or industrial zoning district if the person wishing to display such sign applies therefore and obtains the approval of the planning director, but such signs may only be displayed for a period of thirty (30) days, and no time extensions may be granted. 
(i)  Joint identification signs may be freestanding, projecting, or wall signs, and are subject to the applicable provisions of subsections (b), (d) and (f) of this section, except that freestanding joint identification signs are subject to the area and height limitations therefor prescribed by section 26-21-20. Where a freestanding joint identification sign is used to identify tenants in a single building or a business or industrial complex, no other freestanding signs are permitted on the premises. One (1) joint identification sign is permitted for each one thousand (1,000) feet of total street frontage, or fraction thereof, adjacent to the premises. 
(j)  Time-temperature-date signs that do not exceed ten (10) square feet per face are not included in the allowable sign area permitted in section 26-21-20. But any identification or advertising that is attached to or made part of the same sign structure is included in such allowable sign area for the premises. The owner of the signs shall maintain such signs and ensure that they are kept accurate; if such owner fails to do so, the owner shall remove the sign. 
(k)  Any building or portion of a building that is proposed to be erected in a business or industrial zoning district and that is classified as a sign under this Section shall be permitted only upon application for and approval of a special exception therefor from the planning director. 
(1)  The planning director shall determine whether or not such proposed building or portion thereof will be classified as a sign before issuing the building permit therefor, and shall notify the owner or builder of the proposed building of such findings. The planning director shall not issue a building permit for any such building until the building has been approved as a sign under the provisions of this section. 
(2)  At the time of applying for a building permit, the owner or builder shall furnish to the planning director building plans, elevations and details that are adequate to enable the planning director to determine whether the building is a sign. 
(3)  The owner or builder of any building that is classified as a sign by the planning director may appeal such interpretation to the zoning board of adjustment under the procedures of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-01, § 4, 2-21-89; Ord. No. 1991-01, § 5, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2012-11, § 4, 5-15-12; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-22. - Structural design requirements. 
(a)  Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed as specified in this Section to resist wind and seismic forces. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground so as not to overstress any of the elements thereof. The overturning moment produced from lateral forces may not exceed two-thirds ( 2/3 )of the dead load resisting moment. The structural frame of the building or the anchoring of the sign shall be adequate to resist uplift due to overturning. The weight of earth superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead load resisting moment, if it is carefully placed and thoroughly compacted. 
(b)  Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the city building code, including all requirements to resist seismic forces. 
(c)  Wind loads and seismic loads need not be combined in the design of signs or sign structures. Signs shall be designed to withstand the loading that produces the larger stresses. Vertical design loads, other than roof line loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind or seismic shock. 
(d)  The design of structural members shall conform to the requirements of the city building code. Vertical and horizontal loads exerted on the soil shall not produce stresses exceeding those specified in the city building code. 
(e)  The working stresses of wire rope and its fastenings shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the ultimate strength of the rope or fasteners. Working stresses for wind loads combined with dead loads may be increased as specified in the city building code. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-23. - Construction standards. 
(a)  Signs and sign structures shall be securely built, constructed and erected in conformity with the requirements of this Section. 
(b)  Supports for signs or sign structures shall not be placed in or upon public right-of-way or public easements, except pursuant to the terms of a lease where the right-of-way has been leased to an adjacent property owner, or except under the provisions of section 26-21-16.1. 
(c)  Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade specified for buildings in the city building code. Plastic materials shall be those specified in the building code that have a flame spread rating 225 or less and a smoke density no greater than that obtained from the burning of untreated wood under similar conditions when tested in accordance with the building code standards in the way intended for use. The products of combustion shall be no more toxic than the burning of untreated wood under similar conditions. 
(d)  All sign structures, except for construction signs, those signs specifically excepted in section 26-21-8; window signs; and signs located inside buildings, shall have structural members of heavy timber or incombustible material. Wall signs, projecting signs and signs on arcades and marquees shall be constructed of incombustible material, except as provided in subsection (e) of this Section or as specifically approved by the planning director. No combustible materials other than approved plastics shall be used in the construction of electrical signs. 
(e)  Nonstructural trim may be of wood, metal, approved plastic or any combination thereof. 
(f)  Members supporting unbraced signs shall be so proportioned that the bearing loads imposed on the soil either vertically or horizontally shall not exceed safe values. Braced ground signs shall be anchored to resist specified wind or seismic loads acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil for effective resistance to pull-out amounting to a force of twenty-five (25) percent greater than the required resistance to a depth of not less than three (3) feet. Anchors and supports shall be guarded and protected when near driveways, parking lots or similar locations where they could be damaged by moving vehicles. 
(g)  Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads applied. 
(h)  No anchor or support of any sign, except flat wall signs, shall be connected to or supported by an unbraced parapet wall. 
(i)  Display surfaces in all types of signs may be of metal or other approved materials. 
(j)  Noncommercial signs less than six (6) square feet per face and under four (4) feet in height may be constructed by any sturdy material and shall be anchored securely to the ground or a building, fence or other structure. 
(k)  The planning director may approve the use of any materials if an applicant submits sufficient technical data to substantiate such proposed use and if the planning director determines that such materials are satisfactory for the use intended. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2005-38, § 4, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-24. - Clearance. 
(a)  No person shall locate a sign with less than three (3) feet horizontal or eight (8) feet vertical clearance from overhead electric conductors that are energized in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) volts. 
(b)  No person shall erect a sign or sign structure in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe. No person shall erect or maintain a sign that obstructs any window to such an extent that any light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by any provision of this chapter or other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-25. - Freestanding signs. 
(a)  Freestanding signs may be constructed of any material meeting the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Supports for freestanding signs shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of this section and may not be placed upon public right-of-way or public easements, except pursuant to the terms of a lease where the right-of-way has been leased to the adjacent property owner. Where freestanding signs are located in vehicular parking and circulation areas, a base or barrier of concrete or steel, not less than thirty (30) inches high, shall be provided to protect the base of the sign from possible damage by vehicles. 
(c)  Where any freestanding sign has a clearance of less than eight (8) feet from the ground, there shall be provided a barrier or other adequate protection to prevent hazard to pedestrians and motorists. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-26. - Wall signs. 
(a)  Wall signs shall be constructed of incombustible material meeting the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Projecting wall signs shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-27. - Marquee signs. 
    Signs may be placed on, attached to or constructed in a marquee. For purposes of determining projection, clearance, height and materials, such signs shall be considered a part of and shall meet the requirements for a marquee in the city building code. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-28. - Electric signs. 
(a)  Electric signs shall be constructed of incombustible materials meeting the requirements of this section. Electric signs shall be raintight; service holes fitted with waterproof covers may be provided to each compartment of such signs. All electrical signs installed or erected in the city shall bear the label of Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. 
(b)  No electric sign shall be erected or maintained that does not comply with the city electric code. 
(c)  No electric equipment or electrical apparatus of any kind that causes interferences with radio or television reception shall be used in the operation of illuminated signs. Whenever interference is caused by a sign that is unfiltered, improperly filtered or otherwise defective, or by any other electrical device or apparatus connected to the sign, the planning director may order the sign disconnected until it is repaired. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-29. - Sign maintenance. 
    No person shall fail to maintain a sign on such person's premises, including signs exempt from the permit requirements by section 26-21-8, in good structural condition at all times. All signs, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not galvanized or of rust-resistant metals, shall be kept neatly painted. The planning director shall inspect and may order the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign that constitutes a hazard to safety, health or public welfare because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence, under the procedures prescribed by section 26-21-32. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-30. - Continuation of legal nonconforming signs. 
    A legal nonconforming sign that is not required to be discontinued under the provisions of section 26-21-31 may be continued for a period of seven (7) years from September 15, 1984, or sixty (60) days after the date the sign premises becomes annexed to the city; however, said sign shall be maintained and in good condition as required by section 26-21-29, but it shall not be: 
(a)  Structurally changed to another nonconforming sign, but its contents may be changed; or 
(b)  Structurally altered in order to prolong the life of a sign, except to meet safety requirements; or 
(c)  Altered so as to increase the degree of nonconformity of the sign; or 
(d)  Expanded; or 
(e)  Re-established after its discontinuance for ninety (90) days; or 
(f)  Continued in use after cessation or change of the business or activity to which the sign pertains; or 
(g)  Re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds fifty (50) percent of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the planning director. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-35, § 4, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-30.1. - Continuation of legal nonconforming signs for multi-tenant buildings. 
    Signage for multi-tenant buildings may be maintained for existing uses when a change of use occurs for tenants provided the owner of a nonconforming sign signs a disclosure recognizing that a nonconforming sign will have to be removed by September 15th, 1991 or sooner if the use ceases or the business changes. Total signage allowed on a multi-tenant property shall not exceed the total allowed by this chapter in any case. 
(Ord. No. 1989-35, § 5, 6-20-89) 
Sec. 26-21-31. - Discontinuance of prohibited signs. 
    Any nonconforming sign prohibited by section 26-21-9 shall be removed or brought into conformity with this section as follows: 
(a)  Within sixty (60) days after the date the sign premises becomes annexed to the city. 
(b)  Any sign described in subsections 26-21-9(i) through (m) shall be brought into conformity with the requirements of this section within sixty (60) days of September 15, 1984. 
(c)  Any "temporary sign" or "real estate sign" as defined by this section shall be brought into conformity with this section or removed within sixty (60) days of September 15, 1984. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-21-32. - Remedies for violations. 
(a)  Any display, construction, erection, alteration, use or maintenance of any sign in the city that is not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter shall be unlawful and shall be cause for the citation of any owner, possessor or user of the sign or owner of the property on which the sign is located to the Lafayette Municipal Court for violation of this Section 26-21. As an alternative to enforcement in the Lafayette Municipal Court, the planning director may, but shall have no obligation to, seek enforcement through the provisions of this section 26-21-32. 
(b)  If the planning director finds that any sign is maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, the director may require that the owner or possessor of the sign or the owner of the property where the sign is located alter the sign to bring it into conformity with the requirements of this section or remove the sign. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent or limit the authority of the city to seek enforcement of this section or any other ordinance or code of the city by citation of any person to the Lafayette Municipal Court. 
(c)  If the planning director determines, pursuant to subsection (b) above, that an owner or possessor shall be required to bring a sign into conformity or remove a sign, the planning director shall notify the sign owner or possessor or property owner of the duty to alter or remove and that such person has thirty (30) days from the date of the notice, or such longer period as the planning director finds is reasonably necessary, to complete such alteration or removal. Notice under this subsection shall be deemed sufficient if it is deposited in the mail first class to the address on the application for the sign permit under this section, or, if no permit is required, to the last known owner of the real property on which the sign is located on the records of the Boulder County Assessor. 
(d)  If the property owner or sign owner or possessor fails to complete alteration or removal as required by the notice prescribed by subsection (c) of this section, the planning director may cause such sign to be altered or removed at the expense of the owner or possessor of the property or sign and charge the costs thereof to such person. 
(e)  If any person fails or refuses to pay when due any charge imposed under this section, the planning director may, in addition to taking other collection remedies, certify due and paid charges, including interest, to the Boulder County Treasurer to be levied against the person's property for collection by the county in the same manner as delinquent general taxes upon such property are collected. 
(f)  Before certifying charges to the county for collection as prescribed by subsection (e) of this section, the planning director shall provide to the property owner an opportunity for hearing to contest the need for alteration or removal or the amount of the charges. The hearing shall be conducted by the city council and the notice of the hearing to the property or sign owner shall be mailed first class to the address on the application for the sign permit under this section, or, if no permit is required, to the last known owner of the real property on which the sign is located on the records of the Boulder County Assessor. If the city council affirms the imposition of the charges for the alteration or removal of the sign, the decision shall include notice that the charges are due and payable within ten (10) days of the date of the decision and that if not paid when due, they will be certified to the Boulder County Treasurer for collection, along with ten (10) percent for the costs of the county collection. 
(g)  Whenever the planning director certifies any charges to the Boulder County Treasurer for collection, the director shall record notice of such certification with the Boulder County Clerk and Recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1999-41, § 6, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-21-33. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  When the planning director finds that a violation of Section 26-12 exists, except a failure to obtain a permit under section 26-21-3, the director may follow the procedure prescribed by section 26-21-32. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent or limit the authority of the city to seek enforcement of this section or any other ordinance or code of the city by citation of any person to the Lafayette Municipal Court. 
(b)  Any aggrieved person who believes the alleged violation to be factually or legally contrary to this section may appeal the notice of violation to the zoning board of adjustment pursuant to this section, or may request that a variance be granted. An appeal and a request for variance may be filed in the alternative. 
(1)  An appellant shall file the appeal, request for variance or both in the alternative to the zoning board of adjustment within thirty (30) days from the date of service of the notice of alleged violation. The appellant may request more time to file. If the applicant makes such request before the end of the time period and shows good cause therefor, the planning director may extend for a reasonable period the time to file. 
(c)  Any aggrieved person may also appeal to the zoning board of adjustment a decision or ruling of the planning director involving the interpretation of any provision or term of this section. Before the board hears an appeal, however, from a ruling of the planning director that a particular proposed building or other structure will itself constitute a sign, for which reason the planning director has refused to issue a building permit, the board shall receive an advisory report from the planning department, stating its opinion whether the proposed structure constitutes a sign. 
(d)  An applicant for an appeal or a variance under this section shall pay the fee prescribed by city council resolution. 
(e)  If an applicant requests that the board of adjustment grant a variance from the requirements of this section, the board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that each of the following conditions exist or that any specific condition does not apply to the requested variance. If the board finds that a condition is not applicable, it shall make specific findings in support thereof. 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions such as the existence of buildings, topography, vegetation, sign structures, or other matters on adjacent lots or within the adjacent public right-of-way, that would sufficiently restrict the effectiveness of the sign in question, and that such special circumstances or conditions are peculiar to the particular business or enterprise to which the applicant desires to draw attention, and do not apply generally to all businesses or enterprises in the area. 
(2)  The variance would be consistent with the purposes of this section, and would not injure the neighborhood in which the business or enterprise to which the applicant desires to draw attention is located. 
(3)  The variance is the minimum one necessary to permit the applicant reasonably to draw attention to its business or enterprise. 
(4)  When the requested variance is to grant an extension of the amortization period set forth in sections 26-21-30 and 26-21-30.1, the applicant must prove that (1) conditions not listed in section 26-21-33(e)(1) exist or (2) a public service is provided by the sign or (3) that the sign has been recognized by the state historical board as a historically significant sign structure. No variance granting a time extension shall exceed five (5) years without further board of adjustment approval of a new variance. However, should there be a change of the use category of the property as listed within Table 26-A, said change of use category shall automatically void the granted variance. No sign approved under this section shall be allowed to remain in an unsafe location or unsafe condition as determined by this chapter. 
(f)  The zoning board of adjustment may grant a variance subject to any conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to make the device that is permitted by the variance compatible with the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1991-01, §§ 6, 7, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 1999-41, § 7, 10-19-99; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 10, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2011-33, §§ 13, 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, §§ 2, 3, 2-19-2019) 
SECTION 26-22. - MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS, MOBILE HOME PARKS, CAMPERS AND CAMPER PARKS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2007-53, adopted Nov. 27, 2007, amended the title of Section 26-22, Mobile Homes, Mobile Home Parks, Campers and Camper Parks, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 26-22-1. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this section to provide for orderly and creative development of mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions and camper parks within the City of Lafayette. It is further intended that a high quality of design be encouraged with design standards and amenities provided that are equal to or greater than conventional single-family or multiple-family developments. These regulations are also intended to provide minimum safety standards for utilities, fire protection and protection from excessive winds. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-22-2. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  General. The provisions of this section shall apply to construction, alteration, extension, location, installation, use and maintenance of all mobile homes, mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions and camper parks in the City of Lafayette. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, extend, install, use or maintain a mobile home, mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or camper park within the city that is not in compliance with this section. 
(b)  Existing mobile homes, mobile home subdivisions, mobile home parks and camper parks. 
(1)  Whenever a mobile home, mobile home park, mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or camper park was in existence in the City of Lafayette on the effective date of this chapter or was annexed to the city after the effective date of this chapter, and the mobile home, mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or camper park was in compliance with the applicable codes or ordinances then in effect, the mobile home, mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or camper park shall be legally nonconforming. If the existing mobile home, mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or camper park is proposed to be altered or extended, the expansion or alteration must be in conformance with this Section, however, the existing uses and locations may be continued or permitted by Section 26-26 of this chapter. 
(2)  In the event that a legally nonconforming mobile home is removed from its location, whether within a mobile home park or elsewhere, said mobile home shall not be replaced or relocated except in conformance with the provisions of this Section. If the use of the mobile home, mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or camper park is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or more, the mobile home, mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or camper park shall not be occupied or used until it is in conformance with all applicable regulations in this Section. 
(3)  If an existing mobile home is located on a lot within a mobile home park or outside a mobile home park and the lot is not large enough to meet the provisions of this Section, the mobile home shall not be replaced by a larger mobile home, but it may be replaced with a mobile home of the same or lesser size if otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1987-02, § 17, 2-17-87) 
Sec. 26-22-3. - Permits and licenses required. 
    The following permits and licenses shall be required: 
(a)  Mobile home park and camper park license. A mobile home park or camper park license is required to operate and maintain a mobile home park or camper park in the City of Lafayette and no license shall be granted by the city council unless the mobile home park or camper park is in compliance with this Section, the fee for which shall be set by resolution. 
(b)  Mobile home installer's license. A mobile home installer's license for the City of Lafayette is required for any person engaging in the business of installing mobile homes, the fee for which shall be set by resolution. 
(c)  Building permit. 
(1)  All buildings, utilities constructed, altered or repaired in a mobile home park or camper park shall be in conformance with applicable city and state codes and shall require a building permit prior to construction. 
(2)  A building permit shall be required for installing individual mobile homes anywhere in the city, for tying down of a previously installed mobile home and for the construction of accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-22-4. - Special use application required. 
    All new mobile home parks, camper parks and mobile home subdivisions shall be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of a special use application filed in accordance with the procedures and requirements of Section 26-15. Individual mobile homes shall be permitted only in approved mobile home subdivisions or mobile home parks, however, mobile homes conforming to the criteria listed in section 26-22-5 may be permitted on individual lots through the provisions of a special use. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-22-5. - Mobile homes on individual lots. 
    Mobile homes placed on individual platted lots must conform to the following criteria: 
(a)  The mobile home unit shall be no less than twenty-four (24) feet wide and thirty-six (36) feet in length. 
(b)  The mobile home unit shall be installed on a permanent, engineered perimeter foundation. 
(c)  The mobile home unit shall have a brick, wood or a cosmetically equivalent exterior siding and a pitched roof. 
(d)  The mobile home unit shall be certified by the "National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974", 42 USC 5401, et seq., as amended. 
(e)  All appropriate provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted by the City of Lafayette, such as snow load, wind shear and energy conservation measures shall apply to mobile homes. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2007-53, § 2, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 26-22-6. - Mobile home installer's license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing mobile homes without first having been issued a valid mobile home installer's license by the city. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to labor or work for compensation at the job of installing mobile homes without first obtaining a valid mobile home installer's license. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-22-7. - Mobile home park and mobile home subdivision development standards. 
(a)  Location. The mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall be located on a well-drained site, and shall be located so that its drainage will not constitute a hazard or nuisance to persons, property or water supply in the immediate vicinity of the site. The site shall be free from marshes, swamps, or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents. Mobile home park and mobile home subdivision sites shall not be subject to undue flooding, fire or safety hazards and shall not be exposed to nuisances, such as undue noise, smoke, fumes or odors. The topography of the site shall be favorable to minimum grading, mobile home placement and ease of maintenance. Initial site grades shall not exceed eight (8) percent. 
(b)  Site design. The site design shall provide for a desirable residential environment for mobile home residents which is an asset to the community and the neighborhood in which it is located. Site planning and improvements shall provide facilities and amenities which are appropriate to the needs of the residents; safe, comfortable and sanitary uses by the residents under all weather conditions; and practical and efficient operation and maintenance facilities at reasonable costs. Innovative and imaginative design shall be encouraged. 
(c)  Minimum area required. The minimum area required for any mobile home park or subdivision is ten (10) acres. 
(d)  Maximum density. The maximum gross density for any mobile home park or subdivision is seven (7) units per acre. 
(e)  Recreation area and open area. Not less than thirty (30) percent of the total site area shall be used for common recreation facilities and landscaped open areas. All open areas and common recreational areas shall be in locations convenient to mobile home lots or spaces. Recreation areas may include space for community use facilities, buildings, swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(f)  Mobile home setbacks and other miscellaneous requirements. The following regulations shall apply to mobile homes, attached structures, and detached accessory structures: 
(1)  For mobile home subdivisions the following setbacks and regulations shall apply: 
a.  A minimum side yard setback of seven and one-half (7.5) feet. 
b.  A minimum separation between mobile homes of fifteen (15) feet shall be maintained. 
c.  A minimum front yard setback of fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  A minimum rear yard setback of fifteen (15) feet. 
e.  A minimum of ten (10) feet from any point of the mobile home to the pavement of any access road, whether public or private, serving more than one (1) mobile home lot. 
f.  A minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet from the perimeter of the boundaries of the mobile home subdivision; except when abutting another mobile home subdivision or park, in which case, distance between mobile homes shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
g.  On corner lots, the sight triangle requirement as defined in section 26-14-16 shall apply. 
h.  An outdoor living and service area on the mobile home lot of not less than three hundred (300) square feet. Such area may include paved patio areas, but not vehicle parking areas. 
i.  Paved driveways, the minimum width of which shall be ten (10) feet, shall be provided where necessary for convenient access to the mobile home lot. 
j.  Garages shall be placed no closer than fifteen (15) feet from the back of a sidewalk, or the back of curb or road surface if a sidewalk is not present. 
k.  Carports shall be placed no closer than fifteen (15) feet from the back of a sidewalk, or the back of curb or road surface if a sidewalk is not present. Carports have a minimum of two (2) adjacent open sides. 
l.  The mobile home shall be attached to either a permanent or temporary foundation, as defined by the City of Lafayette building official, in accordance with plans prepared by a registered engineer providing for vertical loads, uplift and lateral forces in compliance with current building code in effect at the time of the installation. 
m.  All transport features, such as hitches, tongues, axles and wheels shall be removed. 
n.  Building height for the principal building and for all accessory structures shall be governed by the underlying zoning district and Table 26-B of this chapter. 
o.  Nothing in this chapter, except the underlying zoning regulations, shall prohibit the construction of a conventional residential structure, such as stick-built or modular type structures, in a mobile home subdivision. Any such conventional residential structure shall comply with all of the regulations pertaining to the underlying zoning district. 
p.  Legal nonconforming carports existing prior to January 28, 2011, may be converted into a garage subject to the approval of the planning director, who shall review and approve or disapprove such request based on the traffic sight vision clearance requirements for local streets as provided in Chapter 26 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  For mobile home parks the following setbacks and regulations shall apply: 
a.  A minimum separation between mobile homes of fifteen (15) feet shall be maintained, except that a separation of not less than ten (10) feet shall be allowed when mobiles homes are parked end to end. 
b.  A minimum of ten (10) feet from any point of the mobile home to the pavement of any access road, whether public or private, serving more than one (1) mobile home space. 
c.  A minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet from the perimeter of the boundaries of the mobile home park; except when abutting another mobile home subdivision or park, in which case, distance between mobile homes shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  On corner spaces, the sight triangle requirement as defined in section 26-14-16 shall apply. 
e.  An outdoor living and service area on the mobile home spaces of not less than three hundred (300) square feet. Such area may include paved patio areas, but not vehicle parking areas. 
f.  Paved driveways, the minimum width of which shall be ten (10) feet, shall be provided where necessary for convenient access to the mobile home space. 
g.  Garages shall be placed no closer than ten (10) feet from the back of a sidewalk, or the back of curb or road surface if a sidewalk is not present. 
h.  Carports shall be placed no closer than ten (10) feet from the back of a sidewalk, or the back of curb or road surface if a sidewalk is not present. Carports have a minimum of two (2) adjacent open sides. 
i.  The mobile home shall be attached to either a permanent or temporary foundation, as defined by the City of Lafayette building official, in accordance with plans prepared by a registered engineer providing for vertical loads, uplift and lateral forces in compliance with current building code in effect at the time of the installation. 
j.  All transportation hitches and tongues shall be removed. 
k.  Building height for the principal building and for all accessory structures shall be governed by the underlying zoning district and Table 26-B of this chapter. 
l.  Conventional residential structures, such as stick-built or modular type structures, are not permitted within mobile home parks. 
m.  Legal nonconforming carports existing prior to January 28, 2011, may be converted into a garage subject to the approval of the planning director, who shall review and approve or disapprove such request based on the traffic sight vision clearance requirements for local streets as provided in Chapter 26 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances. 
(g)  Minimum lot area and density: 
(1)  The minimum lot or space area in a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet for double-wide mobile homes and four thousand (4,000) square feet for single-wides. 
(2)  Camper parks shall not exceed twelve (12) units per net acre. 
(h)  Areas reserved for travel trailers, campers, motor homes and camper buses. If areas are to be provided within the mobile home park or mobile home subdivision for accommodation of travel trailers, campers, and the like, on a storage basis, such areas shall be provided in a location where the parking of such vehicles does not constitute a nuisance to other residents of the mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. Such areas shall be screened from view of the rest of the mobile home spaces or lots. 
(i)  Screening. All mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions adjacent to other residential uses, commercial or industrial uses shall be screened with a solid fencing, or landscape buffers along the property boundary separating the mobile home development from the adjacent use. 
(j)  Windbreaks. Any mobile home park or mobile home subdivision located on flat open land, without natural barriers (such as hills, bluffs or large stands of trees) to strong winds shall be required to have windbreaks to protect mobile homes from the effects of such winds. Windbreak design and location shall be relative to known wind velocities and direction and to the existing and proposed topography and vegetation, and shall be subject to landscape review and approval by the city planning staff. One (1) or more of the following techniques shall be used to provide windbreak screening: 
(1)  Landscape buffering. A combination of trees and "understory" shrubbing of dense deciduous or evergreen plant material, with mature shrub heights ranging from four (4) to twelve (12) feet; or clustered or row-planted tree and/or shrub hedging. 
(2)  Earth berming, in combination with landscape buffering. 
(3)  Fencing. Opaque (eighty-five (85) percent or more opacity), wood or masonry fencing. (Fencing, whether for screening or for windbreak purposes shall comply with building and zoning code requirements.) 
(k)  Streets. The mobile home park or mobile home subdivision site shall have at least two (2) direct accesses to a public street or highway, and access roads shall be provided to each mobile home space or lot. 
    All streets and accessways providing ingress to and egress from the mobile home park or mobile home subdivision and circulation within the mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with specifications of the city engineer for public streets and public accessways, and shall be completed prior to issuance of a mobile home placement permit. All such streets and accessways shall include sidewalk, curb and gutter in accordance with city standards. 
(l)  Walkways and lighting. Paved walkways at least four (4) feet wide shall be provided from all mobile home spaces or lots to service buildings and other community areas, and along all access roads and streets. 
    Pedestrian circulation areas shall be lighted at night by 7000-lumen lighting standards (equal to 175-watt mercury vapor bulbs) spaced no more than three hundred (300) feet apart, with a maximum light height of twenty-five (25) feet; or by other lighting methods producing an equivalent level of light at the ground. 
(m)  Storage areas. Storage areas for boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, tent trailers, horse trailers and detachable pickup campers shall be provided within the mobile home park in an amount equal to one hundred (100) square feet per mobile home space. Such areas shall be screened from adjacent residential properties and public streets by means of opaque fencing or landscaping. 
(n)  Off-street parking. Parking in mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions shall be provided as required by Section 26-20 for single-family residences. 
(o)  Blocking, skirting and tie-down requirements for mobile homes not on a permanent foundation: 
General Requirements: 
Every owner and/or occupant of a mobile home within the city shall secure said mobile home against wind damage in accordance with the regulations of this Section. 
In case of mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter or annexed to the city after said effective date, the City of Lafayette Building Official shall have the authority to reduce the number of required tie-down sets upon presentation of adequate evidence that certain spaces are not subject to the wind forces upon which these requirements are based. 
All mobile homes shall be skirted with a skirting of rigid type material. 
Tie-Downs: 
Each mobile home shall be provided with tie-downs to the main framing members of the mobile home as hereinafter described: 
Length of mobile home: Up to 30 feet 
Required tie-down sets: 2 sets 
Number of anchors: 4 
Length of mobile home: 30 to 50 feet 
Required tie-down sets: 3 sets 
Number of anchors: 6 
Length of mobile home: 50 to 70 feet 
Required tie-down sets: 4 sets 
Number of anchors: 8 
Length of mobile home: Over 70 feet 
Required tie-down sets: 5 sets 
Number of anchors: 10 
All ties shall be fastened to an anchorage as described by this Section and shall be drawn tight with one-half inch or larger galvanized, drop-forged turnbuckles or other equivalent tightening device approved by the building official. Turnbuckles shall be ended with jaws or forged or welded eyes. Turnbuckles with hook ends are prohibited. 
All cable ends shall be secured with at least two (2) u-bolt type cable clamps or other fastening device as approved by the building official. 
Cable used for ties shall be of either galvanized steel or stainless steel and shall be either three-eighths inch diameter (7 × 7-7 wires each) steel cable, or three-eighths inch diameter or larger (7 × 19-7 strands of 19 wires each) "aircraft" cable. 
If flat steel strapping is used, it shall be in accordance with Federal Specification QQ-S-781; i.e., 11/4 inches × .035 inches, Type 1, Class B, Grade 1. Zinc coating shall be a minimum of 0.30 ounces per square foot of surface. Breaking strength shall be a minimum of 4,750 pounds. (See Table II of QQ-S-781.) Any other material shall be at least equal to the above specifications in tensile strength and weather resistance. 
Steel bands used for ties shall terminate with a d-ring, bolt or other device that will not cause distortion of the band with the tensioning device attached. 
Sharp edges of the mobile home that would tend to cut the cable when the home is buffeted by the wind shall be protected by a thimble or other device that will prevent such cutting. 
Connection to the I beam shall be by a five-eighths inch drop-forged closed eye, bolted through a hole drilled through the beam. A washer, or equivalent, shall be used so that the beam is sufficiently finish plated through the hole. 
Other connectors or means of securing the cable to the beam of equivalent holding power and permanence are acceptable if approved by the Building Official. 
Anchorage: 
Ground anchors shall be aligned with piers required by this Section. Said anchors shall be situated immediately below the outer wall if they are to accommodate over-the-home ties if this placement allows for sufficient angle for the anchor-to-frame connection. 
Steel rods shall be five-eighths inch minimum diameter with a forged or welded eye at the top. For deadman anchors, the bottom of the rod shall be hooked into concrete. 
Augers shall be of minimum diameter of six (6) inches (arrowheads, eight (8) inches) and be sunk to a depth of at least five (5) feet. 
Deadman anchors shall be sunk to a depth of five (5) feet, with a minimum vertical dimension of two (2) feet and a diameter of six (6) inches. Celled concrete blocks are prohibited. 
In lieu of the above, anchors to reinforced concrete slabs shall be of strength comparable to the above as may be approved by the building official. If this method is used, the weight of the mobile home must rest on the slab. 
Piers and Footings: 
All piers shall be placed on footers of concrete with minimum dimensions of sixteen inches by sixteen inches by four inches or equivalent thereof as approved by the building official. 
Piers shall be constructed of standard eight inches by eight inches by sixteen inches celled concrete blocks placed over the foundation with long dimension crossways to the main frame members and centered under them, with cells vertical. Pier heights shall be such that the mobile home will be located as close to the ground as possible. 
Piers shall be topped with a concrete cap of eight inches by sixteen inches by four inches. 
Hardwood shims shall be driven tight between the cap and the main frame to provide uniform bearing. They shall be four (4) inches or less in thickness and be wide enough to provide bearing over the top cap. 
Other types of piers and foundations of equivalent permanence and weight-bearing ability may be approved by the building official. The use of a heavy metal adjustment column, anchored to both frame and foundation, is recommended. 
Required piers shall be centered under each main frame (or chassis) member within five (5) feet of anchorage. The end piers shall be no farther than five (5) feet from the ends of the mobile home. 
Cabanas and Awnings: 
Cabanas, awnings and similar accessory structures, shall be secured by a row of support bars with a maximum spacing of twelve (12) feet at the outer edge. The posts shall be adequately secured to the roof and to the concrete patio or equivalent footing. Other adjacent structures such as storage bins, antennas, refuse containers, etc. shall also be secured and approved by the building official. 
Alternative Tie-Down and Blocking Methods Permitted: 
In the event a mobile home park owner or developer wishes to use different tie-down, block and anchorage systems than those specified herein, he shall comply with the following: 
The method and materials for tie-down pads and for securing the mobile homes to the tie-down pads must be designed by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Colorado and must be approved by the building official both for typical tie-downs and for each individual space as it is shown on the proposed final site plan. 
The approval by the building official must occur prior to the approval of any final mobile home park site plan by the city planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1986-1, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1990-4, § 5, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 1991-31, § 14, 11-19-91; Ord. No. 1993-21, §§ 1, 2, 7-20-93; Ord. No. 1993-44, § 2, 10-19-93; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 16, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2007-53, § 3, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 2011-02, §§ 1-4, 2-1-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-22-8. - Mobile home accessory structures. 
(a)  All accessory structures shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable local and state zoning and construction requirements. They shall be structurally sound, constructed to facilitate cleaning and maintained in good repair. 
(b)  All porches, landings, stairs, or other platforms shall comply with the International Residential Code, as adopted by the City of Lafayette. 
(c)  Attached structures shall maintain the same setbacks required for a mobile home. 
(d)  Except as specified in section 26-22-7(f) of this chapter, detached structures shall be placed no closer than five (5) feet from a side or rear lot or space line and twenty-five (25) feet from a front lot or space line or street. A minimum of five (5) feet shall be maintained between the mobile home and the accessory structure. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2007-53, § 4, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 26-22-9. - Refuse, waste, and recycling disposal. 
(a)  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse, waste, and recycling materials in a mobile home or camper park shall be so conducted as to control odors, rodents, insects, accidents, fire hazards, air pollution, or other nuisance conditions. 
(b)  The number of containers used and the frequency of collection shall be sufficient to prevent overfilled containers. Refuse shall be routinely collected and removed from the premises not less than once weekly. Refuse shall be disposed of at a lawful disposal site in accordance with requirements of the Colorado Disposal Sites and Facilities Act. 
(c)  All refuse shall be stored, collected and disposed of as prescribed by city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2005-22, § 1, 8-2-05) 
Sec. 26-22-10. - Sanitary facilities and service buildings for a camper park. 
(a)  Sanitary facilities shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Toilets. One (1) toilet for each sex for every five (5) campers or dependent mobile home lots or fractional part thereof. 
(2)  Urinals. Urinals in male facilities may be substituted for up to one-third of the required number of toilets. Men's toilet rooms hereafter constructed shall include urinals where more than two (2) toilets are required. 
(3)  Lavatories. One (1) lavatory for each sex for every ten (10) campers or dependent mobile home lots or fractional part thereof. 
(4)  Bathing facilities. One (1) for each sex for each ten (10) campers or dependent mobile home lots or fractional part thereof. 
(b)  Hot and cold water under pressure shall be supplied to all required plumbing fixtures, except that cold water only shall be supplied to water closets. Where tempered water is provided, the water heating facilities shall have the capacity to supply hot water one hundred twenty (120) degrees, at the minimum rate of three (3) gallons per hour per camper space lot. Such facilities shall be of approved types and shall be properly installed and maintained. 
(c)  A sufficient number of factors with running water shall be provided to wash service buildings, walkways, passageways and other common use areas. 
(d)  Drinking fountains, when provided, shall not be located in service rooms or connected to water faucets or lavatories. Drinking fountains shall be of approved types with adequate water pressure. Use of common cups is prohibited. 
(e)  Required plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in good working order and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(f)  Toilet paper, soap and single-service towels, or the equivalent, shall be provided in all common use or centralized toilet and lavatory facilities. The use of common towels is prohibited. 
(g)  Service rooms and buildings housing required plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of easily cleanable, nonabsorbent materials, maintained in good repair, and in a clean and sanitary condition and be conveniently located. 
(h)  Separate rooms containing required plumbing fixtures shall be provided for each sex. If located in the same building, they shall be separated by a solid wall extending from floor to ceiling and shall be clearly marked for "Men" and "Women". 
(i)  Service rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven and one-half (71/2) feet. In rooms with sloping ceilings, the required ceiling height shall be provided in at least fifty (50) percent of the room, and no portion of any room having a ceiling height of less than five (5) feet shall be considered as contributing to the minimum required areas. 
(j)  Service rooms shall be provided with light and ventilation by means of windows or by artificial light and mechanical ventilation. The window area in each service room shall be equivalent to at least ten (10) percent of the floor area with at least one-half of the required window area openable to the outside air. In lieu of the required window area in each service room, an approved mechanical ventilation system may be installed which will provide at least five (5) air changes per hour, be vented directly to the outside, and be connected to the electrical lighting system. 
(k)  When necessary for exclusion of flies, mosquitoes and other insects, exterior openings or service buildings shall be protected with fly screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per square inch unless other approved protective devices are provided. 
(l)  Each exterior door in a service building shall be provided with a landing which has a depth and width not less than the door opening. 
(m)  The floors of service buildings shall have a smooth, impermeable and easily cleanable surface, sloped to drain. Floor drains, properly trapped, shall be provided in all shower booths, and shower rooms to remove waste water and to facilitate cleaning. The walls and partitions shall have a smooth, nonabsorbent, easily cleanable surface extending to a height of four (4) feet in toilet rooms and six (6) feet in shower rooms. 
(n)  Toilets and showers shall be installed in separate compartments, individually accessible. Each compartment shall have a self-closing door, except showers may be equipped with a waterproof curtain. 
(o)  Toilet space shall be not less than thirty (30) inches in width, and the space in front of the toilet shall not be less than twenty-four (24) inches. 
(p)  Shower stalls shall be not less than thirty (30) inches by thirty (30) inches in area. Shower floors shall be impervious and skid-resistant or be provided with a nonslip impervious mat. Dry dressing room space, screened from view and equivalent to the size of the total shower floor area, shall be provided adjacent to bathing facilities and shall be equipped with clothes hooks and benches. 
(q)  Each service room shall have at least one (1) double convenience outlet adjacent to lavatories and one (1) ceiling light fixture to provide thirty (30) footcandles. At least one (1) light fixture, operated by a switch, shall be provided at each entrance, unless the yard lighting provides light levels of at least five (5) footcandles. 
(r)  Service buildings shall be provided with approved heating facilities properly installed, maintained in a safe working condition, and capable of providing a room temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit. No open-flame gas or oil-fired stoves, hot plates or unvented heaters shall be approved for heating purposes. 
(s)  If service buildings are kept locked, the operator shall provide a key to each tenant. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-22-11. - Electrical service. 
(a)  Every mobile home, mobile home subdivision and service building in a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall be provided with electrical service properly installed and maintained in a safe condition. 
(b)  Standards: 
(1)  The installation shall comply with all state and city electrical regulations, including the adopted version of the National Electric Code. Outside electrical outlets shall be weatherproof and all power lines and service connections shall be located in safe conduits below the surfaces of the ground. All electrical and communication utility lines and services, except as provided in this section, shall be installed underground. 
(2)  Excepted from requirements of the foregoing and this section shall be the following: 
a.  Transformers, switching boxes, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, ducts and other facilities necessary appurtenant to such underground and street lighting facilities may be placed above ground within the utility easement provided therefor, or within the street or other public place as appropriate; 
b.  All facilities reasonably necessary to connect underground facilities to existing or permitted overground or underground facilities; 
c.  Overhead electric transmission and distribution feeder lines and overhead communication long distance, trunk and feeder lines, existing or new. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2007-53, § 5, 11-27-07) 
Sec. 26-22-12. - Fuel supply. 
(a)  Natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas and fuel oil equipment shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe, operable condition. 
(b)  The fuel supply system shall be designed to provide a sufficient quantity of fuel to each mobile home and service building. 
(c)  Natural gas: 
(1)  Underground piping shall be installed at a depth of at least eighteen (18) inches. 
(2)  Gas piping shall not be buried in the ground or laid on top of the ground beneath a mobile home. Risers, valves, outlets and connections shall not be located beneath a mobile home. 
(3)  Where the mobile home park or mobile home subdivision contains more than fifty (50) lots or spaces, the gas distribution system shall be so designed that no more than twenty (20) percent of the mobile homes will be without gas service in the event of a service line disruption in the mobile home park. 
(4)  Each mobile home lot or space shall be provided with a gas service riser pipe of not less than three-fourths inch in diameter, and located outside of the left side of the mobile home stand, and the rear third portion of the mobile home stand. 
(5)  Each mobile home lot or space shall have an approved readily accessible shutoff valve installed upstream from the mobile home gas service outlet and located on the outlet riser at a height of not less than four (4) inches above grade. The valve shall not be located under any mobile home. The outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent leakage of gas when not in use. 
(6)  Each mobile home shall be connected to the gas service outlet by an approved flexible connector of three-fourths inch metal or other material not more than six (6) feet in length. Approved rigid pipe and fittings shall be used between the flexible connector and the mobile home lot or space gas outlet when the distance exceeds six (6) feet in length. 
(7)  Aboveground horizontal runs of gas piping shall be maintained not less than six (6) inches above grade and shall be securely supported by straps or hooks. Gas piping, risers, valves, outlets and connectors shall be protected from damage. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-22-13. - Fire protection. 
(a)  The mobile home park, mobile home subdivision or camper park area shall be subject to the fire rules and regulations of the city. 
(b)  Mobile home and camper park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
(c)  Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention authority shall be kept in service buildings, and at all other locations designated by such fire prevention authority, and shall be maintained in good operating condition. 
(d)  Fire hydrants shall be located in accordance with city standards, regulations and ordinances. 
(e)  Fires shall be made only in stoves, and other equipment intended for such purpose in a mobile home park and only in designated fire pits in camper parks. 
(f)  Smoke detectors shall be provided in all mobile homes placed after the date of adoption of this chapter. 
SECTION 26-22.1. - OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 26-22.1-1. - Purpose. 
    This section is enacted to protect and promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity or general welfare of the present and future residents of the city. It is the intent of the city council by enacting this section 26-22.1 to facilitate the development of oil and gas resources within the city while mitigating potential land use conflicts between such development and existing, as well as planned, land uses. It is recognized that under state law the surface and mineral estates are separate and distinct interests in land and that one may be severed from the other. Owners of subsurface mineral interests have certain legal rights and privileges, including the right to use the part of the surface estate reasonably required to extract and develop their subsurface mineral interests. The state has a recognized interest in fostering the efficient development, production and utilization of oil and gas resources, and particularly in the prevention of waste and protection of the correlative rights of common source owners and producers to a fair and equitable share of production profits. Similarly, owners of the surface estate have certain legal rights and privileges, including the right to have the mineral estate developed in a reasonable manner. Municipal governments have a recognized, traditional authority and responsibility to regulate land use within their jurisdiction. This section 26-22.1 is intended to be an exercise of the land use authority of the city. Nothing set forth in this section 26-22.1 shall be construed to limit other applicable ordinances of the city as set forth in the Code of Ordinances or otherwise, or applicable resolutions or regulations of the County of Boulder or statutes of the State of Colorado or to limit the city's authority to abate nuisances by any lawful means. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94) 
Sec. 26-22.1-2. - Definitions. 
    All terms used in this Section 26-22.1 that are defined in the Act or in commission regulations and are not defined in this Section 26-22.1 are defined as provided in the Act or in such regulations as of the effective date of this Section 26-22.1. All other words used in this Section 26-22.1 are given their usual, customary and accepted meaning, and all words of a technical nature, or peculiar to the oil and gas industry, shall be given that meaning which is generally accepted in said oil and gas industry. When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context. the following words and phrases used in this Section 26-22.1 have the following meanings: 
(1)  Abandonment. Any oil or gas well as to which drilling or production has ceased for a period of six (6) months or more shall be considered abandoned. 
(2)  Act. The Oil and Gas Conservation Act of the State of Colorado. 
(3)  Agricultural. Land currently located in areas in a natural state or in which the growing of crops, flowers and trees or other farming activity is practiced. 
(4)  Applicant. A person, corporation, or other legal entity possessing the legal right to develop an oil and gas resource or any other use proposed in connection therewith; generally, the applicant will be the owner or lessee of the mineral estate. The city may require submission of a duly executed and valid power of attorney evidencing such authority. 
(5)  Berm. An earthen barrier of compacted soils preventing the passage of liquid materials. 
(6)  Code of Ordinances or Code. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Lafayette, Colorado as amended from time to time. 
(7)  Collection line. A pipeline to a well, which pipeline is designed to collect water and transport it to a central disposal area (evaporation pit or injection well). 
(8)  Commission or O.G.C.C. The Oil and Gas Conservation Commission of the State of Colorado. 
(9)  Compressor station. An installation consisting of one (1) or more individual compressors, located on a gathering or transmission line or both. 
(10)  County. County of Boulder, State of Colorado. 
(11)  Critical use hours. That time of day, as determined on a case by case basis by the planning director, when disturbance is most likely to increase stress or have any other negative impact on the human or wildlife environment and use or enjoyment of land. 
(12)  Critical use period. That portion of the year (week(s) or month(s)) as determined on a case by case basis by the planning director, when disturbance is most likely to increase stress to or have any other negative impact on human, wildlife or other use and enjoyment of land. 
(13)  D.O.T. United States Department of Transportation. 
(14)  Day. A period of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours. 
(15)  Designated agent. An agent designated by the owner, lessee or applicant, as defined by the O.G.C.C. 
(16)  Director. The director of the Oil and Gas Conservation Commission of the State of Colorado. 
(17)  Easement. Authorization by a property owner for use of a designated portion of the surface of his or her property by another, for a specified purpose. 
(18)  Evaporation pit. An excavated, lined pit used for storing and evaporating water produced in degasification activities or during drilling or production or both. 
(19)  Gathering system. A system consisting of well (or gathering) lateral(s) and trunk pipelines transporting oil, gas, or other products derived from oil and gas production to a central facility or transmission line. 
(20)  Inspector. Any person designated by the chief building official, or designee thereof, who shall have the authority to inspect a well site to determine compliance with this Section 26-22.1 and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(21)  LCP. The Lafayette Comprehensive Plan, accepted November 3, 1987, as amended or supplemented from time to time. 
(22)  Lessee. An individual or firm leasing mineral rights for development purposes from the owner; may also be the applicant, for the purposes of this Section 26-22.1. 
(23)  O.G.C.C. Oil and Gas Conservation Commission of the State of Colorado. 
(24)  Oil and gas drilling. Any operation utilizing equipment which advances a borehole into substrata for the purpose of discovery, development, or production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons. The term oil and gas drilling shall be construed to include the borehole in its entirety and all associated excavations, improvements, equipment, access, and all related facilities and activities. 
(25)  Oil and gas operation. Any structure, facility, or activity which is constructed on or disturbs land in association with oil or gas drilling, production, or waste treatment and disposal, including but not necessarily limited to wells, tanks or tank batteries, pits and pipelines. 
(26)  Oil and gas production. Any operation which utilizes equipment or facilities, including without limitation, a borehole, for the purpose of extraction, containment, preparatory separation, or transportation of oil or gas. 
(27)  Operating plan. A general description of a facility identifying purpose, use, typical staffing pattern, seasonal considerations, routine hours of operating, source of services/infrastructure, and any other information related to regular functioning of that facility. 
(28)  Operator or owner. For purposes of this Section 26-22.1, the person who has the legal right to conduct the proposed oil and gas operation subject to a special use approval. 
(29)  Pollution. Alteration of the physical, chemical, biological or radiological properties of water, air or land, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity or odor, or such discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into or onto water, air or land as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such water, air or land harmful, detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
(30)  Production site. The area surrounding proposed or existing production pits or other accessory equipment required for oil or gas production, at which may also be located tanks and tank batteries, exclusive of transmission and gathering pipelines. 
(31)  Quiet zone. That area described in section 75-130 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(32)  Retaining pit. Earthen excavation used for the purpose of retaining or storing substances associated with the drilling or operation of oil or gas wells. 
(33)  Security fence. A six-foot chainlink topped by three (3) strands of barbed wire, or an equivalent approved by the planning director, with gate(s) that can be secured. 
(34)  Shut-in. To close a valve on a well so that it stops producing. 
(35)  Site. The area surrounding an oil and gas operation. 
(36)  Sour gas. Natural gas containing hydrogen sulfide (HS) of four (4) ppm or greater. 
(37)  Spacing. The acreage dedicated to each well producing from the same formation as established by the O.G.C.C. 
(38)  Tank. Any container used in conjunction with the drilling or production of petroleum of hydrocarbon substances. 
(39)  Temporary abandonment. Any oil or gas well as to which drilling or production has ceased for a period of three (3) months or more (but less than six (6) months) shall be considered temporarily abandoned. 
(40)  Transmission line. A pipeline transporting oil, natural gas, or any other products derived from oil and gas production, which is defined as a transmission line by the D.O.T. regulations under the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act of 1968 as amended. 
(41)  Watercourse. A channel, ditch, natural depression, slough, artificial channel, gulch, arroyo, stream, creek, pond, wetland, reservoir, or lake in which natural or irrigation water flows or storm runoff floodwater flows, either regularly or infrequently. This includes riparian areas and drainage-ways for carrying urban storm runoff. 
(42)  Well site. The area surrounding a proposed or existing oil or gas well or wells and accessory structures and equipment necessary for drilling, completion, recompletion, development and production activities. 
(43)  Wildlife habitat areas. Areas designated on the map entitled 1991 City of Lafayette Wildlife Habitat May as amended from time to time, available for viewing at the city planning department. 
(44)  Working interest owner. Owner of the right to the mineral interest granted by an oil and gas lease. 
(45)  Zoning map. The boundaries of the zoning district designations contained in section 26-2-1 of the Code of Ordinances, as set forth on a map entitled "Zone District Map of the City of Lafayette" which may be amended from time to time, is kept in the city planning department and maintained by such department. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2011-33, §§ 13, 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, §§ 2, 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-22.1-3. - Applicability of regulations to proposed new wells, drilling and enhanced recovery operations. 
(a)  In accordance with the procedures defined in this Section 26-22.1, within all zone districts, the operator shall apply for and receive special use approval prior to installing or constructing any oil and gas operation, including but not limited to drilling, reactivating a plugged or abandoned well, performing the initial installation of accessory equipment or pumping systems, reentry for purposes of sidetracking, deepening, recompleting or reworking, or performing enhanced recovery operations (e.g., injection wells) or installing, constructing, relocating or altering any access to any oil and gas operation provided that a special use approval for relocating or altering any access is required only if such relocation or alteration involves a change in point or means of access. 
(b)  Where strict application of any regulation of this Section 26-22.1 would result in undue hardship upon the applicant, the planning commission, or planning director, as the case may be, may authorize, in conjunction with approval of the special use review, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, provided however, that: 
(1)  The variance granted is the minimum necessary to alleviate such undue hardship upon the applicant; and 
(2)  Such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the general plan of this chapter; and 
(3)  The circumstances found to constitute a hardship were not created by the applicant, are not due to or the result of general conditions in the district and cannot be practically corrected. 
    The grant of any variance shall not constitute or be construed as a precedent, ground or cause for any other variance. 
(c)  The approval of such special use review shall not relieve the operator from otherwise complying with any other ordinances of the City of Lafayette, or applicable resolutions, regulations or statutes of the county, State of Colorado, O.G.C.C. or any federal entities or agencies having jurisdiction over such development. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-22.1-4. - Contents of the application for special use for oil and gas operation. 
    Applicant shall submit an application for special use to the planning director. All special use applications for oil and gas operations shall, at a minimum, contain the following: (1) a site plan; (2) a vicinity map; (3) narrative elements; and (4) a fee, as described herein: 
(1)  Site plan. 
a.  Site information. Applicant shall submit site information on a plat or map at a scale no less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet with a true north arrow showing, where applicable: 
1.  The proposed location of any rig, wellhead, mud tanks, retaining pits, collection lines, racks, and similar structures and equipment, any tank or tank battery and flow lines or collection lines associated with the proposed well in the event of production; 
2.  Existing tank batteries and flow lines of record or identified in the OGCC files and within a half-mile radius of the proposed location; 
3.  Where available, proposed location of any pipeline; 
4.  Buildings within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed oil and gas operation; 
5.  All existing utility easements and other easements and rights-of-way within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed oil and gas operation; 
6.  All watercourses within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed oil and gas operation; 
7.  Location of all access roads to the well site or production site; 
5.  All site and lease boundaries; 
9.  Slope contours for the entire well site area; 
10.  Identification of zoning districts within six hundred (600) feet per the city zoning map; 
11.  Existing features or areas with an official designation or recognition of having important natural, historic or archaeological value, within six hundred (600) feet; 
12.  Wildlife habitat areas within six hundred (600) feet; 
13.  Location of any subdivision lots, agricultural lands, or any facilities or lands comprising a quiet zone within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed oil and gas operation; and 
14.  All trails or other passive recreational use areas existing on the surface surrounding the proposed oil and gas operation within six hundred (600) feet. 
b.  Section information. Applicant shall submit, where applicable, the following section information: The exact location of the drill site in the section in which the drill site is to be located. The plat of the section shall be at a scale of no less than one (1) inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet, and shall include the following information: 
1.  All dimensions of the section (north line, south line, west line, and east line); 
2.  Location of the drill site, given in feet from two (2) lines of the section e.g., 1,000 ft. FNL and 1,600 ft. FWL; 
3.  Township and range information; 
4.  Section number; 
5.  Location expressed in appropriate 1/4 1/4 1/4 section; 
6.  True north arrow; 
7.  Parcel tax identification number; and 
8.  Additional material, data or studies required by the planning director that will facilitate any understanding of the oil and gas operation and development. These may include, but are not limited to, fiscal impact evaluation and groundwater contour for the site area. 
c.  Setbacks. Unless it would violate O.G.C.C. spacing rules, any wellbore, production tanks, on-site production equipment, shall be located not less than three hundred fifty (350) feet from a building, public road, aboveground utility line, railroad, wildlife habitat area, pedestrian, biking or horseback trail, features or sites with official designation as having important historic or archaeological value, building permitted for construction or a platted lot line for a lot which is covered by an approved preliminary plan for a residential or commercial use; or which preliminary plan is for an industrial use which industrial use is characterized by any extraordinary fire hazard concerns. When said setback distance is less than three hundred eighty-five (385) feet, said setback distance shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor. In all cases, the location of the wellbore shall be staked by a licensed land surveyor. To the extent practicable, pipelines shall be located in existing easements, public rights-of-way or along property lines and as practicable, the setback requirements of this subsection shall apply. 
d.  Minimization of surface impacts. Where practicable, in order to minimize surface impacts, the applicant shall develop multiple reservoirs or locations by drilling from common pads or by performing multiple completions or commingling in existing wellbores provided such operations are authorized by the O.G.C.C. regulations. 
(2)  Vicinity map and other maps and plats. Applicant shall submit vicinity information, where applicable, on USGS 7.5 minute series or assessor base maps which indicate topographic detail and shows: 
a.  All existing watercourses within a six hundred-foot radius of the proposed oil and gas operation. For any existing watercourse topographically lower and within two thousand (2,000) feet of the proposed oil and gas operation, applicant shall submit a detailed description of proposed methods to be employed to prevent water pollution or alteration of the watercourse. Such description shall include a determination of whether the proposed oil and gas operation is within six hundred (600) feet of an established "floodway" or "floodplain." Information respecting established floodways and floodplains is set forth in the LCP or maps available for review at the city planning department. 
b.  Applicant shall provide reasonably available information on the location and type of water supply (rivers, creeks, lakes, ponds, ground water wells, and ditches or similar features) and plan for disposal of water, either on a vicinity map or by a written description. Further, applicant shall describe the source and amounts of all water to be used in the drilling and operation of any proposed well; and the proposed methods and routes for transporting water to the well site and methods and location of disposal of produced waters. Applicant shall provide state engineer approvals or permits if groundwater is proposed to be utilized. 
c.  Reasonably available information on the location of existing oil and gas wells and facilities including all wells (producing, abandoned, temporarily abandoned, shut-in, injection, drilling, water, etc.) within a one thousand-foot radius of the proposed location of a well. All gathering systems, transmission lines and compressor stations must also be reflected on this map. 
d.  Identification of all city roads that will be utilized by the oil and gas operation. 
e.  All proposed disposal sites and routes thereto. 
(3)  Narrative elements. Where the planning director determines that said information is appropriate, the applicant shall provide: 
a.  The operator's, working interest owners' and surface owners' names and addresses, as well as copies of any legal instruments identifying the applicant's interest in the property that are of record and any applicable O.G.C.C. Form 1, Designated Agent. 
b.  A listing of any permits or approvals obtained or yet to be obtained from local, state or federal agencies concerning the proposed oil and gas operation. 
c.  An emergency response plan including, but not limited to listing of local telephone numbers of the public and private entities and individuals to be notified in the event of an emergency, means of identifying location of well, and provisions to be made for access by emergency response entities. 
d.  A plan of access to well site showing how applicant will meet the requirements set forth in section 26-22.1-10(e). 
e.  Reserved. 
f.  A visual impact mitigation plan showing how applicant will meet the requirements set forth in section 26-22.1-10(a). 
g.  A drainage, erosion and infiltration plan showing how applicant will meet the requirements set forth in section 26-22.1-10(b). 
h.  A wildlife impacts mitigation plan as described in section 26-22.1-10(c) if applicable. 
i.  Where the planning director determines it is necessary, applicant shall enter into, and submit a road impact agreement as described in section 26-22.1-10(d). 
j.  A weed control plan as described in section 26-22.1-10(f) and when oil and gas operations are proposed on open space, a description of any endangered or threatened plant or animal species; and proof that the State Division of Wildlife, and any Soil Conservation District and the city weed and pest control program, have approved the proposed weed and pest control measures. 
k.  A noise and vibration mitigation plan showing how applicant will meet the requirements of section 26-22.1-10(g). 
l.  The total number of acres required for the entire drill site operation, e.g., rig, mud pits, evaporation pits, pipe racks, temporary trailers, mud pumps and parking areas. 
m.  The location of personnel facilities must be shown on a map or plat or indicated by written description. Any proposed temporary or permanent structures must be noted. Building permits must be secured if required by the Lafayette Code of Ordinances. Sanitary facilities must comply with the city building code and all other applicable Code provisions. Vehicle parking areas, and number of expected vehicles and their type shall be noted. 
n.  Applicant shall submit reasonably available proof that all stages of operation will comply with the State of Colorado and the Boulder County Health Department regulations regarding dust, odor, gas flaring and haul trucks. 
o.  In the event that additional wells are planned or contemplated within one (1) mile, applicant shall submit a field-wide operating plan. 
p.  A detailed two-phase reclamation and restoration plan which shall provide for (1) post-drilling restoration and (2) after-abandonment restoration consisting of the complete reclamation of the site to the equivalent or a better condition than existed prior to the commencement of operations. 
q.  A list of the names and addresses of all surface owners of property, any portion of which is within six hundred (600) feet of the proposed oil and gas operation. 
r.  The name, address and phone number of all subcontractors or third parties the applicant anticipates may work on any portion of the work contemplated to be performed under the special use. 
s.  A plan to minimize or prevent any effect on existing pedestrian, bike and horseback trails or wetlands. 
(4)  Fee schedule. Each application shall be submitted with the fee established pursuant to resolution of the city council as adopted from time to time. Such fee schedule shall be reasonably related to the cost of administering this Section 26-22.1. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2001-9, § 17, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2011-33, §§ 13, 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, §§ 2, 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-22.1-5. - Notice to proceed. 
    Prior to commencing construction or installation of any oil and gas operation, including but not limited to drilling, redrilling, recompletion or enhanced recovery operations, or contracting, installing, relocating or altering any access for which a special use has been approved, applicant shall secure a "notice to proceed" from the city administrator. The city administrator shall issue such notice to proceed upon finding that the following are contained in the city file: 
(1)  A copy of the notice of decision approving an application for special use for the specific oil and gas operation issued by the city. 
(2)  A copy of the site plan and vicinity map presented in conjunction with approval of the application. 
(3)  Drainage and grading plans for the well site meeting city requirements. 
(4)  A copy of an approved overweight/oversized vehicle permit issued by the County of Boulder. 
(5)  A copy of an access permit in accordance with section 26-22.1-10(e). 
(6)  A copy of all necessary building permits. 
(7)  A copy of all easements necessary to secure access to the specific oil and gas operation. 
(8)  A road impact agreement where required under section 26-22.1-10(d). 
(9)  A copy of a noise permit where required under section 26-22.1-10(g). 
(10)  A copy of a receipt for any fees required pursuant to section 26-22.1-4(4) or for any payment due to reimburse the city for technical or legal consulting necessitated by the application. 
(11)  A copy of the O.G.C.C. permit and any federal permit (if required) issued for the operation. 
(12)  A copy of the site restoration plans in accordance with sections 26-22.1-4(3)(xvi) and 26-22.1-9. 
(13)  A letter of indemnification holding the City of Lafayette harmless from all liability, claims and expenses arising out of applicant's operations under any and all permits issued or approvals granted by the City of Lafayette pursuant to this Section 26-22.1. Such indemnification shall not, however, extend to the negligent or willful acts of any agent or employee of the city acting within the scope of that person's actual or apparent authority. 
(14)  A certification that applicant has insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) insuring the applicant against all claims or causes of action made against the applicant for damages to persons or property arising out of the drilling, maintenance, production and other work done with respect to such proposed oil and gas operation. Environmental damage shall not be exempted from this insurance policy if such coverage is reasonably available. If the oil and gas operation is to be located on property owned by the city, the City of Lafayette shall be an additional named insured on this insurance policy. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94) 
Sec. 26-22.1-6. - Oil and gas drilling procedures and regulations. 
    Applicant shall comply with all of the following procedures and regulations: 
(1)  [ Road impact agreement. ] All provisions or conditions of the road impact agreement or approved plans or permits if such agreement, plans or permits were necessary pursuant to the applicable provisions of section 26-22.1-4(3). 
(2)  Rules and regulations 315 and 317 of the O.G.C.C. The applicant shall comply with rules and regulations 315 and 317 of the O.G.C.C., as enacted on the effective date of this Section 26-22.1, and as amended from time to time hereafter, entitled "General Drilling Rules" and "Abandonment," which are incorporated herein in their entirety and adopted as part of this Section 26-22.1, subject to the following: 
a.  315(e). The written notice of commencement of earthwork shall be provided to the planning director no less than thirty (30) days prior to commencement of such operations. 
b.  315(m). Prior written notice of flaring shall be provided to the City of Lafayette Fire Department, to the persons required to receive such notice under Boulder County Health Department Regulations and to the planning director. 
c.  315(q). Burial of concrete, plastic, pipe, cable, and other waste materials is prohibited. Burning of such materials is prohibited unless required under any state law or state regulation and then the operator must give reasonable advance written notice to the City of Lafayette Fire Department, county health department and other city and county agencies as designated from time to time. 
d.  317(a)(6). A minimum of twenty (20) days' advance written notice of the time and date of plugging shall also be provided to the planning director. 
(3)  Reporting of spills and ground contamination/pollution. 
a.  The working interest owner(s) and operator(s) shall be jointly and severally responsible for prevention, reporting and prompt removal of any and all spills involving waste materials, oil or toxic or hazardous materials. In addition to the reporting requirements of the O.G.C.C., and upon discovery or when such spill reasonably should have been discovered, immediate verbal notice, followed within forty-eight (48) hours by written confirmation, of any spill of any material must be provided to the Lafayette Fire Department, [Lafayette] Police Department, Boulder County Health Department, and city administrator. 
b.  No person shall deposit water produced from oil and gas operations, or other oil field waste, other than drilling muds, for disposal in a commercial disposal facility, without first verifying that the facility has obtained a certificate from Boulder County in accord with the regulations pertaining to solid waste disposal sites and facilities promulgated by the Colorado Department of Health; except that such produced water or waste shall not be applied or spread on any lands within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-22.1-7. - Storage tanks and accessory equipment. 
(a)  Central battery. Storage tanks and all other accessory equipment shall be located and installed on a well site in accord with National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet No. 30 unless otherwise approved as part of the application, and to the extent possible, shall be located within a central battery area which shall be located in accordance with the setback provisions contained in section 26-22.1-4(1)c. Unless otherwise approved, no more than two (2) permanent storage tanks, none of which shall have a rated storage capacity in excess of five hundred (500) barrels, shall be installed on any one (1) well site. Storage tanks shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by the city and amended from time to time. Smoking shall be provided at wells and tank locations. 
(b)  Berming/containment. All accessory equipment, such as tanks, heaters and separators shall be contained within a berm. Such berm shall be designed to permit reasonable and adequate access and service. In all cases, the berm shall be so designed to be capable of impounding an amount of fluid equal to one hundred (100) percent of the capacity of the tanks therein. In sensitive areas, appropriate impermeable barrier pads may be required by the city planning director to insure no leakage onto the surface occurs. 
(c)  Fencing. Operator shall fence all pumping systems, treaters, separators and tanks used in the operation of a completed well by enclosing same on all sides by a security fence as defined in section 26-22.1-2(33). Tank control valves shall be locked when not in use by the operator or its agent. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-22.1-8. - Environmental and public safety. 
    In addition to compliance with O.G.C.C. regulations, all oil and gas operations approved under this Section 26-22.1 shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Drilling mud disposal. Excess drilling muds shall be disposed of in accordance with O.G.C.C. rule 322A(e), as amended from time to time. 
(3)  Water contamination. No oil, gas or other deleterious substances or pollutants shall be permitted to alter or affect any surface or subsurface fresh waters in violation of any applicable federal, state, county or city ordinance or regulation. 
(4)  Maintenance of structures and equipment. All structures and equipment shall be maintained so as not to become a hazard or injurious to public health and safety. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Air emissions. Air contaminant emission sources shall comply with the permit and control provisions of the Colorado Air Quality Control Program (Title 25, Article 7, C.R.S.) as amended from time to time and the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Air Quality Control Commission. If operations result in the generation of amounts of dust in excess of applicable standards set forth therein, along access routes and on the well site, the permittee shall institute adequate dust control measures. 
(7)  Rules and regulations 600 through 606 of the O.G.C.C. All operators shall comply with rules 600 through 606 of the O.G.C.C., as adopted on the effective date of this Section 26-22.1, and as amended from time to time hereafter, entitled "Safety Regulations." Such regulations are incorporated herein in their entirety and adopted as part of this Section 26-22.1 as minimum standards subject to the following: 
a.  Rule 603(g). Burial of waste material is prohibited. Burning of waste material is prohibited unless required under any state law or state regulation and then the operator must give reasonable prior written notice to the City of Lafayette Fire Department, the county health department and other city and county agencies as designated from time to time. 
b.  Rule 605. Seismic activity shall not occur within the city limits unless and until approval is granted, after public notice and hearing, by the planning commission. The following criteria shall apply to all approvals of a seismic activity: 
1.  Compelling justification. The existence of a compelling justification that such operations cannot occur outside of the city. 
2.  Public safety. The potential for adverse environmental influences that might result from the proposed activities. 
The planning commission may impose such stringent health and safety regulations as it deems necessary to protect the public health and safety as a condition to permitting seismic operations. Approval shall only be sought after operator has complied with the provisions of section 332 of the rules and regulations of the O.G.C.C. 
(8)  900 series rules and regulations of the O.G.C.C. All operators shall comply with the "900 series" rules of the O.G.C.C. Such regulations are incorporated herein in their entirety and adopted as part of this Section 26-22.1 as minimum standards. 
(9)  No trespassing. A "No Trespassing Zone" shall be established three hundred (300) feet from the drill site and roped off with a watchperson assigned on a twenty-four-hour basis during drilling and fracturing. The watchperson shall remain on as assigned until the site is security fenced according to city standards as defined in section 26-22.1-2(33). 
(10)  O.G.C.C. reports. O.G.C.C. forms 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 14A, 15 and 16 filed by operator with the O.G.C.C. shall be simultaneously filed with the city attorney. 
(11)  Sour gas. If any sour gas is encountered the well shall immediately be shut-in and notice provided to the City of Lafayette Fire Department and the planning director which shall thereafter determine, in conjunction with the operator, appropriate safety procedures to undertake. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-22.1-9. - Site restoration. 
(a)  It shall be the joint responsibility of the working interest owners and operator, upon abandonment, to restore the well site to its original condition. 
(b)  A plan, including an anticipated time schedule, for restoration of the surface and all other affected lands shall be approved by the planning director. The plan will state the proposed program for surface restoration upon abandonment and for the period after drilling but prior to abandonment. Restoration of the well site shall, at a minimum, include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Removal of pumps, tanks, towers and other surface and any subsurface structures or fixtures. At such time that any subsurface pipe is disconnected from any other pipe or structure, all resulting disconnected ends shall be plugged immediately to prevent any leakage. 
(2)  Removal of subsurface structures and fixtures shall be to a depth of at least four (4) feet below grade; however, with respect to pipelines or gathering systems, the planning director may recommend that properly abandoned pipelines remain buried in order to reduce surface disturbance. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Cleanup and removal of all foreign material and all hydrocarbon, excess salinity or other contaminated soil to a designated solid or hazardous waste disposal site as appropriate. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  All holes, excavations and depressions shall be filled and packed. Said earth material shall be of a quality at least as good as that native to the site and be capable of sustaining vegetation if such native material is capable of sustaining vegetation. 
(7)  Remove and return the surface of the land disturbed by any oil and gas operation as nearly as practicable to the original contour and compaction existing at the beginning of the lease. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Prior to reclamation, the well owner and operator undertaking such activity shall provide the planning director with written notice of intent to commence restoration, which shall be attended by evidence of approval by the O.G.C.C. showing compliance with state law and regulations applicable to such abandonment. Restoration shall not commence until the city has conducted a site inspection, which shall be conducted no later than ten (10) business days after receipt of written notice by the city of the intent to commence restoration. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-22.1-10. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Visual impact mitigation. 
(1)  To the maximum extent practicable, oil and gas facilities shall be located away from residences, recreational amenities, places of assembly, areas of high usage by people, prominent natural features such as distinctive rock and land forms, river crossings, city approved or officially designated scenic vistas and other landmarks. 
(2)  To the maximum extent practicable, facilities shall be located to avoid crossing hills and ridges. The applicant shall attempt to locate facilities at the base of slopes to provide a background of topography and/or natural cover to minimize visual prominence of the facilities. 
(3)  To the maximum extent practicable, the applicant shall use structures of minimal size to satisfy present and future functional requirements. 
(4)  The applicant shall replace earth adjacent to water crossings at slopes less than the normal grade, to prevent erosion. 
(5)  To the extent practicable, the applicant shall align access roads to follow existing grades and minimize cuts and fills. 
(6)  Subject to modification by the planning director, facilities shall be painted a uniform, noncontrasting, nonreflective color tone matched to land slightly darker than adjacent landscape. 
(7)  Where facilities create noise and visual impacts nonmitigable because of proximity, density, or intensity of adjacent land use, frequent use by persons or wildlife or other similar nuisance factors, the planning director may require construction of enclosures, barriers or other means of providing screening. 
(8)  Site lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and occupied buildings within seven hundred (700) feet of said light source. 
(9)  Where a proposed oil and gas operation does not comply with the required setback or other portions of this Section 26-22.1, the applicant shall be subject to one (1) or more of the following standards as appropriate: 
a.  Establishment of screening ground cover, shrubs or trees; any such landscaping must be periodically maintained by the applicant until the well is properly plugged and abandoned. 
b.  Shaping cuts and fills to appear as natural forms. 
c.  Cutting rock areas to create irregular forms. 
d.  Designing the facility to utilize natural screens. 
e.  Construction of fences such as woven wood or rock for use with or instead of landscaping. 
(b)  Drainage, erosion and infiltration. 
(1)  The applicant shall provide drainage plans and erosion control plans for on-site and off-site drainage which shall be sufficient safely to convey a 100-year storm off-site. A drainage plan may be required to ensure drainage is limited to historical rates of release and locations, and to insure that runoff is detained. 
(2)  Stream boundaries shall be preserved in a natural undisturbed state. If disruption of these areas is unavoidable, prior written approval of such disturbance must be secured from the planning director. Rehabilitation of disturbed stream boundaries shall restore the form and vegetative character that would occur under long term natural processes. 
(3)  Roads or other site improvements obstructing drainages shall provide for culverts adequately sized for storm flows. 
(4)  The planning director may require containment structures underlying tanks in order to prevent potential seepage or infiltration. 
(c)  Wildlife impacts. 
(1)  When an oil and gas operation is located within a wildlife habitat area, the applicant shall consult with the division of wildlife and city staff to obtain recommendations for appropriate site specific and cumulative impact mitigation procedures. Recommendations shall be submitted for review and approval by the planning director. 
(2)  The following mitigation measures shall be included in the site specific wildlife mitigation procedures as required under subparagraph (c)(1) above, as appropriate: 
a.  Avoid conducting drilling and construction activities during critical use periods (for example: Near heron nests during nesting or wildlife winter ranges during winter). 
b.  Avoid conducting on-site operations and maintenance activities during critical use hours. 
c.  Confine vehicular access to established roads except under emergency circumstances. 
d.  Forbid use of firearms in project areas. 
e.  Install gates which can be locked at the first property boundary crossed when accessing the facility from the closest public road. 
f.  Conduct work near watercourses in a manner that minimizes siltation and erosion and at a period of little or no flow. 
g.  Place pipes below channel scour depths in watercourses to avoid partial diversion of channel discharges. 
h.  Stabilize excess material at watercourse crossings in place or remove off-site. 
i.  Complete fueling and lubrication of construction equipment or vehicles away from the well site. 
j.  Multiple sites. In lieu of a site specific mitigation review for each oil and gas operation facility, the applicant may submit to the city planning director a multisite plan addressing cumulative impacts to wildlife from the total facilities. The multisite plan shall include, but not be limited to, all items under this subparagraph (b)(2). 
(d)  Impacts to roads and bridges. 
(1)  If required maintenance of city or county roads accessing the well site is more extensive than what is currently provided, the applicant shall, by contractual agreement acceptable to the city attorney, provide for either private maintenance of the city or county roads or reimburse the city or county for additional maintenance and repair costs in accordance with a road impact agreement. 
(2)  The city has the authority to limit or otherwise regulate use of any city street or roadway at its discretion if such roadway is in poor condition and would be further damaged by additional use. 
(e)  Access. 
(1)  Ingress and egress points and routes shall be located and improved in order to: 
a.  Assure adequate capacity for efficient movement of existing and projected traffic volumes. 
b.  Minimize hazards to street or road traffic and adjacent property and human activity. 
c.  Discourage the use of local streets through residential areas. 
d.  Assure that all-weather access roads, suitable to handle emergency equipment, are provided to any well site, structure, improvement, or activity area from the public road. Road design, base and location must be approved by the Lafayette Public Works Department prior to operation commencement. All roads shall be maintained to provide a passable roadway free of ruts. 
(2)  All applicable permits or approvals shall be obtained, including: 
a.  Access permits to state, county or city roads. 
b.  Construction of pipelines within state, county or city highway easements. 
c.  Overweight or oversize permits for all extra-legal vehicles or loads. 
d.  Army corps of engineers permits regarding wetlands where applicable. 
(f)  Weed control. Oil and gas well sites shall be maintained in a weed-free, clean condition. The operator shall follow the weed control plan contained in Chapter 30, Article IX of the Code, as applicable, and the applicable soil conservation district for weed control, reclamation, and revegetation which shall be immediately initiated after completion of drilling and be finally implemented at cessation of production. Special care shall be utilized to protect all endangered and threatened plant or animal species. 
(g)  Special noise and vibration mitigation measures. 
(1)  Article VI, Chapter 75 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lafayette shall apply, except that applications for a permit to conduct activity which may violate provisions of Article VI, Chapter 75 shall be filed with the planning director and shall provide the following information: 
a.  The dates and times of the noncomplying activity; 
b.  The general description of the noise disturbance activity for which applicant seeks a permit. 
(2)  The planning director may issue a permit if it finds that: 
a.  The applicant's noise disturbance activity will not constitute an unreasonable interference with traffic; 
b.  The applicant will not violate the hour restrictions of the permit; 
c.  Said noise disturbance activity or use will not unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of a residential neighborhood; and 
d.  Denial of the permit would cause undue hardship on the applicant. 
(3)  The planning director may condition issuance of the permit upon one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  The use of electrically operated motors. 
b.  Acoustically insulated housing or covers enclosing the motors or engines and/or quiet design mufflers. 
c.  Vegetative screens consisting of trees and shrubs which may be placed within a fenced enclosure. 
d.  A solid wall or fence of acoustically insulating material surrounding all or part of the facility. 
e.  A noise management plan identifying hours of maximum noise emissions, type, frequency, and level of noise to be emitted, and proposed mitigation measures during critical periods. 
(4)  The permit issued under this subsection (g) shall have the same force and effect as a permit issued by the city clerk under Article VI, Chapter 75 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-22.1-11. - Application to existing oil and gas operations. 
    Existing oil and gas operations shall comply with the following: Section 26-22.1-8(1) through (7); and section 26-22.1-9(b)(1) through (9). 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94) 
Sec. 26-22.1-12. - Inspections. 
    In recognition of potential impacts associated with oil and gas drilling thereon, all oil and gas operations, including but not limited to, wells, accessory equipment and structures shall after notification to the operator, which reasonably provides the operator an opportunity to be present, be subject to inspection by inspectors of the city at all times to determine compliance with this Section 26-22.1, the city fire code, the city building code, and other applicable city and county health/safety standards. Inspection fees shall be assessed under the fee structure set forth from time to time as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 13, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 26-22.1-13. - Building permit; as-built plans and baseline samples; emergency response plan. 
(a)  In conjunction with the completion of a well, applicant shall secure city building permits for all aboveground structures as required. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days after a well is in production, the operator shall tender to the planning director as-built plans/drawings which reflect the actual as-built well site, easements, gathering system, tanks and all other buildings or structures thereon. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days after a well is in production, the operator is encouraged to submit soil and groundwater samples obtained at operator's expense establishing a baseline for determining the existence of any contaminants in the soil or groundwater. At a minimum, the soil sample should consist of two (2) test pits excavated to a depth of six (6) feet with one (1) test pit excavated adjacent to the tank battery and one (1) test pit excavated adjacent to the well head. A total petroleum hydrocarbon (TPH) test should be performed for both test pits excavated on the well site. At a minimum, two (2) water test wells should be drilled at a location and depth as specified by the planning director. Failure to submit such samples shall create a rebuttable presumption that the operator is responsible for soil or groundwater contamination existing at or traceable to the oil and gas operation. 
(d)  Within thirty (30) days after a well is in production, the operator shall tender to the Lafayette Police Department a supplementary emergency response plan listing information on the location of any materials needed for application in the event of a spill or fire. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-22.1-14. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Unlawful to construct or install unapproved oil and gas operation. Within all zone districts, it shall be unlawful to construct, install, or cause to be constructed or installed, any oil and gas operation or construct, install, relocate or alter any access for an oil or gas operation within the City of Lafayette unless an application for special use has been approved. The construction or installation of any oil and gas operation including but not limited to the drilling or redrilling of any well, or the production therefrom, or constructing, installing, relocating or altering an access without such approval shall constitute a nuisance and the city may commence proceedings to abate such nuisance pursuant to Chapter 70 of the Code. Further, no person, firm, corporation, or legal entity which owns, leases, or operates an oil and gas operation or access thereto shall construct, install, or use, or cause to be constructed, installed, or used, any oil and gas operation or access thereto without first receiving special use approval and a notice to proceed from the city administrator. Any person violating this Section 26-22.1 shall be guilty of an offense pursuant to the Lafayette Code of Ordinances. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this Section 26-22.1, or any rule, regulation, or order issued hereunder shall be subject to applicable penalties under state law, O.G.C.C. regulations or applicable ordinance of the City of Lafayette. 
(c)  Civil action. In case any building, oil and gas well, or structure is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or used, or any land is or is proposed to be used, in violation of any provision of this Section 26-22.1, the city attorney, in addition to the other remedies provided by law, ordinance, or resolution, may institute an action for injunction, mandamus, abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding to abate nuisances and/or to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or use. In any action for legal or equitable relief, in addition to any other penalties or remedies which may be available, the city shall be entitled to recover any damages, costs of action, expert witness fees and reasonable attorney's fees incurred should the city prevail. 
(d)  False or inaccurate information. The planning commission may rescind special use review approval if it is determined at a public hearing, held on at least ten (10) days' notice to the applicant, that the applicant provided information and/or documentation upon which approval was based, which the applicant, its agents, servants and employees, knew, or reasonably should have known, was false, misleading, deceptive, or inaccurate. The applicant shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard at the public meeting prior to the planning commission rendering its decision. 
(Ord. No. 1994-7, § 2, 6-21-94) 
SECTION 26-22.5. - WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 4 of Ord. No. 2017-36, adopted Sept. 19, 2017, amended section 26-22.5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former section 26-22.5 pertained to telecommunication facilities, consisted of §§ 26-22.5-1-26-22.5-9, and derived from Ord. No. 2000-25, adopted Sept. 5, 2000; Ord. No. 2004-20, adopted Oct. 19, 2004; and Ord. No. 2011-33, adopted Sept. 20, 2011. 

Sec. 26-22.5-1. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, council finds that these regulations are necessary to: 
(1)  Provide for the managed development and installation, maintenance, modification, and removal of wireless communications infrastructure in the city with the goal of having the fewest number of wireless communication facilities ("WCF") required to complete a network without unreasonably discriminating against wireless communications providers of functionally equivalent services including all of those who install, maintain, operate, and remove WCFs; 
(2)  Promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare by reducing the visibility of WCFs to the fullest extent possible through techniques including, but not limited to, camouflage design techniques and undergrounding of WCFs and the equipment associated therewith; 
(3)  Encourage the deployment of smaller, less intrusive WCFs to supplement existing larger WCFs; 
(4)  Encourage the use of wall mounted panel antennas; 
(5)  Encourage roof mounted antennas only when wall mounted antennas will not provide adequate service or are not otherwise feasible; 
(6)  Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas, in a manner that minimizes the total number of towers needed throughout the community; 
(7)  Encourage strongly the colocation of WCFs on new and existing sites; 
(8)  Encourage owners and users of antennas and towers to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimized; 
(9)  Enhance the ability of wireless communications service providers to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; 
(10)  Effectively manage WCFs in the right-of-way; 
(11)  Manage amateur radio facilities and over-the-air receiving devices in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36, § 4, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 26-22.5-2. - Applicability. 
(a)  The requirements set forth in this section 26-22.5 shall apply to all WCF applications for base stations, alternative tower structures, small cell facilities, alternative tower structures located within right-of-way, and towers as defined in this section 26-22.5 and further addressed herein. 
    The requirements set forth in this section 26-22.5 shall not apply to: 
(1)  Amateur radio antennas, OTARD and other residential television reception/antenna towers except as required in the operational standards set forth in this section. 
(2)  Pre-existing WCFs. Any WCF for which a permit has been properly issued prior to September 30, 2017, shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section 26-22.5, other than the operational standards set forth in this section 26-22.5. Changes and additions to pre-existing WCFs (including trading out of antennas for an equal number of antennas) shall meet applicable operational standards set forth in this section 26-22.5. 
(3)  Miscellaneous antennas. Antennas used for reception of television, multi-channel video programming and radio such as over the air reception devices ("OTARD") antennas, television broadcast band antennas, and broadcast radio antennas, provided that any requirements related to special uses contained in chapter 26 of this Code and the requirement that the height be no more than the distance from the base to the property line are met. The director has the authority to approve modifications to the height restriction related to OTARD antennas and OTARD antenna structures, if in the director's reasonable discretion, modifications are necessary to comply with federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36, § 4, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 2018-30, § 1, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 26-22.5-3. - Definitions. 
    Accessory equipment means any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a WCF, including, but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters or other structures. 
    Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, traffic signals, buildings, and similar alternative design mounting structures that are compatible with the natural setting and/or surrounding structures, and camouflage or conceals the presence of antennas or towers so as to make them architecturally compatible with the surrounding area. This term also includes any antenna or antenna array attached to an alternative tower structure or a stand-alone pole (including a replacement pole) in the right-of-way that accommodates small cell facilities to the extent the pole meets the camouflage and concealment standards of this chapter. 
    Antenna means any device used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves such as, but not limited to panel antennas, reflecting discs, microwave dishes, whip antennas, directional and non-directional antennas consisting of one (1) or more elements, multiple antenna configurations, or other similar devices and configurations. Exterior apparatus designed for telephone, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of wireless communications signals. 
    Antenna, dish means dish (parabolic or cylindrical) antennas used for microwave and satellite transmission and reception for commercial purposes. This definition shall not apply to wireless cable satellite dish antennas or dish antennas less than one (1) meter measured diagonally. 
    Base station means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The definition of base station does not include or encompass a tower as defined herein or any equipment associated with a tower. Base station includes, without limitation: 
(1)  Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the city pursuant to this section 26-22.5 has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support; and 
(2)  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplied, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-cell networks) that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the city pursuant to title 18 of the Code has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support. 
    The definition of base station does not include any structure that, at the time the application is filed with the city under this section 26-22.5, does not support or house equipment described herein in sub-paragraphs 1 and 2 of this definition. 
    Camouflage, concealment, or camouflage design techniques means a WCF which is camouflaged or utilizes camouflage design techniques when any measures are used in the design and siting of WCF's with the intent to minimize or eliminate the visual impact of such facilities to surrounding uses. A WCF site utilizes camouflage design techniques when it (i) is integrated as an architectural feature of an existing structure such as a cupola, or (ii) is integrated in an outdoor fixture such as a flagpole, or (iii) uses a design which mimics and is consistent with the nearby natural, or architectural features (such as an artificial tree) or is incorporated into or replaces existing permitted facilities (including without limitation, stop signs or other traffic signs or freestanding light standards) so that the presence of the WCF is not readily apparent. 
    Collocation means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. 
    Director means the city's planning director or such person's authorized designee. 
    Eligible facilities request means any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station involving: (i) colocation of new transmission equipment, (ii) removal of transmission equipment, or (iii) replacement of transmission equipment. 
    Eligible support structure means any tower or base station as defined in this section, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this section 26-22.5. 
    Existing means a constructed tower or base station that was reviewed, approved, and lawfully constructed in accordance with all requirements of applicable law as of the time of an eligible facilities request, provided that a tower that exists as a legal, non-conforming use and was lawfully constructed is existing for purposes of this definition. 
    Monopole means a single, freestanding pole-type structure supporting one or more antennas. 
    OTARD means an over-the-air receiving device. 
    OTARD antenna means (i) an antenna that is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite services, that is one (1) meter or less in diameter; or (ii) an antenna that is designed to receive video programming services via multipoint distribution services, including multichannel multipoint distribution services, instruction television fixed services, and local multipoint distribution services, and that is one (1) meter or less in diameter or diagonal measurement; or (iii) an antenna that is designed to receive television broadcast signals. 
    OTARD antenna structure means any pole, tower, or other structure designed and intended to support an OTARD antenna. 
    Pole-mounted small cell facility means a small cell facility with antenna that are mounted and supported on an alternative tower structure, which includes a replacement pole. 
    Related accessory equipment means the transmission equipment customarily used with, and incidental to WCF antennas, including by way of example, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supply and remote radio units. 
    Replacement pole means a newly constructed and permitted traffic signal, utility pole, street light, flagpole, electric distribution, or street light pole or other similar structure of proportions and of equal height or such other height that would not constitute a substantial change to a pre-existing pole or structure in order to support a WCF or small cell facility or to accommodate collocation and remove the pre-existing pole or structure. 
    Right-of-way as used within this section 26-22.5, means any public street or road that is dedicated to public use for vehicular traffic except for those rights-of-way owned by the Colorado Department of Transportation within city limits. 
    Site means the area comprising the base of the structure and other related accessory equipment deployed on the ground. 
    Site, for towers other than towers in the right-of-way and eligible support structures, means the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower or eligible support structure and any access or utility easements currently related to the site. A site, for other towers in the right-of-way, is further restricted to that area comprising the base of the structure and to other related accessory equipment already deployed on the ground. 
    Small cell facility means a WCF where each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than three cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than three cubic feet; and primary equipment enclosures are no larger than 17 cubic feet in volume. The following associated equipment may be located outside of the primary equipment enclosure and, if so located, is not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosure, back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switch and cut-off switch. Small cell facilities may be attached to alternate tower structures, monopoles, and pole support structures. 
    Substantial change means a modification that substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure, which meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  For towers, other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it may, for one (1) time, increase the height of the tower by more than ten (10) percent or by the height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten (10) percent or more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater; 
(2)  For towers, other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the tower more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for eligible support structures it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six (6) feet; 
(3)  For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or for towers in the public right-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten (10) percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure; 
(4)  For any eligible support structure, it entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site; 
(5)  For any eligible support structure, it would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure. For the purposes of this subsection (5), a change which undermines the concealment elements of an eligible support structure will be considered to defeat the concealment elements; or 
(6)  For any eligible support structure, it does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure equipment, unless the non-compliance is due to an increase in height, increase in width, addition of cabinets, or new excavation that would not exceed the thresholds identified in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this subsection. For purposes of determining whether a substantial change exists, changes in height are measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height are measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to February 22, 2012. 
    Tower means any structure that is built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting one or more Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. The term includes self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. 
    Transmission equipment means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
    Wireless communications facility or WCF means a facility used to provide personal wireless services as defined at 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C); or wireless information services provided to the public or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public via licensed or unlicensed frequencies; or wireless utility monitoring and control services. A WCF does not include a facility entirely enclosed within a permitted building where the installation does not require a modification of the exterior of the building; nor does it include a device attached to a building, used for serving that building only and that is otherwise permitted under other provisions of the Code. A WCF includes an antenna or antennas, including without limitation, directions, omni-directional and parabolic antennas, base stations, support equipment, alternative tower structures, and towers. It does not include the support structure to which the WCF or its components are attached if the use of such structures for WCFs is not the primary use. The term does not include mobile transmitting devices used by wireless service subscribers, such as vehicle or hand held radios/telephones and their associated transmitting antennas, nor does it include other facilities specifically excluded from the coverage of this section 26-22.5. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36, § 4, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 2018-30, § 2, 12-4-18; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019; Ord. No. 2019-08, § 1, 4-16-19) 
Sec. 26-22.5-4. - Operational standards. 
(a)  Federal requirements. All WCFs shall meet the current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Authority ("FAA"), the FCC and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate WCFs. If such standards and regulations are amended, then the owners of the WCF governed by this section 26-22.5 shall bring such facility into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the time period mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to meet such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the WCF at the owner's expense. 
(b)  Permission to use within rights-of-way or upon public property . For WCFs in the right-of-way, the applicant shall execute a master license agreement with the city, granting applicant a non-exclusive license to use the right of way. Applicants shall also, as applicable, execute supplemental site licenses with the city for each facility subject to the master license agreement. An annual attachment fee shall be required for each supplemental site license involving the attachment of WCF's to any city owned structure in the right-of-way. Master licenses and supplemental site licenses are subject to administrative processing fees, and such fees along with the attachment fee shall be established by resolution of city council. Attachment of WCFs on an existing traffic signal, street light pole, or similar structure shall require written evidence of a license, or other legal right or approval, to use such structure by its owner. Prior to, or concurrently with, seeking land use approval for a WCF on public property, the applicant shall execute a lease agreement with the city. 
(c)  Signal interference. All WCFs shall be designed and sited, consistent with applicable federal regulations, so as not to cause interference with the normal operation of radio, television, telephone and other communication services utilized by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties; nor shall any such facilities interfere with any public safety communications. The applicant shall provide a written statement from a qualified radio frequency engineer, certifying that a technical evaluation of existing and proposed facilities indicates no potential interference problems and shall allow the city to monitor interference levels with public safety communications during this process. Additionally, the owner or operator shall notify the city at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the introduction of new service or changes in existing service, and shall allow the city to monitor interference levels with public safety communications during the testing process. 
(d)  Legal access. In all applications for WCFs an applicant must warrant and represent that it has the written agreement of the owner of the property which is the subject of the application for legal access to and from the WCF and the applicant must also warrant and represent that it will have legal access to the utilities to operate and maintain the WCF. 
(e)  Operation and maintenance. To ensure the structural integrity of WCFs, the owner of a WCF shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building and safety codes. If upon inspection, the city concludes that a WCF fails to comply with such codes and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon written notice being provided to the owner of the WCF, the owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of notice to bring such WCF into compliance. Upon good cause shown by the owner, the city's building official may extend such compliance period not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of said notice. If the owner fails to bring such WCF into compliance within said time period, the city may remove such WCF at the owner's expense. 
(f)  Abandonment and removal . If a WCF has not been in use for a period of three months, the owner of the WCF shall notify the city of the non-use and shall indicate whether re-use is expected within the ensuing three months. Any WCF that is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned. The city, in its sole discretion, may require an abandoned WCF to be removed. The owner of such WCF shall remove the same within 30 days of receipt of written notice from the city. If the WCF is not removed within said 30 days, the city may remove it at the owner's expense and any approved permits for the WCF shall be deemed to have expired. Additionally, the city, in its sole discretion, shall not approve any new WCF application until the applicant, if also an owner or operator of an abandoned WCF, has removed such WCF or payment for such removal has been made to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36, § 4, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 2018-30, §§ 3, 4, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 26-22.5-5. - Design standards. 
(a)  The requirements set forth in this section shall apply to the location and design of all WCFs governed by this section; provided, however, that the city may waive these requirements it if determines that the goals of this section are better served thereby. To that end, WCFs shall be designed and located to minimize the impact on the surrounding neighborhood and to maintain the character and appearance of the city, consistent with other provisions of the Code. 
(1)  Camouflage/concealment . All WCFs and any transmission equipment shall, to the extent possible, use camouflage design techniques including, but not limited to the use of materials, colors, textures, screening, undergrounding, landscaping, or other design options that will blend the WCF to the surrounding natural setting and built environment. Design, materials and colors of WCFs shall be compatible with the surrounding environment. Designs shall be compatible with structures and vegetation on the same parcel and adjacent parcels. 
a.  Camouflage design may be of heightened importance where findings of particular sensitivity are made (e.g. proximity to historic or aesthetically significant structures, views, and/or community features). In such instances where WCFs are located in areas of high visibility, they shall (where possible) be designed (e.g., placed underground, depressed, or located behind earth berms) to minimize their profile. 
b.  The camouflage design may include the use of alternative tower structures should the director determine that such design meets the intent of the Code and the community is better served thereby. 
c.  All WCFs, such as antennas, vaults, equipment rooms, equipment enclosures, and tower structures shall be constructed out of non-reflective materials (visible exterior surfaces only). 
(2)  Hazardous materials . No hazardous materials shall be permitted in association with WCFs, except those necessary for the operations of the WCF and only in accordance with all applicable laws governing such materials. 
(3)  Colocation . WCFs shall be designed and constructed to permit the facility to accommodate WCFs from at least two wireless service providers on the same WCF unless the city approves an alternative design to the extent such design is reasonably feasible based upon construction, engineering and design standards. No WCF owner or operator shall unreasonably exclude a telecommunications competitor from using the same facility or location. Upon request by the city, the owner or operator shall provide evidence demonstrating why colocation is not possible at a particular facility or site. 
(4)  Siting . 
a.  No portion of any WCF may extend beyond the property line of the lot upon which it is located. 
b.  Colocation. WCFs may be required to be designed and constructed to permit the facility to accommodate WCFs from at least two wireless service providers on the same WCF unless the city approves an alternative design. No WCF owner or operator shall unfairly exclude a competitor from using the same facility or location. 
c.  WCFs shall be sited in a location that does not reduce the parking for the other principal uses on the parcel below Code standards. 
(5)  Lighting . WCFs shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable governmental authority, or the WCF is mounted on a light pole or other similar structure primarily used for lighting purposes. If lighting is required, the city may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. Lighting shall be shielded or directed to the greatest extent possible so as to minimize the amount of glare and light falling onto nearby properties, particularly residences. 
(6)  Landscaping and fencing requirements . 
a.  WCFs shall be sited in a manner that does not reduce the landscaped areas for the other principal uses on the parcel, below Code standards. 
b.  WCFs shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screen the view of the WCF from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of the front, side, and rear landscaped setback on the perimeter of the site. 
c.  In locations where the visual impact of the WCF would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether by the director. 
d.  Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as WCFs sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the site perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. 
e.  No "significant trees" may be removed, unless authorized by the director. To obtain such authorization the applicant shall show that the significant tree removal is necessary, the applicant's plan minimizes the number of significant trees to be removed and any trees removed are replaced at a ratio of two (2) to one (1). For the purposes of this subsection a significant tree is defined as a tree that is a minimum of six (6) inches in caliper measured twelve (12) inches above soil line for a deciduous tree or a minimum of ten (10) feet in height for a needled evergreen tree. 
(7)  Noise . Noise generated on the site must not exceed the standards in the Code, except that a WCF owner or operator shall be permitted to exceed Code noise standards for a reasonable period of time during repairs, not to exceed two hours without prior authorization from the city. 
(8)  Adjacent to single family residential uses . WCFs shall be sited in a manner that considers the proximity of the facility to residential structures and residential district boundaries. When placed by residential property, the WCF shall be placed adjacent to the common side yard property line between adjoining residential properties, such that the WCF minimizes visual impacts equitably among adjacent properties. In the case of a corner lot, the WCF may be placed adjacent to the common side yard property line between adjoining residential properties, or on the corner formed by two intersecting streets. If these requirements are not reasonably feasible from a construction, engineering or design perspective, the applicant may submit a written statement to the director requesting the WCF be exempt from these requirements. 
(9)  Additional design requirements shall be applicable to the various types of WCFs as specified below: 
a.  Base stations . If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, or alternative tower structure, such as a base station (including, but not limited to the antennas and accessory equipment) it shall be of a neutral, non-reflective color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure, or uses other camouflage/concealment design techniques so as to make the antenna and related facilities as visually unobtrusive as possible, including for example, without limitation, painting the antennas and accessory equipment to match the structure. Additionally, any ground-mounted equipment shall be located, based upon the reasonable discretion of the city, in a manner necessary to address both public safety and aesthetic concerns and may, where appropriate, require a flush-to-grade underground equipment vault. 
b.  Alternative tower structures and small cell facilities . 
1.  Shall be designed and constructed to look like a building, facility, or structure typically found in the area; 
2.  Be camouflaged/concealed consistent with other existing natural or manmade features in the immediate proximity of the location where the alternative tower structure will be located. 
3.  Height or size of the proposed alternative tower structure or small cell facility should be minimized as much as possible and shall be subject to the maximum height restrictions of the zoning district in which they are located, subject to a maximum height limit of 60 feet; 
4.  Shall be sited in a manner that is least obtrusive to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
5.  Shall take into consideration the uses on adjacent and nearby properties and the compatibility of the facility to these uses; 
6.  Shall be compatible with the surrounding topography, tree coverage, and foliage; 
7.  Shall be designed utilizing design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and 
8.  Visual impacts of the proposed ingress and egress shall be minimized. 
c.  Alternative tower structures and small cell facilities located in the right-of-way, requirements in addition to those set forth herein this subsection . 
1.  Shall be no higher than 35 feet. 
2.  Shall be no more than ten feet higher (as measured from the ground to the top of the pole) than any existing utility or traffic signal within 500 feet of the pole or structure. 
3.  Any new pole for an alternative tower structure or small cell facility shall be separated from any other existing WCF facility by a distance of a least 600 feet, unless the new pole replaces an existing traffic signal, street light pole, or similar structure determined by the director. 
4.  Pole-mounted components shall be located on an existing utility pole serving another utility; or be located on a new utility pole where other utility distribution lines are aerial, if there are no reasonable alternatives. 
5.  Shall be camouflaged/concealed consistent with other existing natural or manmade features in the right-of-way near the location where the alternative tower structure will be located. 
6.  Shall to the extent feasible, be consistent with the size and shape of pole-mounted equipment installed by communications companies on utility poles near the alternative tower structure. 
7.  Shall when located near a residential property, be placed in front of the common side yard property line between adjoining residential properties. In the case of a corner lot, the facility must be placed in front of the common side yard property line adjoining residential properties, or on the corner formed by two intersecting streets. 
8.  Shall be designed such that antenna installations on traffic signals are placed in a manner so that the size, appearance, and function of the signal will not be considerably altered. 
9.  Facility antennas, mast arms, equipment, and other facilities shall be sized to minimize visual clutter. 
10.  Any ground mounted equipment shall be installed in an underground or partially underground equipment vault (projecting not more than 36 inches above grade), or co-located within a traffic cabinet of a design approved by the director. 
11.  Shall not alter vehicular circulation or parking within the right-of-way or impede vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian access or visibility along the right-of-way. Must comply with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act and all applicable local, state, and federal law and regulations. No alternative tower structure nor small cell facility may be located or maintained in a manner that causes unreasonable interference. Unreasonable interference means any use of the right-of-way that disrupts or interferes with this use by the city, the general public, or other person authorized to use or be present upon the right-of-way, when there exists an alternative that would result in less disruption or interference. Unreasonable interference includes any use of the right-of-way that disrupts vehicular or pedestrian traffic, any interference with public utilities, and any other activity that will present a hazard to public health, safety, or welfare. 
d.  Towers . 
1.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish, or, subject to any applicable FAA standards, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness as determined by the city; 
2.  Tower structures should use existing land forms, vegetation, and structures to aid in screening the facility from view or blending in with the surrounding built and natural environment; 
3.  Monopole support structures shall taper from the base to the tip; 
4.  All towers, excluding alternative tower structures in right-of-way, shall be enclosed by security fencing or wall at least six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. No security fencing or any portion thereof shall consist of barbed wire or chain link material; and 
5.  Towers shall be subject to the maximum height restrictions of the zoning district in which they are located, subject to a maximum height limit of 60 feet; 
6.  Towers should be sited in a manner that is least obtrusive to residential structures and residential district boundaries where feasible; 
7.  Towers should take into consideration the uses on adjacent and nearby properties and the compatibility of the tower to these uses; 
8.  Towers should be designed utilizing design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
9.  Visual impacts of the proposed ingress and egress shall be minimized; 
10.  No new towers shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing WCFs can accommodate the needs that the applicant proposes to address with its tower application. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing WCF can accommodate these needs may consist of the following: 
i.  No existing WCFs are of sufficient height and are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
ii.  Existing WCFs do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed WCF; and 
iii.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing WCFs unsuitable for colocation. 
11.  A tower, located outside of the right-of-way, shall meet the greater of the following minimum setbacks from all property lines: 
i.  The setback for a principal building within the applicable zoning; 
ii.  Twenty-five percent of the facility height, including WCFs and transmission equipment; or 
iii.  The tower height, including antennas, if the tower is in or adjacent to a residential district or residential zoned property. 
iv.  Towers over 40 feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter mile from any existing tower that is over 40 feet in height, unless the applicant has shown to the satisfaction of the city that there are no reasonably suitable alternative sites in the required geographic area which can meet the applicant's needs. 
e.  Related accessory equipment . Accessory equipment for all WCFs shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  All buildings, shelter, cabinets, and other accessory components shall be grouped as closely as technically possible; 
2.  The total footprint coverage area of the WCFs accessory equipment shall not exceed 350 square feet; 
3.  No related accessory equipment or accessory structure shall exceed 12 feet in height; 
4.  Accessory equipment, including but not limited too remote radio units, shall be located out of sight whenever possible by locating behind parapet walls or within equipment enclosures. Where such alternate locations are not available, the accessory equipment shall be camouflaged or concealed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36, § 4, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 2018-30, § 5, 12-4-18; Ord. No. 2019-08, § 2, 4-16-19) 
Sec. 26-22.5-6. - Review procedures and requirements. 
(a)  No new WCF shall be constructed and no colocation or modification to any WCF may occur except after a written request from an applicant, reviewed and approved by the city in accordance with this section. All WCFs shall be reviewed pursuant to the following procedures: 
(1)  Submittal requirements . In addition to an application form, signal interference letter, removal affidavits, and payment of all application and review fees, as established by resolution of city council, each applicant shall submit a scaled site plan, photo simulation, scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation showing the location and dimension of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, drainage, and other information deemed by the director to be necessary to assess compliance with this section. Documents requiring signatures and seals by appropriate qualified professionals shall be provided by applicant after approval of the application by the director. 
(2)  Inventory of existing sites . Each applicant for a WCF shall provide to the director a narrative and map description of the applicant's existing or then currently proposed WCFs within the city, and outside of the city within one mile of its boundaries. In addition, the applicant shall inform the city generally of the areas of the city in which it believes WCFs may need to be located within the next three years. The inventory list should identify the site name, site address, and a general description of the facility (for example, rooftop antennas and ground mounted equipment). This provision is not intended to be a requirement that the applicant submit its business plan, proprietary information, or make commitments regarding locations of WCFs within the city. Rather, it is an attempt to provide a mechanism for the city and all applicants for WCFs to share general information, assist in the city's comprehensive planning process, and promote colocation by identifying areas in which WCFs might be appropriately constructed for multiple users. 
    The city may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional permits under this section or other organizations seeking to locate WCFs within the jurisdiction of the city, provided however, that the city is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(3)  Abandonment and Removal . Prior to approval, affidavits shall be required from the owner of the property and from the applicant acknowledging that each is responsible for the removal of a WCF that is abandoned or is unused for a period of six months. 
(4)  In all zoning districts, applications for base stations, alternative tower structures, and towers may be permitted only as a conditional use in accordance with the requirements of this section. All applications for towers shall demonstrate that other alternative design options such as base stations or alternative tower structures are not viable options as determined by the city. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, no towers located in the right-of-way shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(5)  Applications for base stations, alternative tower structures and small cell facilities within right-of-way . In all zoning districts each application for a base station, alternative tower structure or small cell facility within the right-of-way shall be reviewed and considered for approval by the director for conformance with this section and the applicant's execution of a license agreement as approved by the director. Applicants may appeal the director's decision by submitting a written notice of appeal to the city manager within ten calendar days from the date of the director's decision. The notice of appeal must specifically set forth the grounds for appeal and include all documentation the applicant deems relevant. The city manager shall within ten business days of receipt of the notice of appeal and review of all documentation submitted by the applicant and the director's decision issue a final decision which may affirm, overturn or modify the director's decision. 
    Except for WCFs in the right-of-way that meet all requirements of this section, the director may refer the application to planning and zoning commission for conditional use review if the director finds the proposed WCF to have a significant visual impact (e.g., proximity to historic or designated view corridors, or on significant community features), or otherwise is substantially incompatible with the structure on which the WCF will be installed, or it does not meet the clear intent of this section. 
(6)  Review procedures for eligible facilities requests . 
a.  Application . In all zoning districts, eligible facilities requests shall be considered a use by right subject to administrative review. The city shall prepare, and make publicly available, an application form which shall be limited to the information necessary for the city to consider whether an application is an eligible facilities request. Such information may include, without limitation, whether the request: 
1.  Would result in a substantial change; 
2.  Violate a generally applicable law, regulations, or other rule codifying objective standards reasonably related to public health and safety. 
    The application may not require the applicant to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed modification or colocation. 
b.  Type of review . Upon receipt of an application for an eligible facilities request pursuant to this section, the director shall review such application to determine whether the application so qualifies. 
c.  Timeframe for review . Subject to the tolling provisions of subparagraph d. below, within 60 days of the date on which an applicant submits an application seeking approval under this section, the city shall approve the application unless it determines that the application is not covered by this subsection. 
d.  Tolling of the timeframe for review . The 60-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement of the city and the applicant, or in cases where the director determines that the application is incomplete: 
1.  To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the city must provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application; 
2.  The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental written submission in response to the city's notice of incompleteness; and 
3.  Following a supplemental submission, the city will notify the applicant within ten days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in paragraph (d) (1). In the case of a second or subsequent notice of incompleteness, the city may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness. 
e.  Failure to act . In the event the city fails to act on a request seeking approval for an eligible facilities request under this section within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted. The deemed grant becomes effective when the applicant notifies the city in writing after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed granted. 
f.  Interaction with Telecommunications Act Section 332(c)(7) . If the city determines that the applicant's request is not an eligible facilities request as set forth in this section the presumptively reasonable timeframe under Section 332(c)(7), as prescribed by the FCC's Shot Clock order, will begin to run from the issuance of the city's decision that the application is not a covered request. To the extent such information is necessary, the city may request additional information from the applicant to evaluate the application under Section 332(c)(7) reviews. 
(7)  Decision . Any decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a WCF, shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. The applicant shall receive a copy of the decision. 
(8)  Compliance with applicable law . Notwithstanding the approval of an application for colocation as described herein, all work done pursuant to WCF applications must be completed in accordance with all applicable building and safety requirements as set forth in the Code and any other applicable federal, state, and/or local laws and regulations. In addition, all WCF applications shall comply with the following: 
a.  Comply with any permit or license issued by a local, state, or federal agency with jurisdiction of the WCF; 
b.  Comply with easements, covenants, conditions and/or restrictions on or applicable to the underlying real property; 
c.  Be maintained in good working condition and to the standards established at the time of application approval; and 
d.  Remain free from trash, debris, litter, noxious weeds, graffiti, and other forms of vandalism. Any damage shall be repaired as soon as practicable, and in no instance more than ten calendar days from the time of notification by the city or after discovery by the owner or operator of the site. 
(9)  Compliance report . Upon request by the city, the applicant shall provide a compliance report within 45 days after installation of a WCF, demonstrating that as installed and in operation, the WCF complies with all conditions of approval, all applicable Code requirements and standard regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36, § 4, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 2018-30, § 6, 12-4-18; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-22.5-7. - Special use standards for approval. 
(a)  In addition to the design standards set forth in this section 26-22.5, WCFs, subject to acquisition of a special use approval shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedure set forth herein in subsection 26-22.5-6, subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  Base stations. 
a.  Such facilities shall be architecturally compatible with respect to attachments, and colored to match the building or structure to which they are attached; 
b.  The maximum protrusion of such facilities from the building or structure face to which they are attached shall be six (6) feet; 
c.  Wall-mounted WCFs shall not extend above the roofline unless mounted to a penthouse; and 
d.  Roof-mounted WCFs shall be approved only where an applicant demonstrates a wall mounted WCF is inadequate to provide service and evaluated for approval based upon the following criteria: 
1.  Roof-mounted whip antennas shall extend no more than twelve (12) feet above the parapet of any flat roof or ridge of a sloped roof or penthouse to which they are attached; 
2.  Roof-mounted panel antennas shall extend no more than seven (7) feet above the parapet of a flat roof or ridge of a sloped roof to which they are mounted; and 
3.  Other roof-mounted transmission equipment shall extend no more than seven (7) feet above any parapet of a flat roof upon which they may be placed, and shall not be permitted on a sloped roof. 
(2)  Alternative tower structures. 
a.  Such structures shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding area; 
b.  Height or size of the proposed alternative tower structure should be minimized as much as practically possible; 
c.  WCFs shall be sited in a manner that evaluates the proximity of the facility to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
d.  WCFs shall take into consideration the uses on adjacent and nearby properties and the compatibility of the facility to these uses; 
e.  Compatibility with the surrounding topography; 
f.  Compatibility with the surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
g.  Compatibility of the design of the site, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and 
h.  Impact on the surrounding area of the proposed ingress and egress, if any. 
(3)  All other towers. The city shall within the framework of the review criteria set forth in this section 26-22.5 consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit, although the city may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one (1) or more of these criteria if the city concludes that the goals of this section 26-22.5 are better served thereby. 
a.  Height or size of the proposed tower; 
b.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Compatibility with the surrounding topography: 
e.  Compatibility with the surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
f.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
g.  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
h.  No new towers shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing WCFs can accommodate the needs that the applicant proposes to address with its tower application. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing WCF can accommodate these needs may consist of the following: 
1.  No existing WCFs with a suitable height are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
2.  Existing WCFs do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed WCF; and 
3.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing WCFs unsuitable for colocation. 
(4)  Setbacks and Separation . The following minimum setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all WCFs for which a special use approval is required; provided, however, that the city may reduce standard setbacks and separation requirements if the applicant demonstrates that the goals of this section can be better met by reduced setback and separation requirements that protect the public health and safety, view corridors, or minimize adverse impact. A tower shall meet the greater of the following minimum setbacks from all property lines: 
a.  The setback for a principal building within the applicable zoning district; 
b.  Twenty-five percent of the facility height, including WCFs and related accessory equipment; 
c.  The tower height, including antennas, if the tower is in or adjacent to a residential district; and 
d.  Towers over 90 feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter mile from any existing tower that is over 90 feet in height, unless the applicant has shown to the satisfaction of the city that there are no reasonably suitable alternative sites in the required geographic area which can meet the applicant's needs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-36, § 4, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 2018-30, § 7, 12-4-18) 
SECTION 26-23. - FLOODPLAIN STANDARDS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Setion 4 of Ord. No. 2012-36, adopted Nov. 20, 2012, amended Section 26-23 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Section 26-23 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1986-01, adopted Feb. 4, 1986; Ord. No. 1987-02, adopted Feb. 17, 1987; Ord. No. 1993-22, adopted July 20, 1993; Ord. No. 1995-08, adopted May 16, 2995; Ord. No. 1996-10, adopted April 16, 1996; Ord. No. 1998-29, adopted Aug. 18, 1998; Ord. No. 2002-25, adopted Sept. 17, 2002; Ord. No. 2006-26, adopted June 19, 2006; Ord. No. 2006-41, adopted Sept. 19, 2006; and Ord. No. 2011-33, adopted Sept. 20, 2011. 

Sec. 26-23-1. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(a)  Protect human life and health; 
(b)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(c)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(d)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(e)  Minimize damage to critical facilities, infrastructure and other public facilities such as water, sewer and gas mains; electric and communications stations; and streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(f)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(g)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is located in a flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-2. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance uses the following methods: 
(a)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(b)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(c)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(d)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(e)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-3. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to Section 26-23. Unless specifically defined below or in section 26-8-1, words or phrases used in this section shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable application. 
    100-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (one-percent-annual-chance flood). The terms "one-hundred-year flood" and "one-percent-chance-flood" are synonymous with the term "100-year flood." The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every one hundred (100) years. 
    100-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a 100-year flood. 
    500-year flood means a flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2-percent-chance-annual-flood). The term does not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every five hundred (500) years. 
    500-year floodplain means the area of land susceptible to being inundated as a result of the occurrence of a 500-year flood. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means a fan-shaped sediment deposit formed by a stream that flows from a steep mountain valley or gorge onto a plain or the junction of a tributary stream with the main stream. Alluvial fans contain active stream channels and boulder bars, and recently abandoned channels. Alluvial fans are predominantly formed by alluvial deposits and are modified by infrequent sheet flood, channel avulsions and other stream processes. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated Zone AO or AH on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on a FEMA flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Channelization means the artificial creation, enlargement or realignment of a stream channel. 
    Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) means the codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. It is divided into fifty (50) titles that represent broad areas subject to federal regulation. 
    Community means any political subdivision in the State of Colorado that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations through zoning, including, but not limited to, cities, towns, unincorporated areas in the counties, Indian tribes and drainage and flood control districts. 
    Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means FEMA's comment on a proposed project, which does not revise an effective floodplain map, that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodplain. 
    Critical facility means a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in, section 26-23-23, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. See section 26-23-23. 
    DFIRM database means a database (usually spreadsheets containing data and analyses that accompany DFIRMs). The FEMA mapping specifications and guidelines outline requirements for the development and maintenance of DFIRM databases. 
    Digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM) means a FEMA digital floodplain map. These digital maps serve as "regulatory floodplain maps" for insurance and floodplain management purposes. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Register means the official daily publication for rules, proposed rules, and notices of federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains the flood insurance rate map as well as flood profiles for studied flooding sources that can be used to determine base flood elevations for some areas. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated as the result of a flood, including the area of land over which floodwater would flow from the spillway of a reservoir. 
    Floodplain administrator means the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain development permit means a permit required before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area (SFHA). If FEMA has not defined the SFHA within a community, the community shall require permits for all proposed construction or other development in the community including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may determine whether such construction or other development is proposed within floodprone areas. Permits are required to ensure that proposed development projects meet the requirements of the NFIP and this floodplain management ordinance. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood control structure means a physical structure designed and built expressly or partially for the purpose of reducing, redirecting, or guiding flood flows along a particular waterway. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and/or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Freeboard means the vertical distance in feet above a predicted water surface elevation intended to provide a margin of safety to compensate for unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood such as debris blockage of bridge openings and the increased runoff due to urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade embankment, usually earthen, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. For a levee structure to be reflected on the FEMA FIRMs as providing flood protection, the levee structure must meet the requirements set forth in 44 CFR 65.10. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR) means FEMA's official revision of an effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) means FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). Any floor used for living purposes which includes working, storage, sleeping, cooking and eating, or recreation or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use such as a basement or crawl space. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, means the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    Materials safety data sheet (MSDS) means a form with data regarding the properties of a particular substance. An important component of product stewardship and workplace safety, it is intended to provide workers and emergency personnel with procedures for handling or working with that substance in a safe manner, and includes information such as physical data (melting point, boiling point, flash point, etc.), toxicity, health effects, first aid, reactivity, storage, disposal, protective equipment, and spill-handling procedures. 
    National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) means FEMA's program of flood insurance coverage and floodplain management administered in conjunction with the Robert T. Stafford Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. The NFIP has applicable Federal regulations promulgated in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The U.S. Congress established the NFIP in 1968 with the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    No-rise certification means a record of the results of an engineering analysis conducted to determine whether a project will increase flood heights in a floodway. A no-rise certification must be supported by technical data and signed by a registered Colorado professional engineer. The supporting technical data should be based on the standard step-backwater computer model used to develop the 100-year floodway shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM). 
    Physical map revision (PMR) means FEMA's action whereby one (1) or more map panels are physically revised and republished. A PMR is used to change flood risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway delineations, flood elevations, and/or planimetric features. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, i.e., the 100-year floodplain. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, including substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure just prior to when the damage occurred. 
    Threshold planning quantity (TPQ) means a quantity designated for each chemical on the list of extremely hazardous substances that triggers notification by facilities to the state that such facilities are subject to emergency planning requirements. 
    Violation mean the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with Section 26-23 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-4. - Lands to which this section applies. 
    This Section shall apply to all special flood hazard areas and areas removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) within the jurisdiction of the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-5. - Basis for establishing the special flood hazard area. 
    The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Boulder County, Colorado," dated December 18, 2012, (FIS) with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Section. These special flood hazard areas identified by the FIS and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability of this ordinance and may be supplemented by studies designated and approved by the city council of the City of Lafayette. The floodplain administrator shall keep a copy of the FIS, DFIRMs, FIRMs and/or FBFMs on file and available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-6. - Establishment of floodplain development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-7. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed within the special flood hazard area without full compliance with the terms of this Section and other applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council of the City of Lafayette from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. These regulations meet the minimum requirements as set forth by the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-8. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This Section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Section and another ordinance, easement, covenant, nor deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-9. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this Section, all provisions shall be: 
(a)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(b)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(c)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-10. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this Section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Section does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard area or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Section shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-11. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The planning director is hereby appointed as floodplain administrator to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Section and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-23-12. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance, including the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures and any floodproofing certificate required by section 26-23-13. 
(b)  Review, approve, or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by adoption of this ordinance. 
(c)  Review floodplain development permit applications to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(d)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(e)  Inspect all development at appropriate times during the period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this ordinance, including proper elevation of the structure. 
(f)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard area (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(g)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 26-23-5, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sections 26-23-15 through 26-23-22. 
(h)  For waterways with base flood elevations for which a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-half (1/2) foot at any point within the community. 
(i)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one-half (1/2) foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (conditional letter of map revision), fulfills the requirements for such revisions as established under the provisions of Section 65.12 and receives FEMA approval. 
(j)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the Colorado Water Conservation Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA. 
(k)  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-13. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to special flood hazard area. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(a)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(c)  A certificate from a registered Colorado professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 26-23-17(b); 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(e)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 26-23-12. 
    Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this ordinance and the following relevant factors: 
(a)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(b)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(c)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(d)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(e)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(f)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(g)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(h)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(i)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(j)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-14. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The Lafayette planning commission shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. 
(b)  The planning commission shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this ordinance. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 26-23-13 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this ordinance, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this ordinance as stated in section 26-23-1. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in section 26-23-14(a) through (i) are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-15. - General standards. 
    In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(a)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(b)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(d)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(e)  All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(f)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(g)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(h)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-16. - Specific standards. 
    In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) section 26-23-5, (ii) section 26-23-12(g), or (iii) section 26-23-21, the following provisions are required: 
(a)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(b)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in section 26-23-22, new construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that at one (1) foot above the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. Such certification shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator, as proposed in section 26-23-13. 
(c)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(d)  Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of the above paragraph, shall be elevated so that either: 
(1)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is one (1) foot above the base flood elevation; or 
(2)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(e)  Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
(3)  Meet the permit requirements of section 26-23-13, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (d) of this section. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(f)  Prior approved activities. Any activity for which a floodplain development permit was issued by the City of Lafayette or a CLOMR was issued by FEMA prior to December 18, 2012, may be completed according to the standards in place at the time of the permit or CLOMR issuance and will not be considered in violation of this ordinance if it meets such standards. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-17. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the special flood hazard area established in section 26-23-5, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  Residential construction. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified). Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered Colorado professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor. Such certification shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(b)  Nonresidential construction. With the exception of critical facilities, outlined in section 26-23-22, all new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures, must have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least three (3) feet if no depth number is specified), or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that the structure is watertight to at least one (1) foot above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. A registered Colorado professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 26-23-13, are satisfied. 
    Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes are required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-18. - Floodways. 
    Floodways are administrative limits and tools used to regulate existing and future floodplain development. The State of Colorado has adopted floodway standards that are more stringent than the FEMA minimum standard (see definition of "floodway" in section 26-23-3). Located within special flood hazard area established in section 26-23-5, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a licensed Colorado professional engineer and in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase (requires a no-rise certification) in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(b)  If section 26-23-18(a) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 26-23-15 through 26-23-22. 
(c)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-19. - Alteration of a watercourse. 
    For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse within a special flood hazard area, the following standards apply: 
(a)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall appropriately consider issues of sediment transport, erosion, deposition, and channel migration and properly mitigate potential problems through the project as well as upstream and downstream of any improvement activity. A detailed analysis of sediment transport and overall channel stability should be considered, when appropriate, to assist in determining the most appropriate design. 
(b)  Channelization and flow diversion projects shall evaluate the residual 100-year floodplain. 
(c)  Any channelization or other stream alteration activity proposed by a project proponent must be evaluated for its impact on the regulatory floodplain and be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local floodplain rules, regulations and ordinances. 
(d)  Any stream alteration activity shall be designed and sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer or certified professional hydrologist. 
(e)  All activities within the regulatory floodplain shall meet all applicable federal, state and City of Lafayette floodplain requirements and regulations. 
(f)  Within the regulatory floodway, stream alteration activities shall not be constructed unless the project proponent demonstrates through a floodway analysis and report, sealed by a registered Colorado professional engineer, that there is not more than a 0.00-foot rise in the proposed conditions compared to existing conditions floodway resulting from the project, otherwise known as a no-rise certification, unless the community first applies for a CLOMR and floodway revision in accordance with section 26-23-18. 
(g)  Maintenance shall be required for any altered or relocated portions of watercourses so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-20. - Properties removed from the floodplain by fill. 
    A floodplain development permit shall not be issued for the construction of a new structure or addition to an existing structure on a property removed from the floodplain by the issuance of a FEMA letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) unless such new structure or addition complies with the applicable standards in section 26-23-16(a) through (d) of this Section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-21. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be reasonably safe from flooding. If a subdivision or other development proposal is in a floodprone area, the proposal shall minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 26-23-6; section 26-23-13; and the provisions of sections 26-23-15 through 26-23-22. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 26-23-5 or section 26-23-12. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
Sec. 26-23-22. - Standards for critical facilities. 
    A critical facility is a structure or related infrastructure, but not the land on which it is situated, as specified in Rule 6 of the Rules and Regulations for Regulatory Floodplains in Colorado, that if flooded may result in significant hazards to public health and safety or interrupt essential services and operations for the community at any time before, during and after a flood. 
(a)  Classification of critical facilities. It is the responsibility of the city council of the City of Lafayette to identify and confirm that specific structures in their community meet the following criteria: 
Critical Facilities are classified under the following categories: (1) essential services; (2) hazardous materials; (3) at-risk populations; and (4) vital to restoring normal services. 
(1)  Essential services facilities include public safety, emergency response, emergency medical, designated emergency shelters, communications, public utility plant facilities, and transportation lifelines. These facilities consist of: 
a.  Public safety (police stations, fire and rescue stations, emergency vehicle and equipment storage, and, emergency operation centers); 
b.  Emergency medical (hospitals, ambulance service centers, urgent care centers having emergency treatment functions, and non-ambulatory surgical structures but excluding clinics, doctor's offices, and non-urgent care medical structures that do not provide these functions); 
c.  Designated emergency shelters; 
d.  Communications (main hubs for telephone, broadcasting equipment for cable systems, satellite dish systems, cellular systems, television, radio, and other emergency warning systems, but excluding towers, poles, lines, cables, and conduits); 
e.  Public utility plant facilities for generation and distribution (hubs, treatment plants, substations and pumping stations for water, power and gas, but not including towers, poles, power lines, buried pipelines, transmission lines, distribution lines, and service lines); and 
f.  Air transportation lifelines (airports (municipal and larger), helicopter pads and structures serving emergency functions, and associated infrastructure (aviation control towers, air traffic control centers, and emergency equipment aircraft hangars). 
Specific exemptions to this category include wastewater treatment plants (WWTP), nonpotable water treatment and distribution systems, and hydroelectric power generating plants and related appurtenances. 
Public utility plant facilities may be exempted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city council of the City of Lafayette that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same utility or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract) and connected, the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with the provisions of sections 26-23-15 through 26-23-22, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant systems will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the city council of the City of Lafayette on an as-needed basis upon request. 
(2)  Hazardous materials facilities include facilities that produce or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials. These facilities may include: 
a.  Chemical and pharmaceutical plants (chemical plant, pharmaceutical manufacturing); 
b.  Laboratories containing highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; 
c.  Refineries; 
d.  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; and 
e.  Above ground gasoline or propane storage or sales centers. 
Facilities shall be determined to be critical facilities if they produce or store materials in excess of threshold limits. If the owner of a facility is required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to keep a material safety data sheet (MSDS) on file for any chemicals stored or used in the work place, and the chemical(s) is stored in quantities equal to or greater than the threshold planning quantity (TPQ) for that chemical, then that facility shall be considered to be a critical facility. The TPQ for these chemicals is: either five hundred (500) pounds or the TPQ listed (whichever is lower) for the three hundred fifty-six (356) chemicals listed under 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010), also known as extremely hazardous substances (EHS); or ten thousand (10,000) pounds for any other chemical. This threshold is consistent with the requirements for reportable chemicals established by the Colorado Department of Health and Environment. OSHA requirements for MSDS can be found in 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010). The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulation "Designation, Reportable Quantities, and Notification," 40 C.F.R. § 302 (2010) and OSHA regulation "Occupational Safety and Health Standards," 29 C.F.R. § 1910 (2010) are incorporated herein by reference and include the regulations in existence at the time of the promulgation [of] this ordinance, but exclude later amendments to or editions of the regulations. 
Specific exemptions to this category include: 
a.  Finished consumer products within retail centers and households containing hazardous materials intended for household use, and agricultural products intended for agricultural use. 
b.  Buildings and other structures containing hazardous materials for which it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local authority having jurisdiction by hazard assessment and certification by a qualified professional (as determined by the local jurisdiction having land use authority) that a release of the subject hazardous material does not pose a major threat to the public. 
c.  Pharmaceutical sales, use, storage, and distribution centers that do not manufacture pharmaceutical products. 
These exemptions shall not apply to buildings or other structures that also function as critical facilities under another category outlined in sections 26-23-15 through 26-23-22. 
(3)  At-risk population facilities include medical care, congregate care, and schools. These facilities consist of: 
a.  Elder care (nursing homes); 
b.  Congregate care serving twelve (12) or more individuals (day care and assisted living); 
c.  Public and private schools (pre-schools, K-12 schools), before school and after-school care serving twelve (12) or more children; 
(4)  Facilities vital to restoring normal services including government operations. These facilities consist of: 
a.  Essential government operations (public records, courts, jails, building permitting and inspection services, community administration and management, maintenance and equipment centers); 
b.  Essential structures for public colleges and universities (dormitories, offices, and classrooms only). 
These facilities may be exempted if it is demonstrated to the city council of the City of Lafayette that the facility is an element of a redundant system for which service will not be interrupted during a flood. At a minimum, it shall be demonstrated that redundant facilities are available (either owned by the same entity or available through an intergovernmental agreement or other contract), the alternative facilities are either located outside of the 100-year floodplain or are compliant with this ordinance, and an operations plan is in effect that states how redundant facilities will provide service to the affected area in the event of a flood. Evidence of ongoing redundancy shall be provided to the city council of the City of Lafayette on an as-needed basis upon request. 
(b)  Protection for critical facilities. All new and substantially improved critical facilities and new additions to critical facilities located within the special flood hazard area shall be regulated to a higher standard than structures not determined to be critical facilities. For the purposes of this ordinance, protection shall include one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Location outside the special flood hazard area; or 
(2)  Elevation or floodproofing of the structure to at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
(c)  Ingress and egress for new critical facilities. New critical facilities shall, when practicable as determined by the city council of the City of Lafayette, have continuous non-inundated access (ingress and egress for evacuation and emergency services) during a 100-year flood event. 
(Ord. No. 2012-36, § 4, 11-20-12) 
SECTION 26-24. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Sec. 26-24-1. - Creation. 
    A board of adjustment, hereinafter referred to as the board, is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-24-2. - Organization. 
    The board shall have five (5) members. Appointment to the board of adjustment shall be by the city council for a term of three (3) years. The board may recruit and recommend nominees to city council for appointment. Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. The board shall elect from its membership a chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary during its first meeting of each calendar year, and adopt such rules as may be necessary for conduct of its business. Council may, upon recommendation of the board, appoint up to two (2) alternate members, which member(s) shall be called upon to serve and vote in the absence of a regular member(s). The alternate members shall be designated upon appointment as "alternate number one" and "alternate number two". Any vacancy which occurs in the membership of the board shall be filled by the council within sixty (60) days after such vacancy occurs. The board may recommend any alternate member for appointment by council to a vacant position. Compensation of the members of the board shall be as fixed by the council. Members of the board shall be residents of the city and may be removed by council only for cause after written charges and a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 2-1-11) 
Sec. 26-24-3. - Powers and duties. 
    The board shall have the power, duty and jurisdiction as assigned to it by this chapter and the ordinances of the city which shall include: 
(a)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  To hear and decide appeals wherein there is question on the interpretation of the zone district map or similar questions as they may arise in the administration of this chapter. 
(c)  To hear and decide appeals for special exceptions to the provisions of this chapter, such exceptions to be known as variances. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-24-4. - Appeal procedures; granting of variances. 
(a)  Appeals. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved by his inability to obtain a building permit, or by the decision of any administrative officer or agency based upon or made in the course of the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Appeals may be taken by an officer, department, board or commission of the city affected by the grant or refusal of a building permit or by other decision of an administrative officer or agency based on or made in the course of the administration or enforcement of this chapter. Appeals to the board must be made in writing and filed with the planning director within seven (7) days following the action or decision from which the appeal is taken. In the event the seventh day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the next regular business day of the city shall be deemed the seventh day. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board after the notice of appeal shall have been filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay, in his opinion, would cause eminent peril to life and property, in which case, proceedings shall not be stayed. 
(b)  Variances. Where by reason of: 
(1)  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this chapter; or 
(2)  Exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property; or 
(3)  The fact that the property has been designated as an individual landmark or is located within a designated historic landmark district pursuant to Chapter 47, and the historic preservation board has found that conformance with this chapter would have a significant adverse impact upon the historic character of the individual landmark or contributing building of the historic district, the strict application of any regulation of this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property, or have a significant adverse impact upon the historic character of an individual landmark or contributing building of the historic district, the board may authorize a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, or preserve the historical character, provided however, that: 
a.  The variance granted is the minimum necessary to alleviate such practical difficulties or undue hardship upon the owner of the property, or to avoid or mitigate the adverse impacts upon the historic character; 
b.  Such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of the general plan of this chapter; 
c.  The circumstances found to constitute a hardship were not created by the appellant, are not due to or the result of general conditions in the district and cannot be practically corrected; 
d.  The variance shall not permit a use that is prohibited or otherwise alter or affect the regulations of uses on the property; and 
e.  No variance shall be granted for a telecommunication facility that exceeds the height limitations set forth in section 26-22.5. An applicant for such a facility shall apply for approval under section 26-22.5-8 in lieu of a height variance. 
    The grant of any variance shall not constitute or be construed as precedence, ground or cause for any other variance. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 31, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2000-25, § 6, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1, 3-4-08; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-24-5. - Application requirements. 
    Application shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section 26-17 as applicable. Applications shall be received no later than thirty (30) days prior to the board meeting at which the appeal or variance is to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-24-6. - Hearings. 
    The board shall hold hearings and meetings on a date and hour designated by the board. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. All hearings and meetings of the board shall be open to the public and shall be governed by the following rules: 
(a)  Public notice shall be given of all hearings, which notice shall be pursuant to section 26-16-9. 
(b)  Due notice of all hearings shall be given to parties in interest. 
(c)  All evidence and testimony shall be presented publicly. 
(d)  The proceedings shall be electronically recorded. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 32, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-24-7. - Fee. 
    For all applications for variance or appeal, the fee shall be as set by city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-24-8. - Decisions. 
    The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any administrative official or agency or to grant any variance. Any decision of the board shall be subject to review by the municipal court in accordance with its judicial appeals procedure. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 2, 11-16-04) 
SECTION 26-25. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 26-25-1. - Creation; composition, duties. 
    The planning commission as created by section 4.14 of the Charter shall consist of seven (7) members and shall have the duties and jurisdiction as set forth in the Charter, this chapter, and chapter 5 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2002-8, § 3, 4-16-02) 
Sec. 26-25-2. - Hearings. 
    The planning commission shall hold meetings and hearings on a date and hour designated by the planning commission. All meetings and hearings shall be open to the public and shall be governed by the following rules: 
(a)  Public notice shall be given of all hearings pursuant to section 26-16-9. 
(b)  Due notice shall be given to all parties in interest. 
(c)  All evidence and testimony shall be presented publicly. 
(d)  The proceeding shall be electronically recorded. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 33, 8-18-98) 
SECTION 26-25.1. - COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING 

Sec. 26-25.1-1. - Procedure for Comprehensive Plan amendment. 
    The following procedures shall apply to the periodic update of the City of Lafayette Comprehensive Plan (a "periodic update") or to any proposal to amend any specific policy, land use designation, map designation or other aspect of said plan (a "specific amendment"): 
(a)  Requests for amendment: Requests for specific amendment may only be presented by the owner of the real property that is the subject of the requested amendment, city staff, the planning commission or the city council. 
(b)  Preapplication conference: Prior to requesting any Specific Amendment, the applicant (other than the planning commission or city council) shall confer with the planning director or the director's designee pursuant to the provisions of section 26-16-3 of this chapter. 
(c)  Technical review and referral: All applications for specific amendment shall have technical referral and agency referral in accordance with the provisions of section 26-16-8.1(c) of this chapter. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, at least thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing before the planning commission, staff shall send a referral on the proposed specific amendment to the following agencies: 
(1)  City of Lafayette department heads. 
(2)  Lafayette City Attorney. 
(3)  Any affected special district or school district. 
(4)  Any affected bordering governmental entity. 
(5)  Any affected utility service provider. 
(d)  Planning commission hearing: The planning commission shall, after a public hearing, adopt a resolution by the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire membership of the commission recommending that the city council approve, approve with conditions or disapprove of a specific amendment or periodic update. 
(e)  City council hearing: After receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall, after a public hearing, approve, approve with conditions or disapprove a specific amendment or periodic update. Any approval or approval with conditions shall be adopted by ordinance and any disapproval may be by resolution; provided, however, that any amendment of the urban growth boundary established pursuant to section 6.12 of the Lafayette Charter shall require the affirmative vote of not less than six (6) members of the city council. If approved, the periodic update or specific amendment, along with any maps and descriptive text, shall be filed with the city clerk who shall arrange for the filing of the same with the clerk and recorder of each county or city and county that is affected by the same. 
(f)  Public notice of hearings: Each of the above-described public hearings that is conducted in connection with a periodic update or specific amendment shall be noticed in accordance with the provisions of section 26-16-9(b) and (d) of this chapter; provided, however, that any specific amendment that would result in a change to the land use designation of a particular parcel or parcels shall be noticed in accordance with all of the provisions of section 26-16-9 of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, notice of a public hearing of the planning commission concerning a periodic update or specific amendment shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in any county or city and county that is affected by said update or amendment. 
(g)  Submittal requirements: In connection with the preparation of a staff report, the planning director may require an applicant for a specific amendment to provide, at the applicant's expense, research, studies and/or reports concerning matters that are relevant to matters considered in the Lafayette Comprehensive Plan, which matters may include, but shall not be limited to, traffic, economic and market analyses, drainage, utilities, and land use compatibility studies. All applications materials for specific amendments shall conform to the requirements of sections 26-17-2 and 26-17-3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2003-39, § 1, 10-21-03; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11) 
SECTION 26-26. - NONCONFORMING USES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 42-2001, adopted Nov. 20, 2001, repealed section 26-26 and re-enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former section 26-26 derived from Ord. No. 1986-01, adopted Feb. 4, 1986. 

Sec. 26-26-1. - Nonconforming uses, structures and lots; purpose. 
    Certain lawful existing uses of lots or structures, including but not limited to the size, location or other dimensional aspects of such lots or structures, may not be in conformance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter or subsequent amendments to this chapter. This section recognizes these situations, permits the restricted use and maintenance of such nonconformities, and offers provisions for their possible replacement, expansion and alteration. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-26-2. - Conformance to chapter required. 
    All structures and uses of land, other than those in conformity with this chapter, and except structures and uses governed by section 26-21, shall be regulated as set forth in this section. For the purpose of administration, nonconformity shall be classified and regulated as nonconforming structures, nonconforming uses, and nonconforming lots. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-26-3. - Nonconforming structures. 
    For purposes of this section, a nonconforming structure is a structure that was existing and lawful as of the date of adoption of this chapter, or in the case of amendment to this chapter, then at the time of such amendment, but which does not now conform to the provisions of this chapter or amendment thereto with respect to matters including, but not limited to, height, setback, lot coverage, architectural design or any other measurable standard of this chapter. 
(a)  Maintenance and repair. A nonconforming structure may be maintained and repaired to its existing state. 
(b)  Restoration. A structure that has been damaged or destroyed by fire or other cause beyond the control of the owner or occupant may be restored provided that the restoration is commenced within six (6) months of the damaging or destructive event and is completed within one (1) year of such event. No such restoration shall increase the degree or extent of nonconformity, in any respect, beyond that which existed prior to the damaging or destructive event. 
(c)  Expansion or alteration. Unless as otherwise expressly stated in this chapter, a nonconforming building may be expanded or altered provided that the expansion or alteration does not increase the degree or extent of nonconformity, in any respect, beyond that which existed prior to the expansion or alteration and, further, provided that the expanded or altered areas of the structure are in full compliance with all provisions of this chapter. Once expanded or altered to a conforming condition, in whole or part, no structure, or part thereof, shall revert to a nonconforming condition. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 11-20-01) 
Sec. 26-26-4. - Nonconforming use. 
    For purposes of this section, a nonconforming use is a use of a structure or land that was existing and lawful as of the date of adoption of this chapter, or in the case of amendment to this chapter, then at the time of such amendment, but which does not now conform to the provisions of this chapter or amendment thereto. 
(a)  Continuance. A nonconforming use may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter or amendment thereto, unless otherwise specifically stated in this chapter. 
(b)  Change of use. A nonconforming use may only be changed to a use that is less intensive in activity and impact than the existing use. The planning director shall use Table 26-A, sections 26-15-4, 26-19, 26-20 and 26-23 to determine whether a proposed use is less intensive in activity and impact than the existing use. 
(c)  Expansion of use. A nonconforming use that occurs in a structure may be extended throughout the structure if the proposed expansion is approved as a special use pursuant to section 26-15. 
(d)  Abandonment of use. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one (1) year, each use of the land or structure thereafter shall be in full conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-26-5. - Nonconforming lots. 
    For purposes of this section, a nonconforming lot is a lot or parcel of land that was existing and lawful as of the date of adoption of this chapter, or in the case of an amendment to this chapter, then at the time of such amendment, but which does not now conform with the provisions of this chapter or amendment thereto, including, but not limited to, those provisions concerning lot area or frontage. 
(a)  Use of nonconforming lots. An unimproved nonconforming lot may be used in accordance with the applicable zone district regulations provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  The nonconforming lot is shown to have been legally created; 
2.  The use proposed on the lot is in full compliance with all provisions of this chapter; and 
3.  The nonconforming lot is not held in identical ownership with one or more adjacent, unimproved nonconforming lot(s) that have continuous frontage with the first nonconforming lot. 
(b)  Merger of adjacent, unimproved, nonconforming lots. If two (2) or more adjacent, unimproved, nonconforming lots with continuous frontage are held in identical ownership at any time after the effective date of this chapter, the lands shall be considered to be an undivided lot or parcel and no portion of such lands shall be sold or used in a manner that diminishes compliance with the lot width and area requirements established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 11-20-01) 
SECTION 26-27. - INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 26-27-1. - Title provisions deemed minimum requirements. 
    In the application and interpretation, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of private contracts. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than that imposed by such existing provisions of law, contract, or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
SECTION 26-28. - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 26-28-1. - Required. 
    No building or structure shall be occupied or used, until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 34, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 26-28-2. - Issuance; for building use. 
    A certificate of occupancy for a new building or the alteration of an existing building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of such building shall have been completed, inspected and found in conformity with the provisions of the ordinances, codes and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
Sec. 26-28-3. - Record; filing required, fee. 
    Certificates of occupancy shall state that the building complies with all the building codes, ordinances and provisions of this chapter. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building official and copies shall be furnished upon request to the public. No fee shall be charged for an original certificate applied for coincident with the application for a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 35, 8-18-98) 
SECTION 26-29. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 26-29-1. - Building permit required. 
    No site preparation or building construction for any building, structure or wireless communication facility shall be commenced without first obtaining a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2000-25, § 7, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2001-43, § 4, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 2017-36, § 2, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 26-29-2. - Site plan required. 
    All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of a site plan drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lots to be built upon, the size of the building(s), structures or wireless communication facilities to be erected, and the location of the building(s), structures or wireless communication facilities on the lot(s) or tract(s) with reference to the legally established property lines and such information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of section 26-22.5. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 36, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2000-25, § 7, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2001-43, § 5, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 2017-36, § 3, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 26-29-3. - Review, public improvements. 
    All applications for building permits shall be reviewed by the planning director to determine whether or not the proposed construction will require the installation or construction of public improvements, such as street paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage facilities or other public improvements. 
    If the planning director determines that the proposed construction makes necessary any such public improvements, the planning director shall so inform the building official, and in such event, a condition shall be inserted in the building permit which shall require the construction of such public improvement(s) by the permittee, and the dedication thereof to the city prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The cost of any such improvement shall be borne by the permittee, and the construction thereof shall be at the sole cost, risk and expense of the permittee, subject to the provisions of any applicable city ordinance, regulation or policy. All such improvements are to be constructed in full compliance with the City of Lafayette engineering regulations, practices, design standards and construction specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 26-29-4. - Site plan and architectural approval required. 
    No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any of the following types of buildings or structures until a site plan and architectural application is submitted and approved in accordance with the provisions of sections 26-16-7 and 26-17-9 of this chapter: 
(1)  New residential, commercial or industrial buildings or structures; 
(2)  Detached garages for new or existing residential buildings or structures; and 
(3)  Additions to existing residential, commercial or industrial buildings or structures. 
(Ord. No. 2001-43, § 6, 12-4-01) 
SECTION 26-30. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 26-30-1. - Power to amend. 
    The city may, from time to time, amend the number, shape or boundaries of any zone district or any regulation within such district, or any other provision of this chapter. Planned unit developments, as described in section 26-18, and zoning/rezoning, as described in section 26-16, shall be amendments to the zone district map. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-35, § 6, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 38, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 7, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 26-30-2. - Procedure. 
    Other than planned unit development requests, which shall be processed as described in section 26-18, and zoning/rezoning requests, which shall be processed as described in section 26-16, amendments to this chapter shall be considered by the city council only when the following requirements have been complied with: 
(a)  Requests for any amendment to this chapter may only be presented by an owner of real property within the area proposed for change, city staff, the city planning commission or the city council. 
(b)  Each request shall be submitted to the city planning commission for a public hearing noticed in accordance with section 26-16-9(b) and (d). The planning commission shall review the proposed amendment based on the procedure noted in section 26-16-8.1(d), with the exception that the planning commission may deny the proposed amendment. If the planning commission denies the proposed amendment the applicant may appeal the planning commission's decision to city council. Such appeal shall be filed with the department of planning and building, in writing, within fourteen (14) days following the planning commission's decision and shall include the following information: name of person submitting the appeal; date of the appeal; and a statement requesting the appeal along with a statement of the desired outcome. 
A denial by the planning commission may also be called-up and reviewed by initiation of the city council upon the request of three (3) city council members. In the case of a call-up, the call-up shall be initiated by city council at a regularly scheduled city council meeting occurring no later than the second regularly scheduled city council meeting after the planning commission decision. 
(c)  Requests for amendment shall be submitted no less than thirty (30) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the applicant desires the request to be heard. Any of the foregoing notwithstanding, the planning director shall have the discretion to schedule the application for the next planning commission meeting at which adequate time shall be available to consider the application in accordance with good planning practice and in consideration of then-existing agenda items. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-35, § 7, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 39, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 8, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2006-24, §§ 7, 8, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 2017-54, adopted Nov. 27, 2017 allowed for § 26-30-2 to be amended to be consistent with the provisions of said ordinance. Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 2017-54 states: 
"Notwithstanding the procedures set out in sections 26-16-8.1 and 26-30-2 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances, City Council may consider and enact amendments to section 26-22.1 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances pertaining to the land use regulation of oil and gas development activities without such proposed amendments first being submitted to the City Planning Commission for a planning commission public hearing and the City Council shall, however, hold its own public hearing on such proposed amendments, as required by the Code of Ordinances. 
This provision will be automatically repealed without further action of the City Council on December 31, 2018. 
Sec. 26-30-3. - Hearing. 
    Other than planned unit development requests, which shall be processed as described in section 26-18, prior to the final adoption of any amendment to this chapter, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon in conjunction with the ordinance amending the zone district map or pertinent provision(s) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-35, § 8, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 9, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 26-30-4. - Fee. 
    For all proposed amendments to this chapter, except for amendments proposed by the city council or the planning commission, a fee as set by city council resolution shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86) 
SECTION 26-31. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 26-31-1. - Violations. 
    It is unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, maintain or use any building or structure or to use any land in violation of any provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereof, or any provision of any urban renewal plan as approved by the city pursuant to C.R.S. 31-25-101 et seq. Any person, firm or corporation, either as owner, lessee, occupant or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, any amendment thereof, or any provision of any urban renewal plan as approved by the city pursuant to C.R.S. 31-25-101 et seq., or who interferes in any manner with any person in the performance of a right or duty granted or imposed upon him by the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. In case of conflict between the urban renewal plan and the district regulations, the urban renewal plan shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2001-26, § 2, 9-4-01) 
Sec. 26-31-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994, repealed § 26-31-2 in its entirety. Formerly, § 26-31-2 pertained to penalties for development and zoning ordinance violations and derived from § 2 of Ord. No. 1986-01, adopted Feb. 4, 1986. 
TABLE 26-A - PERMITTED USES 
Use AG RE1 
RE2 R0 
R1 R2 OTR R3 
R4 RSR T1 B1 C1 M1 DR P Accessory uses P P P P P P P P P P P P P Accessory building or structure P P P P P P S P P P P P P Agriculture use (crop production only) P P P P P P S P P P P P P Animals P/S 4 S * * * * * * * * S S S Art gallery or studio S S S S S S S P P P P * S Asphalt plant * * * * * * * * * * S * * Assisted living * * * * * * S S S S S * S Automobile storage yard * * * * * * * * * * S * S Automotive and recreational vehicle service and sales greater than two ton * * * * * * * * * * P * S Automotive and recreational vehicle service and sales less than two ton * * * * * * * * S S P * S Automotive paint and body shop * * * * * * * * * S P * S Backyard chickens P P P P P P P See 
Note 
#2 See 
Note 
#2 See 
Note 
#2 * See 
Note 
#2 See 
Note 
#2 Bed and breakfast S * * S S S S P S S * * * Beekeeping as an accessory use P P P P P P P See 
Note 
#3 See 
Note 
#3 See 
Note 
#3 No P See 
Note 
#3 Board and care facility * * * * * S S S * * * * S Brew pub * * * * * * * * S S P * * Brewery * * * * * * * * * * P * * Camper park or campground * * * * * * * * * S * * S Car wash * * * * * * S S S S S * * Church S S S P P P S P P S S * * Commercial horse stable S Commercial parking lot * * * * * * * S S S S * * Commercial recreational 
establishment (e.g., bowling alley, skating rink) * * * * * * * * S S S * * Daycare center * S S S S S S P P S S * P Drive-up facility * * * * * * S S S S S * * Drive-up restaurant * * * * * * * * S S S * * Enclosed (i.e., screened and fenced) storage yard * * * * * * * * S * P * S Extraction of minerals * * * * * * * * * * S * S Extraction of oil and gaseous 
materials S S S S S S S S S S S S S Feedmill * * * * * * * * * * P * * Gas station (fuel facility) * * * * * * S S S S S * * Golf course (public or private) * S S S S S * P P P S S P Halfway house * * * S S S S S * * * * S Home occupation P P P P P P S P * * * * P Household pets, not exceeding three each of dogs, cats, and one other species of household pet. This limitation applies to rabbits, but does not apply to other household pets customarily housed in a cage, aquarium, or similar enclosure P P P P P P P P P P P P P Hospital * * * * * * S S P S S * P Indoor amusement, entertainment, or arcade * * * * * * * S S P * * * Kennel and similar uses such as dog daycare S S * * * * * S S S P S * Library * * * * * S S P P S S * P Lumber, plumbing, electrical or building supplies * * * * * * * * S S P * * Machine shop * * * * * * * * S S P * S Medical or dental office * * * * * S S P P P P * S Micro brew pub * * * * * * * * S P * * * Micro brewery * * * * * * * * S P P * * Miniature pot-bellied pig P P P P P P P See 
Note 
6 See 
Note 
6 See 
Note 
6 * See 
Note 
6 P Miniature goats P P P P P P P See 
Note 
6 See 
Note 
6 See 
Note 
6 * See 
Note 
6 P Mini-bank detached from principal building * * * * * * * S S S S * * Mobile home park or subdivision * * * S * S S * * * * * * Mobile home sales and service * * * * * * * * * * P * * Mobile home on individual lot * * S S S S S * * * S * * Mortuary * * * * * S * P P S S * * Motel, hotel, or resort * * * * * * S S P P * * * Municipal or public utility facility and buildings, excluding offices, repair and storage yard * S S S S S * P P P P S P Nursery or commercial greenhouse * S * * * * * S S P P * * Nursing home or convalescent home * S * * * * S S S S S * S Office and neighborhood retail, if approved as part of PUD, per section 26-18-6 * * * S S S S S P P P * * Office * * * * * S S P P P P * P Park or playground * P P P P P S P P P P P P Parking lot or structure * * * * * S S S S S S * P Personal service outlets such as barber and beauty shop, self-service laundry, shoe repair, tailors, dry cleaners, 
travel agency * * * * * S S S P P P * * Printing or publishing * * * * * * * * S P P * * Private or public membership club * S S S S S S S P S S * * Recreational club or facility (indoor or outdoor) * S S S S S S S P S S * S Refinement of hydro-carbons, 
mineral, or gaseous materials * * * * * * * * * * S * * Research, testing and laboratory facility, or facility for manufacturing, fabricating, processing, or storing of product * * * * * * * * * * P * * Residential  Two-family dwelling * * * P P P S P S * * * P  Accessory dwelling * P  Multifamily dwelling * * * * * P S P S * * * P  Single-family dwelling P P P P P P S P S S * P P  Single-family dwelling in a mixed use building complex (Refer to Note 1) * * * * * * * P P P S * *  Duplex two-family dwellings in a mixed use building complex * * * * * * * P P P * * *  Multifamily dwellings in a mixed use building complex * * * * * * * P P P * * * Restaurant * * * * * * S S S P P * * Retail sales including, but not limited to, the sale of food, beverages, dry goods, furniture, appliances, hardware, and clothing with floor areas of less than 20,000 square feet * * * * * * * S P P * * * Retail sales with floor areas in excess of 20,000 square feet * * * * * * * * S P * * * School, private S S S S S S S S S S * S S School, public S S S S S S * S S * * S S Sexually oriented business * * * * * * * * * * S * * Slaughtering and processing animals * * * * * * * * * * S * * Tailoring, millinery, electric parts assembly, woodworking, and other limited manufacturing uses similar to those uses identified by the International Building Code, Factory Group F * * * * * * * S S S P * * Theater, auditorium, or place of assembly * * * * * * S * S S S * P Transportation center * * * * * * S * S S S * S Veterinarian hospital or clinic S * * * * * * S P P P * * Warehouse (including mini-storage) * * * * * * * * * S S * S Wholesale establishment * * * * * * * * S S P * * Wireless communication facilities P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5 P/S 
 5  
KEY: 
P  -Permitted 
S  -Special review 
*  -Not permitted 
  -Uses permitted subject to the review process provided in section 26-22.5-6 
NOTES: 
1.  The purpose of a single-family dwelling in a mixed use building complex within the M1 zoning district is to allow for a dwelling unit for a caretaker, and/or watchman and their family. 
2.  Backyard chickens are approved as an accessory use for residential and school uses in the T-1, B-1, C-1, P and DR zoning districts. 
3.  Beekeeping is approved as an accessory use for residential and school uses in the T-1, B-1, C-1 and DR zoning districts. 
4.  Any use that is not specifically permitted, or permitted by special use review, in a particular zone district, shall be prohibited in such zone district, unless the planning director determines that (i) the proposed use is not specifically addressed and allowed in other zone districts; and (ii) the proposed use is sufficiently similar to a designated use that is otherwise allowed (by right or special use review) in the zone district proposed for the use, such that the location of the use in that district would be consistent with the provisions of this Chapter 26. 
5.  Per section 26-22.5, of the Code base stations, alternative tower structures and small cell facilities, and towers not in the right-of-way are special uses and base stations, alternative tower structures and small cell facilities within the right-of-way, and "eligible facilities" are permitted uses. 
6.  Miniature pot-bellied pigs and miniature goats are approved as an accessory use for residential and school uses in the T-1, B-1, C-1 and DR zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1988-18, § 11, 9-20-88; Ord. No. 1989-35, § 9, 6-20-89; Ord. No. 1990-4, § 6, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 1993-6, § 18 (Exh. A), 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1994-1, § 3(Exh. A), 4-5-94; Ord. No. 1994-7, § 7, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 1996-11, §§ 7-9, 4-16-96; Ord. No. 1998-25, § 12, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 1998-26, § 13, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 1998-28, § 4, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 40, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 1999-10, § 4, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2000-25, § 8, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 2000-48, § 3, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 2002-3, § 1, 2-19-02; Ord. No. 2002-7, § 1, 4-16-02; Ord. No. 2002-31, § 9, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 16, 3-3-09; Ord. No. 2011-05, § 4, 2-15-11; Ord. No. 2011-15, §§ 8-12, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2011-37, § 1, 10-18-11; Ord. No. 2013-8, § 2, 5-7-13; Ord. No. 2013-09, § 2, 5-7-13; Ord. No. 2014-14, § 5, 5-20-14; Ord. No. 2014-22, § 3, 1-6-15; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 1-20-15; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 1, 3-15-16; Ord. No. 2016-39, § 3, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 2018-13, § 1, 5-1-18; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
TABLE 26-B - SPATIAL REQUIREMENTS 
Zone standards
AG RE1 RE2 R0 R1 R2 R3 R4 RSR OTR T1 B1 C1 M1 DR P Principal Building Front yard setback  Arterial 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 25 20 20 45  Collector 40 40 40 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 25 20 20 45  Local 30 30 30 25 25 20 20 30 30 20 20 20 20 20 30 Side yard setback 30 15 10 10  5  5  5 15 15 5 15 5  0  0 30 Rear yard setback 30 30 30 30 25 20 20 30 30 20 25 10  0  0 30 Side street setback N/A 10 N/A Minimum lot area Single-family 5.0 ac 40,000 20,000 10,000 7,000 7,000 6,000 6,000 * 7,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 NA Duplex N/A 7,000 6,000 6,000 * 7,000 Multifamily N/A 2,500 2,000 * Maximum lot 
coverage 20% 15% 25% 30% 30% 30% 30% 30% * 30% 50% 50% Maximum dwelling unit per acre 0.2 1  2  3  6 10 14 18 * 13 10 10  4  4 NA NA Building height 27 27 27 27 27 27 35 35 35 27 27 35 35 35 27 35 Accessory Building or Structure Rear yard setback 30  5  5  5  5  5  5 10 10  5  0  0  0  0 30 Maximum height 27 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 16 20 20 20 20 20 16 20 Accessory Dwelling Unit Rear yard setback  5 Maximum height 20 1. Commercial/industrial uses must maintain a 20-foot setback from residentially-zoned areas. 2. Heights to 35 feet with special review approval. 3. No part of a building may project into an easement. 4. 350 feet distance is required between any existing or approved oil and gas well and a residential or commercial lot line, or an industrial use characterized by extraordinary fire hazard. 5. Setback requirements for an accessory building or structure and for an accessory dwelling unit are referenced in sections 26-14-6 and 26-14-19. * To be determined during the special use review, required of all projects.  
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1990-4, § 7, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 1993-6, § 19 (Exh. B), 3-2-93; Ord. No. 1994-1, § 4(Exh. B), 4-5-94; Ord. No. 1994-7, § 8, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 1994-22, § 3(Exh. A), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1998-25, § 13, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2002-31, § 10, 11-5-02; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 2, 4-15-03; Ord. No. 2014-22, § 4, 1-6-15; Ord. No. 2015-20, § 2, 7-7-15) 
TABLE 26-C - PARKING STANDARDS 
Parking Dimensions: 
A B C D E F Angle Stall Width Stall to Curb Aisle Width Curb Length Overhang  0° 9  9 12 23  0  20° 9 15 11 26.3 0.5 30° 9 18 11 18  1  40° 9 19 12 14  1  45° 9 20 13 12.7 1.5 50° 9 20 16 11.7 1.5 60° 9 21 18 10.4 1.5 70° 9 21 19  9.6 1.5 80° 9 20 24  9.1 1.5 90° 9 19 24  9  1.5  
(1)  Overhang may be utilized to reduce parking space length if a solid curb is installed and the overhang area is landscaped with plant material that does not exceed twelve (12) inches in mature height. If an attached sidewalk and curb are proposed as a wheel stop, the sidewalk must be the minimum required sidewalk width (four (4) feet), plus the overhang width. 

TYPICAL PARKING LAYOUT 
    Accessible parking spaces: The width of accessible parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet. Access aisles adjacent to accessible spaces shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide, except as provided as follows: one (1) in every eight (8) accessible spaces, but not less than one (1), shall be served by an accessible aisle eight (8) feet wide minimum and shall be designated "van accessible". All accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility. Spaces designed with the eight-foot wide accessible aisle shall have an additional sign "Van Accessible" mounted below the symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall be located so they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space. 
    Small car spaces are a minimum width of eight and one-half (8.5) feet and sixteen (16) feet deep. The above dimensions can be appropriately reduced for small car spaces. 
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 2006-24, § 4, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 2, 3-6-07) 
TABLE 26-D - SCHEDULE OF SIGN REQUIREMENTS 
Zoning 
District Class of 
Sign 
Permitted Type of Sign 
Permitted Maximum Sign Area 
per Lot Maximum 
Area per 
Sign Face Maximum 
Number of 
Signs 
Permitted Maximum 
Height of 
Freestanding 
Signs R1 
R2 
R3 
AG Freestanding 
Wall 
Window Identification 4 sq. ft. for single-family residential uses 2 sq. ft. 1 per use 4 feet 15 sq. ft. for multifamily uses 10 sq. ft. 1 per street frontage 6 feet 25 sq. ft. for nonresidential uses by right 15 sq. ft. 1 per street frontage 6 feet 64 sq. ft. for uses located in a planned unit development as part of an approved site plan 32 sq. ft. 2 per project 6 feet Subdivision, the design and materials are subject to staff architectural review. Notice of Decision to be mailed to Planning Commission. The decision may be appealed under Section 26-16-6b(3-4) 16 sq. ft. 2 per project 6 feet For neighborhood 32 sq. ft. 2 per project 6 feet Bulletin board 32 sq. ft. for nonresidential use 16 sq. ft. 2 per street 6 feet Business sign 50 sq. ft. for uses permitted by special use review and for lawful nonconforming uses, or the maximum sign area permitted for the use in the zoning district where the use is permitted by the zoning ordinance whichever is less 15 sq. ft. The lesser of 1 per street frontage or 2 per use 6 feet Noncommercial signs 32 sq. ft. 16 sq. ft. 1 per street 6 feet Temporary signs See Section 21-21-16, 
Temporary Signs B1 
C1 
M1 Freestanding, 
Marquee, 
Projecting, 
Suspended, 
Vehicle- 
Mounted, 
Wall, and 
Window Identification 
Bulletin board For any use permitted in a residential zone, as regulated in a residential zoning district Business The greater of: 30 sq. ft.; or 
(a) lots having only one use 11/2 sq. ft. of sign area for each linear foot of total building frontage for the first 200 feet of building frontage and 1/2 sq. foot of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage thereafter; 
(b) on lots having more than one use and/or lots where building frontage equals street frontage: 2 sq. ft. of sign area for each linear foot of total building frontage of the unit occupied by a street level use for the first 200 feet of frontage plus 1/2 sq. ft. of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage thereafter; 
(c) maximum total freestanding sign area, see Section 26-21-21(b) See Section 
26-21-21, 
Additional 
Regulations 
for Signs in T1, B1, C1, M1 See Section 
26-21-21, 
Additional 
Regulations 
for Signs in T1, B1, C1, M1 See Section 
26-21-11, 
Required 
Setbacks for 
Freestanding 
Signs ; 
26-21-21(b), 
Freestanding 
Signs Joint 
identification 1 sq. ft. of sign area per linear foot of building frontage, maximum sign area 300 sq. ft. 150 sq. ft. Section 
26-21-21(I) See Section 
26-21-11; 
6-21-21(b) Noncommercial 32 sq. ft. 6 feet Real estate 32 sq. ft. 16 1 per street 8 feet Time- 
temperature- 
date See Section 26-21-21(j) 1 per street See Section 
26-21-11; 
26-21-21(b) Temporary See Section 26-21-16, 
Temporary Signs T1 Free- 
standing, Suspended, Wall, Window Temporary See Section 26-21-16, 
Temporary Signs Identification 
Bulletin board For uses permitted in residential zones, as regulated in residential zoning districts Business The greater of: 30 sq. ft.; or 
(a) lots having only one use, 1 sq. ft. of sign area for each linear foot of total building frontage and 1/2 sq. ft. of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage thereafter; 
(b) on lots having more than one use: 1.5 sq. ft. of sign area for each linear foot of total building frontage of the unit occupied by a street level use for the first 200 feet of frontage, plus 1/2 sq. ft. of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage thereafter; 
(c) maximum total area for sign: 100 sq. ft. See Section 
26-21-21, 
Additional 
Regulations 
for Signs in T1, B1, C1, M1 See Section 
26-21-21, 
Additional 
Regulations 
for Signs in T1, B1, C1, M1 See Section 
26-21-11; 
26-21-21(b) Joint 
identification The greater of: 50 sq. ft. or 1 sq. ft. sign area for each 2 linear feet of frontage. Maximum sign area per sign: 100 sq. ft. 50 sq. ft. See Section 
26-21-21(i) See Section 
26-21-11 
26-21-21(b) Noncommercial 32 sq. ft. 6 feet Real estate 32 sq. ft. 16 sq. ft. 1 per street 8 feet Time- 
temperature- 
date See Section 
26-21-21(j) 1 per street See Section 
26-21-11 
26-21-21(b) Temporary See Section 26-21-16, 
Temporary Signs  
(Ord. No. 1986-01, § 2, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1987-02, § 22, 2-17-87; Ord. No. 1990-4, § 8, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 1993-44, § 3(Exh. A), 10-19-93; Ord. No. 1997-16, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-97; Ord. No. 2014-22, § 5, 1-6-15) 
TABLE 26-E - MINIMUM STREET DESIGNS AND WIDTHS 








Note: This design may require additional off-street parking. 
(Ord. No. 2007-15, § 9, 4-3-07) 
Chapter 28 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  In addition to those responsibilities set forth in chapter 6 of the city Code of Ordinances, the planning department shall administer the affordable housing program of the city, and oversee implementation of the city's historic preservation ordinances. 
(b)  In addition to those responsibilities set forth in chapter 6 of the city Code of Ordinances, the director of the department of arts and cultural resources shall work with the cultural arts commission and public art committee to fulfill their responsibilities as defined in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, § 5, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 3, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, §§ 2, 4, 2-19-2019) 
Secs. 28-2-28-4. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2011-47, adopted Jan. 3, 2012, repealed and reenacted Art. II to read as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to the same subject matter, was comprised of §§ 28-5-28-12, and derived from Ord. No. 2010-05, adopted Feb. 2, 2010. 

Sec. 28-5. - Legislative findings. 
    The city council hereby finds, based in part upon the City of Lafayette Housing Study, dated July 10, 2001, that a significant housing problem exists within Lafayette with respect to the supply of affordable priced dwelling units. Specifically, the city council finds that: 
(a)  High levels of unmet demands for housing allows for housing to be highly priced, discourages developers from offering a more diversified price range for housing, and contributes to the unwillingness of developers to create housing that is affordable to lower income households; 
(b)  Regional growth has contributed to make land and construction costs higher, causing a rise in the price of housing and causing the supply of housing that is affordable to moderate income households to be located in limited areas, if at all; 
(c)  Increases in income have not kept pace with the rapid and significant increases in the cost of housing in Lafayette; 
(d)  Housing problems have escalated due to population increase, a limited supply of developable land and as a result of the lack of residential building permits available due to the adoption of Lafayette Charter section 6.10; 
(e)  Developers of new housing are not meeting the need for housing to serve households earning lower income levels; 
(f)  The lack of an adequate supply of housing that is affordable to a significant percentage of the wage earners employed in jobs within Lafayette will make it difficult for those individuals to find housing within Lafayette and negatively impacts employers within Lafayette due to the resulting impacts on employee productivity, labor costs and the availability of a labor force; 
(g)  A lack of dwelling units that are affordable to lower income households threatens to negatively impact the prospects for economic development within Lafayette, which economic development is necessary to sustain and improve upon the level of municipal services provided by Lafayette to its citizens; 
(h)  Without a program encouraging the construction of dwelling units that are affordable to lower income households, it is unlikely, based upon current trends, that developers will provide such housing on their own initiative, leaving Lafayette citizens without sufficient affordable priced housing; and 
(i)  Section 6.10 of the Charter of the City of Lafayette, providing a limited exception to the number of residential building permits that may be issued in Lafayette, contemplates that city council may establish a program to encourage the provision of affordable housing within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-47, § 1, 1-3-12) 
Sec. 28-6. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to: 
(a)  Provide standards and a process to carry out those provisions of section 6.10 of the Charter of the City of Lafayette pertaining to affordable dwelling units under the residential growth management program. 
(b)  Maintain a balanced community that provides housing for households of lower income levels. 
(c)  Retain and expand opportunities for people that work in the city to also live in the city and, thereby, to promote the economic well-being of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-47, § 1, 1-3-12) 
Sec. 28-7. - Definitions. 
    Words and phrases that are used but not defined in this article shall have the meanings given to them in the community housing guidelines. The following words and phrases, as used in this article, have the following meanings: 
    Affordable housing units means dwelling units for which the anticipated rent or purchase price is structured so that the targeted tenant or purchaser population pays no more than thirty (30) percent of their gross household income for rent, or mortgage payments, and utilities. The targeted population referenced in this definition includes households earning not more than one hundred twenty (120) percent of the HUD area median income for the Boulder/Longmont Area, and shall include "Permanently Affordable Dwelling Units" as that is term is defined in section 6.10 of the City of Lafayette Home Rule Charter. 
    Charter affordable housing units means dwelling units that are constructed under building permits that are available from time to time under section 6.10 of the Charter of the City of Lafayette for "permanently affordable dwelling unit[s]," and that are sold, resold and/or rented only in accordance with the standards and under the procedures set forth in the community housing guidelines, and which dwelling units are permanently deed restricted or encumbered in perpetuity by a real covenant or other legal restriction to ensure that the units shall be priced and sold and/or rented to be affordable at the time of the initial and each subsequent sale or rental to a household earning not more than the eighty (80) percent HUD area median income, except that, at each sale after the initial sale, the units may be sold for a price that is the lesser of (a) the purchase price paid by the then owner, plus an allowance for eligible rehabilitation/expansion expenses as provided in the community housing guidelines, plus three (3) percent per annum simple interest on that sales price and eligible rehabilitation/expansion expenses, and (b) the purchase price paid by the then owner, plus an allowance for eligible rehabilitation/eligible expansion expenses as provided in the community housing guidelines, plus a percentage per annum of simple interest on that price and eligible rehabilitation/expansion expenses that is equal, on an annual basis, to the percentage increase in the CPI for each year in which the determination is made. 
    Community housing guidelines means that certain document titled "City of Lafayette Community Housing Guidelines," initially dated June 3, 2003, and as subsequently amended, which document has been approved and adopted by the city council, and which document may be further amended from time to time by the city council or by the city administrator in accordance with its terms and the terms of this article. 
    CPI or consumer price index means the Consumer Price Index, U.S. City Average and Regions, Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W), All Items, as published from time to time by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor. 
    Dwelling unit means a structure, or portion of a structure designed for occupancy as a residence for a single-family or a single housekeeping unit. 
    Eligible household means a household: 
(a)  That has complied with the procedures set forth in the community housing guidelines for a determination of eligibility for purchase of a charter affordable housing unit and that has received a certificate of eligibility pursuant to said guidelines; and 
(b)  The income of which qualifies the household to purchase a charter affordable housing unit according to the standards set forth in the community housing guidelines; and 
(c)  Whose financial assets qualify the household to purchase a charter affordable housing unit according to the standards set forth in the community housing guidelines. 
    Household means one (1) or more persons who intend to live together in the premises of a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit, but does not mean a group of four (4) or more persons unrelated by blood, adoption or marriage. 
    HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
    HUD AMI or HUD area median income means the median annual income for the Boulder/Longmont Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, as adjusted for household size, and is calculated and published annually by HUD. 
    Program administrator means the administrator of the City of Lafayette or his designee. 
    Residential development means the construction or provision of one (1) or more structures containing one (1) or more new dwelling units. 
    Set-aside inclusionary zoning developments means those residential developments that actually contributed to the inventory of affordable housing units in Lafayette by reason of the requirement to set aside, develop, construct and make available for sale to third parties either "permanently affordable housing units" or "market rate affordable housing units," pursuant to City of Lafayette Ordinance No. 14, Series 2003, as amended, prior to the repeal of such requirement by the enactment of Ordinance No. 47, Series 2011, on January 3, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 2011-47, § 1, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 2015-41, § 2, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 28-8. - Charter affordable housing standards. 
    Charter affordable housing units shall: 
(a)  Be permanently deed restricted or encumbered in perpetuity by a real covenant or other legal restriction that ensures that the units shall be sold, at the time of the initial and each subsequent sale, and/or rented, if a rental property, to a household earning not more than eighty (80) percent of the HUD area median income for the Boulder/Longmont area, provided, however, that at each sale after the initial sale of a permanently affordable housing unit, the unit may be sold for a price that is the lesser of (i) the purchase price paid by the then owner, plus an allowance for eligible rehabilitation/expansion expenses, as provided in the community housing guidelines, plus three (3) percent per annum simple interest on that price and eligible rehabilitation/expansion expenses, and (ii) the purchase price paid by the then owner, plus an allowance for eligible rehabilitation/expansion expenses, as provided in the community housing guidelines, plus a percentage per annum of simple interest on that price and eligible rehabilitation/expansion expenses that is equal, on an annual basis, to the percentage increase in the CPI for each year in which the determination is made. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, be created, sold and resold, or rented, only to eligible households and only in accordance with the standards and procedures, and at or below the maximum sales prices for charter affordable housing units, that are set forth from time to time in the community housing guidelines. 
(c)  In accordance with requirements and subject to the exceptions set forth in the community housing guidelines, and be occupied as the primary residence of the households to which such units are sold and resold, or rented. 
(Ord. No. 2011-47, § 1, 1-3-12) 
Sec. 28-9. - Community housing guidelines. 
    The city council hereby adopts the community housing guidelines and authorizes the city administrator to amend said guidelines in the manner and to the extent provided therein and to recommend to the city council, from time to time, other amendments to said guidelines to ensure that they include such standards and/or procedures as may be necessary or convenient to effectuate the purposes and requirements of this article, including, but not limited to, standards and/or procedures for: 
(a)  The determination of eligible households, including, but not limited to, the establishment of maximum income and asset levels that will allow a household to purchase a charter affordable housing unit; 
(b)  The establishment of a fair and equitable preference system, which may but need not include a lottery system, to establish preferences for the purchasers of charter affordable housing units based upon the existence and/or duration of a household's residency within the City of Lafayette, and/or the existence and/or duration of a household's employment within the City of Lafayette, and/or the intention of the household with respect to residency within a charter affordable housing unit, and/or the graduation of a member of the household from a high school located within the City of Lafayette; 
(c)  The placement of permanent deed restrictions or perpetual real covenants or other legal restrictions that ensure that dwelling units shall remain as charter affordable housing units, as the case may be, including, but not limited to, the preparation of standard forms of deed restrictions, real covenants or other legal restrictions to be used; 
(d)  The determination, and amendment from time to time, of pricing levels to be established as the maximum initial sale prices of charter affordable housing units, which pricing levels shall be based, among other considerations, upon area median income levels set forth by HUD, the conclusion that when the aggregate cost of mortgage loan principal and interest, property taxes, homeowners insurance and homeowners association fees exceed thirty (30) percent of a household's gross income that the housing is not affordable, the household income, household size, dwelling unit type, number of bedrooms and all other matters addressed in the community housing guidelines under the heading "Sales Price Methodology;" 
(e)  The minimum square footage of charter affordable housing units to assure the reasonable livability of such units; 
(f)  The review and approval of a community housing plan that shall be submitted by an applicant to demonstrate how it intends to comply with the requirements of this article and the community housing guidelines. The submission of a community housing plan shall include payment of a review fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council; 
(g)  An incentive program that may, upon a determination made by the city council pursuant to certain criteria, provide incentives for the development of charter affordable housing that is above and beyond the nature or extent of charter affordable housing that is to be created pursuant to the requirements of this article and/or the community housing guidelines; 
(h)  The payment to the city and/or its designated program administrator, of fees in an amount set by resolution of city council to cover costs incurred by the city and/or its program administrator, in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the community housing guidelines; 
(i)  The limitation of homeowners' association dues and assessments that may be applied to a charter affordable housing unit; 
(j)  The marketing and sale of charter affordable housing units. 
(Ord. No. 2011-47, § 1, 1-3-12) 
Sec. 28-10. - Affordable housing development fee. 
(a)  No person engaged in residential development in the city shall fail to pay an affordable housing development fee as provided herein. Such fees shall be assessed and collected before the issuance of a building permit for any new structure that includes one (1) or more dwelling units. The affordable housing development fee shall be assessed at the rate of sixty cents ($0.60) per square foot of interior floor area of the structure, including unfinished areas, garages, accessory structures, and interior common areas in multi-unit structures. In mixed use structures, the fee shall be calculated on the basis of the square footage directly devoted to residential use, with common areas that are used for both commercial and residential uses being assessed such fee in the same proportion as the ratio of residential use to commercial use for the entire structure. 
(b)  The following are excluded from the requirement to pay the affordable housing development fee pursuant to this section: 
(1)  Set-aside inclusionary zoning developments, as defined in this article. 
(2)  Those portions of new residential development structures that meet the definition of "permanently affordable dwelling units," as that term is defined in section 6.10 of the City of Lafayette Home Rule Charter. 
(3)  Dwelling units that replace a dwelling unit that is in existence as of January 1, 2016, and, therefore, does not increase the total number of dwelling units within the City of Lafayette, provided that such new dwelling unit is located on the same lot as the existing dwelling unit. 
(c)  The fees collected pursuant to this article are to be used to fund the purchase, development of, or otherwise provide for new affordable housing units in the City of Lafayette in accordance with section 28-11 below. The fee is not intended to, nor may it be used for the general costs of government. 
(d)  The affordable housing development fee assessed by this article applies regardless of the value of the property developed. 
(e)  The city council intends and specifically finds that the affordable housing development fee assessed by this section is generally applicable to broad classes of residential property; the above fees reflect the reasonable impacts of proposed residential development on the availability of affordable housing; and these charges are set a level no greater than necessary to defray the impacts directly related to new development. 
(Ord. No. 2015-41, § 3, 12-1-15; Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 2-20-18) 
Sec. 28-11. - Affordable housing trust fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created an interest bearing housing trust fund within the city's budget for the purpose of receiving affordable housing development fees from residential developers. All affordable housing development fees paid pursuant to this article shall be deposited in this fund. No money shall be expended from the affordable housing trust fund unless the expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved by city council. 
(b)  Money deposited in a housing trust fund may be used for any activity approved by the city council to defray the cost of affordable housing programs in Lafayette that will increase or perpetuate the stock of for-purchase or rental housing available to lower and moderate income households. Such activities may include, but are not necessarily limited to, housing rehabilitation; new construction; regional contribution agreements; the purchase of land for affordable housing projects; assistance designed to render units to be more affordable to low and moderate income people; and administrative costs necessary to administer such affordable housing program. 
(Ord. No. 2015-41, § 4, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 28-12. - No taking of property without just compensation. 
    It is the intention of the city in adopting this article that the application of this article and/or the community housing guidelines not result in an unlawful taking of property without just compensation. Any applicant subject to the requirements of this article who believes that the application of this article and/or the community housing guidelines to his property would affect such an unlawful taking may request a hearing before the city council within which to seek relief from the provisions of this article and/or the community housing guidelines. At such hearing, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish that compliance with one (1) or more provisions of this article and/or the community housing guidelines would affect an unconstitutional taking of his property without just compensation pursuant to the applicable law of the United States or the State of Colorado. If it is determined by the city council at the conclusion of said hearing that compliance with one (1) or more provisions of this article and/or community housing guidelines would affect such an unconstitutional taking, then the city council shall adjust, alter, lessen or waive such provision or provisions, as applied to the particular project, to such extent as may be necessary to avoid such unconstitutional taking. 
(Ord. No. 2015-41, § 4, 12-1-15) 
Secs. 28-13-28-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 7 of Ord. No. 2011-33, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, recodified Ch. 50, Art. III, as Ch. 28, Art. III, and renumbered §§ 50-20-50-29 as §§ 28-20-28-29. Section 8 of said ordinance further provided for the addition of reserved §§ 28-13-28-19. 

Sec. 28-20. - Cultural arts commission established. 
(a)  Established. There shall be and is hereby established a cultural arts commission which shall have the principal responsibility of serving as an advisory board to the city council with regard to cultivating the arts and cultural components of the community. 
(b)  Membership. The commission shall consist of seven (7) citizens of Lafayette, who shall be appointed by the city council. A city employee appointed by the city administrator shall serve as a nonvoting staff liaison to the commission. 
(c)  Term. All appointments to the commission shall be for a period of three (3) years. The commission may recruit and recommend nominees to city council for appointment. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by city council appointment as soon as possible. A member of the commission shall not receive a salary or other compensation for services as a member of the commission, but necessary traveling and subsistence expenses actually incurred may be paid from the general fund. City council may, upon recommendation of the commission, appoint up to two (2) alternate members, which member(s) shall be called upon to serve and vote in the absence of a regular member(s), and the commission may recommend any alternate member for appointment by council to a vacant position. Commission members serve at the pleasure of city council. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The commission shall: 
(1)  Adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for its guidance and government. 
(2)  Prepare and submit to the city council a plan for the development and furtherance of cultural art in the community and as necessary amend the plan. 
(3)  Review the annual cultural arts budget request. 
(4)  Advise city council on the use of city funds to support and encourage cultural arts activities within the city. 
(5)  Monitor gifts of money which shall be segregated in the accounting records of the city or property or endowments as may be granted to and accepted for cultural arts purposes and to encourage grants and gifts in support of the cultural arts. 
(6)  Do all other necessary acts to assist in the orderly and efficient management of cultural arts activities as directed by the city council. 
(7)  Review the qualifications of all final candidates for key positions pertaining to the cultural arts commission. The commission shall have no authority over any decisions or policies involving city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7, 2-1-11; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 7, 9-20-11) 
Secs. 28-21-28-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC ART[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 9 of Ord. No. 2011-33, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, recodified Ch. 50, Art. IV, as Ch. 28, Art. IV, and renumbered §§ 50-30-50-36 as §§ 28-30-28-36. Section 8 of said ordinance further provided for the addition of reserved §§ 28-13-28-19. 

Sec. 28-30. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
    Artwork includes, but is not limited to, a sculpture, monument, mural, fresco, relief, painting, fountain, banner, mosaic, ceramic, weaving, carving and stained glass, but does not include landscaping, architectural ornamentation or signs. 
    Building means a structure without reference to use or occupancy for which a building permit is required by the ordinances of the city. 
    Construction cost means the budgeted cost of any construction project, including any contingency reserve, but excluding land acquisition costs, engineering and administrative costs, costs of fees and permits, interest during construction, advertising and legal fees. 
    Construction project means the construction, rehabilitation, renovation, or remodeling of any public building, park or other public improvement within the city limits by the city or any of its agents or contractors, including without limitation all associated landscaping, parking areas and similar areas or facilities, excluding all street improvement, water, water reclamation, and stormwater utility projects, whether related to maintenance or new construction. 
    Contractor means any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, or corporation, required to obtain a building permit pursuant to the ordinances of the city. 
    Dwelling unit or unit means a structure or a portion of a structure designed for occupancy as a residence by a single-family. 
    Lafayette Cultural Arts Commission means the cultural arts commission created pursuant to section 28-20 of this Code. 
    Public art means any tangible artwork displayed for two (2) weeks or more in an outdoor city-owned area, on the interior or exterior of any city-owned facility, or on non-city property if the work of art is installed or financed, either wholly or in part with city funds or grants procured by the city. 
    Reserve account means the public art reserve account established for administering, acquiring and maintaining works of art for the city's public art program. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 9, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2017-23, § 1, 6-19-17; Ord. No. 37-2017, § 2, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 28-31. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide a means to fund the acquisition of artwork for display in public places, to establish a public art committee of the Lafayette Cultural Arts Commission, to review proposals and make recommendations to the city council regarding the selection and display of artwork and to be responsible for the administration, management, maintenance and repair of artwork for the city's public art program, and to set forth guidelines for the public art committee to follow in performing its duties. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 9, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 28-32. - Goals. 
    The principal goals of the public art program are: 
(a)  To enrich the public environment for both residents and visitors to the area through incorporation of the visual arts; 
(b)  To increase public access to works of art and to promote understanding and awareness of the arts in the public environment; 
(c)  To encourage private sector investment in public art; and 
(d)  To contribute to the civic pride of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 9, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 28-33. - Funds for artwork; reserve account established. 
(a)  Commencing with those construction projects included in the city's appropriation and budget process for 2001, for construction thereafter, the city shall cause an amount equal to one (1) percent of the construction costs of each construction project with total costs of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more to be deposited in the city's public art reserve account and used in furtherance of the city's public art program. In years when no such construction projects are budgeted, the city shall deposit a minimum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in the public art reserve account. 
(b)  There is hereby established a reserve account, to be known as the "public art reserve account." The funds set aside from construction projects for public art pursuant to subsection (a) above shall be deposited in the public art reserve account, along with all other funds for public art, whether earned, contributed, secured through grants or otherwise obtained by the city. 
(c)  If any construction project is funded in whole or in part from any source that precludes artwork as an object of expenditure of funds, then this section shall apply only to the amount of funds not so restricted, if any. 
(d)  The city shall encourage and support the utilization of other sources of funding, including, but not limited to, grants, endowments, individual donations, and public-private partnerships, for the procurement of public art. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 9, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 28-34. - Public art fee-Public art in lieu of fee. 
(a)  A "public art fee" shall be assessed and collected on construction of all new buildings and all additions to buildings, except to additions to existing dwelling units, and except construction projects as defined in section 28-30 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lafayette, for the purpose of funding new acquisition and display of artwork in public places as provided in article IV of this chapter. Any contractor applying for a building permit in accordance with the applicable ordinances and codes of the city shall, as a condition of obtaining such building permit, pay to the city a public art fee in an amount to be established by resolution by city council, which payment shall be made at the time of issuance of the building permit or at a later time pursuant to article XIV of this chapter. Any public art fee, whether assessed upon square footage, or the number of dwelling units, shall be based upon incremental square footage/dwelling units with respect to remodels, additions and replaced buildings. Under no circumstances shall the city be required to pay a refund of previously paid public arts fees. 
(b)  The fee collected pursuant to this section shall be placed in the public arts reserve account established pursuant to section 28-33 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances and shall be spent pursuant to the terms of article IV of this chapter of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Any party who may be liable for payment of a public arts fee pursuant to this section may propose to provide a public art project in lieu of paying the public art fee. Any such proposal shall have a monetary cost that equals, or exceeds, the public art fee that would otherwise be imposed, and shall be evaluated pursuant to the process established by section 28-36 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances, except that the acceptance of such proposal shall be subject to specific approval by city council, following recommendation from the public art committee. Any accepted proposal shall be documented by an appropriate development agreement, or other agreement between the city and the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 9, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2017-37, § 1, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 28-35. - Public art committee established. 
(a)  Established. There shall be and is hereby established a subcommittee of the Lafayette Cultural Arts Commission to be known as the "public art committee," which shall have the principal responsibility of serving as an advisory board to the city council with regard to the city's public art program. 
(b)  Membership. The public art committee shall consist of six (6) citizens of Lafayette, who shall be appointed by the city council upon recommendations from the existing public art committee, and one (1) liaison from the cultural arts commission. A staff liaison appointed by the city administrator shall serve as a nonvoting member of the public art committee. 
(c)  Term. All appointments to the public art committee shall be for a period of three (3) years, excepting the liaison from the cultural arts commission. No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms and the members of the existing committee shall retain their appointment until the expiration of their current respective term or their resignation or removal. The liaison from the cultural arts commission shall be appointed for a period of one (1) year. Vacancies on the committee shall be filled as soon as possible in the manner in which members are regularly appointed; however, such appointments shall be for a full term. Council may, upon recommendation of the committee, appoint alternate members. Committee members serve at the pleasure of the city council. A member of the public art committee shall not receive a salary or other compensation for services as a public art committee member, but necessary traveling and subsistence expenses actually incurred may be paid from the general fund of the city. 
(d)  Organization, powers and duties. The powers of the public art committee shall be advisory only and the committee shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for its guidance and government. 
(2)  Adopt criteria for review of artwork proposals and site selection for the city's public art program, that are in addition to and consistent with the criteria set forth in this article. 
(3)  Review proposals for artwork for the city's public art program and recommend approval or disapproval by the city council of such proposals. 
(4)  Consider potential sites, review site proposals, and recommend to the city council for approval appropriate site selections for the placement and display of artwork for the city's public art program. 
(5)  Advise city council on matters related to public art. 
(6)  Advise on the use of the expenditure of monies in the public art reserve account. 
(7)  Pursue financial assistance for public art related programs. 
(8)  Prepare and submit to the city council a plan for the development and maintenance of public art and as necessary amend the plan. 
(9)  Review the annual public art program budget request. 
(10)  Adopt policies that provide for the orderly operation of the public art program. Such policies shall be effective upon adoption or at the time specified in the policy, unless and until city council disapproves of the policy. The committee shall promptly submit adopted policy to city council for its review. 
(11)  Review the qualifications of all final candidates for the staff position directly administering the public art program. The committee shall have no authority over any decisions or policies involving city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2007-38, § 6, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 9, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 28-36. - Artwork and site selection. 
(a)  A proposal for public art may be made to the public art committee by any organization, club or business, any city official or employee, or any individual member of the public, by filing an application with the city administrator to be forwarded by the city administrator to the public art committee for review. 
(b)  The public art committee shall consider all of the following factors when reviewing a proposed artwork for the city's public art program: 
(1)  Compatibility of the design with the immediate environment of the site. 
(2)  Appropriateness of the design to the function of the site. 
(3)  Preservation and integration of natural features for the project. 
(4)  Appropriateness of the materials and design (texture, color, line, shape and value) to the expression of the artist's concept. 
(5)  Permanence of structural and surface components. 
(6)  Extent to which the work reflects the diverse influences that make the city unique. 
(c)  The public art committee shall consider all of the following factors when reviewing a proposed site for placement of artwork for the city's public art program: 
(1)  Relationship of the site to the artwork in terms of the physical dimensions, social dynamic, local character and surrounding context of the site, existing or planned. 
(2)  Public safety. 
(3)  Extent to which the site helps to improve the design of an area by emphasizing a particular location through landmarks, gateways and/or linkages to other parts of the community. 
(4)  Vehicular and pedestrian traffic patterns. 
(5)  Site design including landscaping, drainage, grading, lighting and seating considerations. 
(6)  Relationship of the proposed artwork to existing artworks within the vicinity of the site. 
(7)  Environmental impact such as noise, sound, light and odor. 
(8)  Public accessibility to the artwork. 
(9)  Impact on adjacent property owners' view. 
(10)  Impact on operational functions of the city. 
(11)  Potential for vandalism. 
(12)  Cost of development. 
(13)  Compatibility of the design and location with the historical character of the site. 
(d)  The public art committee shall review each artwork or site proposal for conformance with the criteria set forth in subsections (b) and (c) above and for conformance with the purposes of this article. Within thirty (30) days after the date of the meeting at which the proposal is first reviewed by the public art committee, the public art committee shall either approve or disapprove the proposal and if approved, shall refer the proposal with a copy of its report and recommendation to the city council. The public art committee shall also notify the city council immediately of any decision disapproving an artwork or site proposal. 
(e)  Any decision of the public art committee referred to the city council for approval pursuant to subsection (d) above shall be deemed accepted by the city council if the city council does not overrule such decision by majority vote within thirty (30) days after the date of such referral. 
(f)  When a public art proposal has been approved by the city council as provided in this article the city administrator shall promptly notify the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 9, 9-20-11) 
Secs. 28-37-28-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ONE LAFAYETTE FUND 

Sec. 28-50. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
    Qualified beneficiary shall mean an entity that meets the following qualifications: 
(1)  Certified as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization; 
(2)  Provides services to Lafayette residents; 
(3)  Provides the city with a current list of board of directors, active volunteers and key officers; and 
(4)  Provides the city with a copy of its financial statement for the most recently completed fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2011-38, § 1, 10-18-11) 
Sec. 28-51. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide a means to support the work of nonprofit organizations that serve the city and the needs of its residents; to establish the One Lafayette Legacy Fund and the Annual Disbursement Fund and the guidelines for disbursements from those funds; to establish the One Lafayette Advisory Committee; and to set forth guidelines for the One Lafayette Advisory Committee to follow in performing its duties. 
(Ord. No. 2011-38, § 1, 10-18-11; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 1, 10-15-13) 
Sec. 28-52. - Goals. 
    The principal goals of the One Lafayette Fund program are: 
(a)  To improve the quality of life for Lafayette residents by providing both short- and long-term means for supporting nonprofit charitable organizations that provide valuable community services to the Lafayette community; 
(b)  To raise and disseminate funds to support the activities of nonprofit charitable organizations serving and benefitting the Lafayette community; and 
(c)  To encourage public and private investment in nonprofit charitable organizations that provide valuable community services to the Lafayette community. 
(Ord. No. 2011-38, § 1, 10-18-11) 
Sec. 28-53. - One Lafayette Legacy Fund established. 
(a)  Creation. There shall be and is hereby established the One Lafayette Legacy Fund. 
(b)  Administration of fund. The One Lafayette Legacy Fund shall be owned and administered by the city. Alternatively, the fund shall be owned and administered as an agency endowment fund by a nonprofit organization qualified to receive, administer and disburse funds for public, charitable, education, scientific, literacy, or benevolent uses or purposes within the State of Colorado, and pursuant to an endowment agreement approved by city council. 
(c)  Annual contribution to fund by city. The city's proposed annual budget shall include a contribution of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to the One Lafayette Legacy Fund, which shall be subject to appropriation by city council. Such appropriation and contribution shall continue until the One Lafayette Legacy Fund reaches a balance of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). Annual appropriations and contributions by the city to the One Lafayette Legacy Fund after the balance of the fund has exceeded five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) shall be at the discretion of city council. 
(d)  Contributions to fund by others. Contributions to the One Lafayette Legacy Fund by persons or entities other than the city shall be combined with all other contributions in the fund. Such contributions shall become the sole property of the owner and administrator of the fund designated pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, and shall be disbursed in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Disbursements from fund. Annual disbursements of the net income from the One Lafayette Legacy Fund shall be reinvested in the fund, or shall be distributed to the city, or to a qualified beneficiary, upon recommendation by the two (2) council members on the One Lafayette Advisory Committee and approval by city council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-38, § 1, 10-18-11; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 2, 10-15-13) 
Sec. 28-54. - Annual Disbursement Fund established. 
(a)  Creation. There shall be and is hereby established the Annual Disbursement Fund. 
(b)  Administration of fund. The Annual Disbursement Fund shall be owned and administered by the city. 
(c)  Annual contribution to fund by city. The city's proposed annual budget shall include a contribution to the Annual Disbursement Fund, which shall be subject to appropriation by city council. Such appropriation may include funds disbursed to the city from the One Lafayette Legacy Fund. 
(d)  Disbursements from fund. The two (2) council members on the One Lafayette Advisory Committee shall make recommendations to city council regarding annual disbursements to qualified beneficiaries from the Annual Disbursement Fund. Disbursements shall be made upon approval by city council, and city council may disburse all or a portion of the funds available in the Annual Disbursement Fund during each fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2011-38, § 1, 10-18-11; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 3, 10-15-13) 
Sec. 28-55. - One Lafayette Advisory Committee established. 
(a)  Established. There shall be and is hereby established the One Lafayette Advisory Committee, which shall have the principal responsibility of serving as an advisory board to the city council with regard to fundraising for the One Lafayette Legacy Fund and Annual Disbursement Fund. 
(b)  Membership. The One Lafayette Advisory Committee shall consist of two (2) city council members, and three (3) citizens of Lafayette, who shall be appointed by the city council. A staff liaison appointed by the city administrator shall serve as a nonvoting member of the One Lafayette Advisory Committee. 
(c)  Term. All appointments to the committee shall be for a period of three (3) years. The committee may recruit and recommend nominees to city council for appointment. Vacancies on the committee shall be filled for the unexpired term by city council appointment as soon as possible. A member of the committee shall not receive a salary or other compensation for services as a committee member. City council may, upon recommendation of the committee, appoint up to two (2) alternate members, which member(s) shall be called upon to serve and vote in the absence of a regular member(s), and the committee may recommend any alternate member for appointment by council to a vacant position. Committee members serve at the pleasure of city council. For those members of the committee appointed on or after October 1, 2011, the city council shall determine who shall initially have a three-year, two-year and/or one-year term, to maintain staggered terms as required herein. 
(d)  Organization, powers and duties. The powers of the One Lafayette Advisory Committee shall be advisory only and the committee shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Adopt bylaws, rules, regulations, and meeting times for its guidance and government. 
(2)  Advise city council on matters related to supporting the activities of nonprofit charitable organizations that benefit the Lafayette community. 
(3)  Pursue financial contributions and fundraising to support the One Lafayette Legacy Fund and Annual Disbursement Fund. 
(Ord. No. 2011-38, § 1, 10-18-11; Ord. No. 2013-26, § 4, 10-15-13) 
Chapter 30 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 912, §§ 1-16, adopted May 19, 1981, enacted provisions relative to a growth management program and allocation of building permits. Inasmuch as § 16 thereof provides that the ordinance will sunset on June 30, 1983, unless extended, Ord. No. 912 has not been set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. It should further be noted that Ord. No. 978, § 1, adopted June 7, 1983, extended the sunsetting of such provisions to September 2, 1983. See Art. XI and the editor's footnote thereto. 
Charter reference- Enactment of codes by reference, § 7.6. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 45; libraries, Ch. 50; mobile homes, Ch. 60; solid waste, Ch. 100; zoning, App. A; maximum height of buildings, App. A, § 42; flood control, App. C. 
State Law reference- Municipal building regulations, C. R. S. § 31-15-601. 

ARTICLE I. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 2017-37, adopted Sept. 19, 2017, changed the title of art. I from In General to "Development Impact Fees"; and repealed and reenacted §§ 30-1-30-9 in their entirety to read as herein set out. Said §§ 30-1-30-9 pertained to various provisions relating to building and building regulations, and derived from Ord. No. 620, adopted Mar. 5, 1974; Ord. No. 839, adopted June 5, 1979; Ord. No. 884, adopted Aug. 19, 1980; Ord. No. 885, adopted Aug. 18, 1980; Ord. No. 913, adopted May 19, 1981; Ord. No. 916, adopted July 21, 1981; Ord. No. 957, adopted Oct. 5, 1982; Ord. No. 994, adopted Sept. 20, 1983; Ord. No. 1984-30, adopted Sept. 18, 1984; Ord. No. 1986-35, adopted Oct. 7, 1986; Ord. No. 1989-50, adopted Oct. 3, 1989; Ord. No. 1990-17, adopted Aug. 21, 1990; Ord. No. 1994-21, adopted Aug. 2, 1994; Ord. No. 2005-10, adopted Mar. 1, 2005; and Ord. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007. 

Sec. 30-1. - Intent. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to ensure that new development bears the proportionate share of the costs of the city's municipal capital facilities, and parks and recreation capital facilities. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article that the impact fees imposed upon new development are no greater than necessary to defray the impacts directly related to new development (i.e., the costs of city municipal capital facilities and parks and recreation capital facilities), as are necessary to accommodate new development. 
(c)  It is not the intent of this article that the impact fees be used to remedy any existing deficiency in municipal capital facilities or parks and recreation capital facilities. 
(d)  It is not the intent of this chapter that any monies collected from any impact fee deposited in an impact fee trust fund account ever be comingled with monies from a different trust account, or ever be used for capital facilities that are different from that, for which, the fee was paid, or ever be used to replace or rehabilitate existing city municipal capital facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37, § 3, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 30-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Building means any structure without reference to use or occupancy for which a building permit is required for ordinances of the city. 
    Building official means the officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the uniform building code adopted by the city or his regularly authorized deputy. 
    Capital facility means any improvement or facility that: 
(1)  Is directly related to any service that the city is authorized to provide and has an estimated useful life of five (5) years or longer. 
(2)  Firefighting apparatus and ambulances shall qualify as "capital facility" for the purposes of this chapter. 
    City means the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    City road system means all collector and arterial roads within the city that are included within the "city street system" as defined by Colorado statute. 
    Contractor means any person, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other entity required to obtain a building permit pursuant to the ordinances of the city. 
    Development means any construction or expansion of a building or structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land, which creates an additional demand for municipal capital facilities. 
    Development permit means any final approval of an application for rezoning, a final PUD plan, special review use permit, subdivision, site and architectural plan, building permit or similar application for new development. 
    Floor area means the area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building, or portion thereof, excluding parking garages. 
    Impact fee(s) means the service expansion impact fee and parks and recreation facilities impact fee established by this article. 
    Impact fee trust fund means the trust fund established pursuant to this article that includes a municipal capital facilities account and parks and recreation capital facilities account. The trust fund is also called "the trust fund." 
    Municipal capital facilities means the building improvements for office space at the Lafayette City Hall and other capital facility improvements used to provide general administrative services to the city government, the building improvements to the city's public works yard and facilities, the building improvements for the city's public library, building improvements associated with police and fire facilities, including communications equipment, and transportation capital facilities as defined herein. Municipal capital facilities does not include the cost of vehicles and equipment other than firefighting apparatus and ambulances. 
    Parks and recreation capital facilities means the real property, building improvements and capital facility used to provide parks and recreation services to the citizens of Lafayette, including the recreation center, municipal aquatics park and senior services center, but excluding the golf course. 
    Site-related improvement(s) means those transportation improvements that provide direct access to a development, other than arterial roads and interchanges on the city road system. Direct access improvements include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Driveways and streets leading to and from the development; 
(2)  Right or left turn lanes leading to those driveways and streets; 
(3)  Traffic lights and other traffic control measures for those driveways; and 
(4)  Internal street, traffic lights, and other traffic control measures. 
    The foregoing street improvements include all improvements within the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, all road preparation and surfacing, curb and gutter, medians, entryways, underground utilities, sidewalks, bicycle paths, bridges, street lighting, landscaping and drainage improvements. Credit is not provided for site-related improvements under the terms of this chapter. 
    Transportation capital facilities means the preliminary engineering, engineering design studies, land surveys, alignment studies, engineering, permitting and construction of all necessary features for any road in the city road system, undertaken to accommodate additional traffic (through the provision of additional capacity) resulting from new impact generating development in the city. Transportation capital facilities include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Construction of new through lanes; 
(2)  Construction of new bridges; 
(3)  Construction of new drainage facilities in conjunction with new road construction; 
(4)  Purchase and installation of traffic signals, including new and upgraded signalization; 
(5)  Construction of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, medians, and shoulders, in conjunction with new road construction; 
(6)  Relocating utilities to accommodate new road construction; 
(7)  Construction and reconstruction of intersections; 
(8)  Widening of existing roads; 
(9)  Bus turnouts; 
(10)  Acceleration and deceleration lanes; 
(11)  Interchanges; 
(12)  Traffic control devices; and 
(13)  Bicycle and pedestrian improvements that the city determines are not site related improvements. 
    Transportation capital facilities include all necessary rights of way for the expansion or construction of a road in the city road system. For the purposes of this article, site-related improvements shall not constitute transportation capital facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37, § 3, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 30-3. - Impact fees established. 
(a)  Service expansion impact fee. There is hereby established a "service expansion impact fee," which fee is established as an impact fee pertaining to municipal capital facilities. 
(b)  Parks and recreation facilities impact fee. There is hereby established an impact fee pertaining to parks and recreation capital facilities. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the city from requiring a contractor to construct reasonable capital facilities improvements designed and intended to serve the needs of the contractor's project, whether or not such capital facility improvements are of a type for which credits are available under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37, § 3, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 30-4. - Development impact fees to be imposed. 
(a)  Fee obligation, payment and deposit. 
(1)  Obligation to pay and time of payment. Any contractor applying for a building permit, except those exempted pursuant to this article, shall be obligated to pay impact fees pursuant to the terms of this article. The obligation to pay the impact fees shall run with the land. The amount of the impact fees shall be determined by city council by the adoption of a resolution, and shall be calculated as provided below. 
(2)  Fees promptly deposited into account trust fund. All monies paid by a fee payer pursuant to this article shall be identified as impact fees and shall be promptly deposited into the appropriate impact fee trust account established and described in this article. 
(3)  Extension of previously issued development permit. If the contractor is applying for a development permit issued previously, the impact fee(s) required to be paid shall be the net increase between the impact fees applicable at the time of the current permit extension application, and any impact fees previously paid pursuant to this article, and shall include any impact fees established subsequent to such prior payment. 
(4)  Permit for change in use, expansion, redevelopment, modification. If the contractor is applying for a building permit to allow for the change of use, or for the expansion, redevelopment or modification of an existing development, the impact fees required to be paid shall be based on the net increase in the impact fees for the new use as compared to the previous use and shall include any impact fees established subsequent to such prior payment. 
(b)  Exemption. The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of the impact fee(s). Any claim for exemption shall be made no later than the time when the applicant applies for the first building permit. Any claim for exemption not made at or before that time shall be waived. The city planner director or designee shall be determine the validity for any claim for exemption pursuant to the standards set forth below: 
(1)  Replacing existing residential unit with new unit. Reconstruction, expansion, alteration, or replacement of a previously existing residential unit that does not create any additional residential unit. 
(2)  New impact generating development that creates no greater demand than previous development. New impact generating development that an applicant can demonstrate will create no greater demand over and above that produced by the existing use or development. 
(3)  Building after fire or catastrophe. Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure that was destroyed by a fire or other catastrophe. 
(4)  Accessory structure. Construction of unoccupied accessory structure related to a residential unit. 
(5)  Previous payment of same amount of impact fee. Impact-generating development for which an impact fee was previously paid in an amount that equals or exceeds the impact fee would be required by this chapter. 
(6)  Government. Development by federal government, state of Colorado, or the city. 
(c)  Calculation of amount of impact fee(s). Impact fees shall be established by city council by the adoption of a resolution. Such fees shall be calculated and predicated upon the estimated costs as are necessary to defray the projected impacts caused by the proposed new development on the municipal capital facilities and/or parks and recreation capital facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37, § 3, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 30-5. - Credits. 
(a)  Any contractor applying for a building permit may apply for a credit against impact fees otherwise due, up to but not exceeding the full obligation of the impact fees proposed to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this article, for any contributions, construction, or dedication of land (where appropriate) accepted by the city, for city municipal capital facilities or parks and recreation capital facilities. Credit against service expansion impact fees shall be allowed only for municipal capital facilities that are related to a service expansion fee. A credit against the parks and recreation impact fee shall be allowed only for the provision of parks and recreation capital facilities. 
(b)  Valuation of credits. 
(1)  Land dedication. Credit for land dedication shall be valued at the fair market value of the land established by either by agreement with the city, or by a private appraiser acceptable to the city in an appraisal paid for by the contractor. 
(2)  Construction. Credit for construction of capital facilities shall be valued by the city based upon the completed engineering drawings, specifications, and construction cost estimates submitted by the contractor to the city. The city shall determine the amount of the credit due based upon the information submitted, or, if determined that the information is inaccurate or unreliable, then on alternative or construction costs acceptable to the city planning director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37, § 3, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 30-6. - Impact fee trust fund. 
(a)  Establishment of trust fund and accounts. 
(1)  There is hereby established the impact fee trust fund (hereinafter "trust fund") for the purpose of ensuring the impact fees collected pursuant to this article are designated for the accommodation of capital facilities impacts reasonably attributable to new impact generating development for which the fees are paid. 
(2)  The trust fund shall be divided into two (2) accounts: A service expansion capital improvement account, and a parks and recreation capital improvement account. 
(b)  Deposit and management of accounts and trust fund. 
(1)  The impact fee trust fund and the two (2) accounts shall be maintained as an interest-bearing account and shall be managed in conformance with C.R.S. § 29-1-801, et seq. 
(2)  All impact fees collected by the city pursuant to this article shall be promptly deposited into the appropriate account in the trust fund. 
(3)  Any proceeds in the trust fund accounts not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested in an interest-bearing account. Interest earned on the monies in the accounts shall be considered a part of such an account and shall be subject to the same restrictions on use applicable to the impact fees in such account. 
(4)  Monies in each trust account shall be considered to be spent in the order collected on a first in/first out basis. 
(5)  A record of the trust fund accounts shall be available for public inspection in the city administrator or designee's office during normal business hours. 
(c)  Annual reporting. At least once annually, the finance director shall publish on the city's website, in a clear, concise and user friendly format, information detailing the allocation by dollar amount of each impact fee account collected, the average annual interest rate earned for each account and the total amount of disbursements from each account during the city's most recent fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37, § 3, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 30-7. - Expenditure of impact fees. 
(a)  Service expansion impact fee. The monies collected from the service expansion impact fee shall be used only to acquire and construct municipal capital facilities. 
(b)  Parks and recreation facility impact fee. The monies collected from the parks and recreation facility impact fee shall be used only to acquire and construct parks and recreation capital improvements. 
(c)  No monies shall be spent for periodic or routine maintenance, rehabilitation, or replacement of any capital facilities. 
(d)  No monies shall be spent to remedy existing deficiencies in capital facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37, § 3, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 30-8. - Refund of impact fees paid. 
(a)  Any impact fees collected shall be returned to the contractor paying such fee, or the contractor's successor-in-interest, if the impact fees have not been spent or encumbered within six (6) years from the date of the building permit for which the development was issued, along with interest actually earned on the fees. Fees shall be deemed spent on the basis of the first fee collected shall be the first fee spent. 
(b)  The refund shall be administered by the city's planning director or designee. 
(1)  A refund application shall be submitted within one (1) year following the end of the sixth year from the date on which the building permit was issued. The refund application shall include the following application: 
a.  A copy of the dated receipt issued for payment of the fee. 
b.  A copy of the building permit. 
c.  Evidence that the applicant is the successor-in-interest or the contractor who paid the fee. 
(2)  Within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the refund application, the city's planning director or designee shall determine if it is complete. If it is determined that the application is not complete a written statement specifying the deficiencies shall be forwarded by mail to the person submitting the application. The city's planning director or designee shall take no further action on the refund application until it is deemed complete. 
(c)  When it is determined that the refund application is complete, it shall be reviewed within thirty (30) days and shall be approved if it is determined a fee has been paid which has not been spent within the period of time permitted under this section. The refund shall include the fee paid, plus interest actually earned on the fee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-37, § 3, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 30-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 30-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, repealed § 30-10 in its entirety. Former § 30-10 pertained to the collection and expenditure of the parks and recreation fee and derived from Ord. No. 620, adopted Mar. 5, 1974; Ord. No. 836, adopted June 5, 1979; Ord. No. 913, adopted May 19, 1981, Ord. No. 944, adopted Sept. 20, 1983; Ord. No. 1984-30, adopted Sept. 18, 1984; and Ord. No. 2005-10, adopted Mar. 1, 2005. 
Sec. 30-11. - Engineering inspection fees. 
    Any contractor as defined in section 30-8 applying for a building permit in accordance with the applicable ordinances and codes of the city, for the purpose of a building to be used for residential purposes, shall, as a condition to obtaining such building permit, pay to the city a per unit fee in an amount set by resolution of city council for new residential construction to be used by the city for the inspection by an engineer of capital improvements constructed in conjunction with said building. The payment of said fee may be deferred pursuant to article XIV of this chapter. Where any dwelling unit is razed and subsequently rebuilt, the amount owing for the engineering inspection fee may be discounted in an amount set by resolution of city council for each dwelling unit razed. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 1-3-84; Ord. No. 1984-31, § 1, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 1986-41, § 1, 11-4-86; Ord. No. 1990-17, § 17, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 1994-21, § 3, 8-2-94; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 19, 3-1-05) 
Secs. 30-12-30-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 2017-37, adopted Sept. 19, 2017, recodified §§ 30-12-30-14 to be included in § 28-34. Former §§ 30-12-30-14 pertained to public art fees, and derived from Ord. No. 2005-18, adopted June 7, 2005; and Ord. No. 2011-33, adopted Sept. 20, 2011. 
Secs. 30-15-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTRACTORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations generally, Ch. 55. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-21. - Compliance with article. 
    It shall be unlawful for any contractor licensed under the provisions of this article to violate any provisions of this article or to violate or refuse to obey any order issued under the authority or neglect to pay any fee assessed under the authority of this article. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-22. - Issuance of permits to license holders. 
    On any work requiring a licensed contractor, permits under this chapter shall be issued only to the contractor or to his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-23. - Fraudulent use of license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently use a contractor's license issued to a contractor under this article to obtain permits for another person. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
State Law reference- See generally, offenses involving fraud, C. R. S. Title 18, Article 5; criminal impersonation, C. R. S. § 18-5-113. 
Sec. 30-24. - Safety standards generally. 
(a)  All state laws, provisions of this Code or other city ordinances dealing with measures for the safety of workmen and the public shall be observed by contractors within the city, in addition to any requirements contained within this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a contractor to be careless or negligent in obtaining minimum safety measures, including appliances, apparatus and equipment to protect workmen and the public. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
State Law reference- Industrial and commercial safety, Title 9, C.R.S. 
Sec. 30-25. - Failure to obtain permit or inspection. 
    It shall be unlawful for a contractor to fail to obtain inspection services when the same are required or fail to obtain a permit when the same is required. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-26. - Responsibility for contracted work. 
    A contractor shall be responsible for all work included in his contract, whether or not such work is done by him directly or by a subcontractor. He shall be responsible for all funds or property received by him for prosecution or completion of a specific contract or for a specific purpose. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-27. - Violation of article. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this article. Any person violating any of the provisions of his article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The suspension or revocation of any license, permit or other privilege conferred by the city shall not be deemed a penalty for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Secs. 30-28-30-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-36. - Required generally; classification. 
    Licenses or registrations shall be required for all types of work specified in this division unless otherwise stated and such licenses or registrations shall be classified in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1963, §§ 11B-10, 11B-16, 26-10; Ord. No. 663, § 2, 1-20-76) 
State Law reference- Power of city council to license, regulate and tax occupations and business places, C. R. S. § 31-15-501 
Sec. 30-37. - Approval of certain issuances. 
    No person may be issued a license or registration to engage in the following listed trades, jobs or contractual service as enumerated in this section unless approved by the city administrator or his designated agent: 
(1)  Builder's license, Class A 
(2)  Builder's license, Class B 
(3)  Builder's license, Class C 
(4)  Plumber's license, Class A-master 
(5)  Heating contractor's license 
(6)  Electrical registration 
(7)  Appliance license 
(8)  Gas fitter's license 
(9)  Masonry license 
(10)  Concrete and form license 
(11)  Warm air heating and ventilating license 
(12)  House and building mover's license 
(13)  Wrecker's license 
(14)  Excavating license 
(15)  Special contractor's license 
(16)  Mobil home installer's license 
(17)  Sign contractor's license 
(18)  Satellite dish antenna installer's license. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 3, 1-20-76; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 1, 2-3-87) 
State Law reference- Electricians, C. R. S. § 12-23-100.2 et seq.; plumbers, C. R. S. § 12-58-101 et seq. 
Sec. 30-38. - When examination not required. 
    All persons who have been previously licensed under the provisions of this division by the city to engage in the trades, jobs or contractual services mentioned in section 30-37, shall not be required to be examined, provided however, that all persons must hold a license issued by the state, if required by the state, before engaging in any trade, job or contractual service within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 3, 1-20-76) 
State Law reference- Electricians, C. R. S. § 12-23-100.2 et seq.; plumbers, C. R. S. § 12-58-101 et seq. 
Sec. 30-39. - Supervisors-General policy with respect to licenses. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, all licenses enumerated in this article shall be issued under authority of and in accordance with the terms and provisions of sections 30-39-30-43 and shall be subject to the supervisory clauses contained in those sections. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-40. - Same-Retained by licensees. 
    The respective licensees under this article, whether individuals, firms or corporations, shall not be required to possess those skills and qualifying experience records required for the work they are permitted to do under the terms and provisions of their respective licenses, provided that they retain in their business a supervisor whose skills and qualifying experience record are such that the would be qualified to do all work in his principal's license category. The respective licensees' rights to do business shall be dependent upon the continued retention of the designated supervisors in active, full-time capacity. 
(Code 1963, §§ 11B-16, 26-16; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-41. - Same-When inactive. 
    Whenever a designated supervisor terminates his connection with a licensee or otherwise becomes inactive, the licensee shall immediately notify the building official. In such event the license shall be deemed to be suspended and there shall be a thirty (30) day grace period in order to acquire a proper supervisor before complete termination of the license. Should the supervisor be replaced or should his retention in the business of the licensee be renewed, such fact shall be made known to the building official. If the proposed replacement has been found by the city administrator to meet the qualifications imposed by section 30-40 the license shall again be deemed in full force and effect without imposition of an additional fee for the same calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-42. - Same-Review; designation in application for license. 
    Each individual who is to act as a supervisor under this division shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this division for the work proposed to be done. Each individual who is to act as a supervisor shall be designated as such in each application for a license. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-43. - Same-Working hours. 
    Licensed supervisors under this division must be on the job at all times during working hours. If something is needed for the job, the apprentice should be sent. At no time will an apprentice be on any job without a licensed supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-44. - Application-Contents; receipt and forwarding by building official. 
    Applications for contractor's licenses shall be on such forms and shall furnish such information as the building official may prescribe. The building official shall receive and sign all applications for licenses set out in this section. Upon receiving an application for licensing, the building official shall forward the application to the city administrator for approval. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-45. - Same-Review; standards required for issuance of license. 
    The building official shall review applicants for licenses issued under this division, and the standards to be applied in the conduct of such review shall be the protection of the public health, welfare and public safety of the people of the city, so that those who are recommended to be licensed under this article are financially and morally responsible and qualified in terms of their skills, practical experience and knowledge to contract for or to do the work for which they seek to be licensed. Applicants who are so qualified shall be licensed as provided in this division. 
(Code 1963, §§ 11B-16, 26-16; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-46. - Insurance-Required; amounts. 
    Every contractor granted a license under the terms of this division shall be required to maintain at all times, to cover employee's liability, public liability insurance with minimum limits of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for one person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for any one accident, and property damage insurance with a minimum limit of not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any one accident. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-3, § 2, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-47. - Same-Certificate of agent. 
    At the time application is made and before a license can be issued, the contractor shall file with the Building official a certificate signed by a qualified agent of an insurance company stating that the policy required in this division has been issued to the licensee for employee's liability insurance or workmen's compensation insurance, public liability insurance and public property damage insurance; the minimum limits of each and the policy number; the name of the company, the effective date of such policies and the expiration date of such policies, together with a statement and a copy of an endorsement placed on such policy requiring ten (10) days written notice by registered mail to the building official if it becomes necessary to cancel the policy for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-48. - Same-Cancellation. 
    In the event of a cancellation of a policy of insurance under this division, the licensee shall be required to furnish a new certificate in full compliance with the terms of sections 30-46-30-48 within the ten (10) day period; otherwise, the license shall automatically be revoked. The license shall be reinstated when the licensee has furnished a certificate of insurance in compliance with such sections, unless such license is suspended for reasons other than the failure to file a proper certificate of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-49. - Other requirements prerequisite to issuance. 
    Any licenses or lawful requirements imposed by other provisions of this Code, other ordinances of the city or laws of the state upon an applicant for a contractor's license under this division shall be deemed prerequisites to the issuance of such license. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-50. - Issuance. 
    If, in the opinion of the building official, the applicant for a license required by this division is qualified by training or experience and is financially and morally responsible to fulfill the obligation of a contractor, he shall issue the applicant a license upon payment of the annual fee prescribed in this division. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-51. - Use by other person. 
    No license issued pursuant to this article shall be used for work performed by any person other than the person to whom said license has been issued. 
(Code 1963, §§ 11B-15, 26-15) 
Sec. 30-52. - Term; renewal. 
    A contractor's license issued under the provisions of this division shall have a term of one (1) year commencing on the date of issue and shall expire the last day of the month of issuance of the succeeding year. 
(Code 1963, §§ 11B-13, 26-13; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 3, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-53. - Annual Fees; amount generally. 
    The annual license fee or registration fee applicable to the license or registration required and set forth in this section shall be set by resolution of city council is section shall be as follows: 
Type of License 
Builder's license-Class A 
Builder's license-Class B 
Builder's license-Class C 
Heating contractor's license 
Plumber's license 
Appliance license 
Gas fitter's license 
Masonry license 
Concrete and form license 
Warm air heating and ventilating license 
Mover's license 
Wrecker's license 
Excavating license 
Special contractor's license 
Mobile home installer's license 
Sign contractor's license 
Satellite dish antenna installer's license 
(Code 1963, §§ 11B-12, 26-12; Ord. No. 712, § 1, 2-1-77; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 4, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 1988-13, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 20, 3-1-05) 
Secs. 30-54, 30-55. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1987-03, §§ 5, 6, adopted Feb. 3, 1987, repealed §§ 30-54 and 30-55. Prior to repeal, § 30-54 had set a license fee for licenses purchased after July first of any year, and § 30-55 had set license renewal deadline of Feb. 15, as well as a penalty for late renewal. Such sections were derived from Ord. No. 712, § 1, adopted Feb. 1, 1977. 
Sec. 30-56. - Revocation; suspension. 
(a)  The building official may, upon his own motion, and shall, upon the verified complaint in writing of any person, require any person licensed under this division to appear before the city council for a hearing upon five (5) days written notice, mailed to his last known post office address, or by notice served personally. 
(b)  The city council shall have the power to temporarily suspend or permanently revoke a license if the holder thereof, after a proper hearing, is found guilty of, or commits, one or more of the acts prohibited in this chapter. 
(Code 1963, §§ 11B-18, 26-18; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-57. - Permits-License in good standing required. 
    No permit shall be issued to any contractor who has not first obtained a license as required by this division or who is delinquent in the payment of his annual fee, or whose license has been suspended or revoked by action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-58. - Same-Work determined by license held. 
    Licensed contractors may apply for and be issued permits to do only work as they are entitled to do under their respective licenses. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-59. - Same-Fraudulent applications. 
    Any application for a permit or license filed in derogation of sections 30-57-30-61 shall be deemed to have been filed with fraudulent intent and shall be a nullity. Any permit or license issued on the basis of such fraudulent application shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-60. - Same-When license not required. 
    Any individual who owns and resides in a single-family residence shall not be required to be licensed for any work to that residence performed by the owner/occupant. 
(Code 1963, §§ 11B-11, 26-11; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 7, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-61. - Same-Processing of excepted applications. 
    Applications under the exception clause in section 30-60 shall be processed as are all other applications for permits, and permits shall be issued only in accordance with those portions of the building, electrical, plumbing, gas fitting, warm air heating, boilers and pressure vessels regulations which relate to structural, technical and safety requirements. 
(Code 1963, § 26-11; Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-62. - Licenses nontransferable. 
    Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1963, §§ 11B-14, 26-14) 
Secs. 30-63-30-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDER'S LICENSE 

Sec. 30-71. - Class "A." 
    A builder's license class "A" shall entitle the licensee to contract for and to do the work of building or contracting for, or altering or adding to the structural portions of any building or structure or portion thereof of types I, II, III, IV or V construction in any and all occupancy group classifications where such work requires the issuance of a permit under this Code or other city ordinances. All such work shall be done in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and all other city and state laws governing same. A builder's license class "A" shall entitle the licensee to contract for and do necessary demolition and wrecking work in connection with the work specified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
State Law reference- Building construction requirements, C. R. S. § 9-1-101 et seq. 
Sec. 30-72. - Class "B". 
(a)  A Class "B" builder's license shall entitle the licensee to contract for and to do the work of building or contracting for, or altering or adding to structural portions of buildings or structures or portions thereof of any residential building, and to any commercial building where the gross square footage of the building does not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(b)  A Class "B" builder's license shall entitle the licensee to contract for and to do the necessary demolition and wrecking work in connection with the work specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 8, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-73. - Class "C". 
(a)  A Class "C" builder's license shall entitle the licensee to contract for and to do the work of building or contracting for, or altering or adding to structural portions of buildings or structures or portions thereof of any residential building not larger than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet gross living area. 
(b)  A Class "C" builder's license shall entitle the licensee to contract for and to do the necessary demolition and wrecking work in connection with the work specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 9, 2-3-87) 
Secs. 30-74-30-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLUMBER'S LICENSE 

Sec. 30-81. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases used herein are defined to have the following meaning. 
    Master plumber. A "master plumber" is any person skilled in the planning, superintending and practical installation of plumbing and is familiar with the laws, rules and regulations governing the same, who is engaged in this business as owner or supervisor. 
    Plumbing. "Plumbing" is the installing, alteration and repairing of all pipes, faucets, tanks, valves and other fixtures by and through which supply or waste water or sewage is used or carried, plumbing fixtures and fixture traps and the soil, waste and vent pipes with their devices, appurtenances and connections, through which waste sewage and air are carried within or adjacent to a building or structure. 
(Code 1963, § 26-19) 
Sec. 30-82. - Class "A" master. 
    A plumber's license class "A" master shall entitle the holder thereof to contract for and to install all sanitary plumbing and potable water supply piping for which a permit is required under the provisions of this Code, other city ordinances and state laws governing the same. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
State Law reference- Master plumber's license, C. R. S. § 12-58-105. 
Secs. 30-83-30-85. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1987-03, §§ 10-12, adopted Feb. 3, 1987, repealed §§ 30-83-30-85. Such sections had pertained to master plumber's license, Class B; journeyman plumber's license, Class C; and bond requirements for plumbing contractors. Former §§ 30-83 and 30-84 were derived from Ord. No. 555, § 1, adopted Feb. 20, 1973, and § 30-85 was derived from Ord. No. 385, § 3, adopted June 2, 1964. 
Sec. 30-86. - Employment of plumber's helpers. 
    No more than two (2) unlicensed plumber's helpers may be employed for each licensed master or journeyman license holder, without the prior consent of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Secs. 30-87-30-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - STEAM HEATING LICENSE 

Sec. 30-96. - Class "A." 
    A steam heating license class "A" shall entitle the holder thereof to contract for and to install high and low pressure steam and hot water heating systems, processing pipes and similar commercial hot water and water vapor systems, and heating or steam power systems, where the installation of such requires a permit under the provisions of this Code or other city ordinances governing the same. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-97. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Formerly, § 30-97 had pertained to a Class B steam heating license as derived from Ord. No. 555, § 1, adopted Feb. 20, 1973. Such section was repealed by Ord. No. 1987-03, § 13, adopted Feb. 3, 1987. 
Sec. 30-98. - Employment of unlicensed helpers. 
(a)  No persons who engage in the installation of heating work shall employ unlicensed helpers unless under the direct supervisions of a licensed class "A" license holder. 
(b)  No more than two (2) unlicensed plumber's helpers may be employed for each licensed master or journeyman license holder without the prior consent of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 14, 2-3-87) 
Secs. 30-99-30-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ELECTRICIAN'S LICENSE 

Sec. 30-111. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases used herein are defined to have the following meaning. 
    Electrical contractor. An "electrical contractor" means any person, firm, copartnership, corporation, association or combination thereof that undertakes or offers to undertake for another the planning, laying out, supervising and installing or the making of additions, alterations and repairs in the installation of wiring apparatus and equipment for electric light, heat and power. 
    License, licensed. The term "license" and "licensed" shall be synonymous with the terms "registration" and "registered" throughout this article, and any amendments thereto relative to electricians and/or electrical contractors shall not apply to electrical registrants. 
    Master electrician. A "master electrician" means a person having the necessary qualifications, training, experience and technical knowledge to properly plan, lay out and supervise the installation and repair of wiring apparatus and equipment for electric light, heat and power, and other purposes in accordance with standard rules and regulations, such as the National Electrical Code adopted by this chapter. 
(Code 1963, § 11B-19; Ord. No. 663, § 4, 1-20-76) 
Sec. 30-112. - Class "A" master. 
    An electrical registration class "A" master shall entitle the registrant to contract for or do the work of installing electrical wiring or any electrical apparatus where such installation requires the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this Code or other city ordinances governing the same in any and all group classifications listed in the Uniform Building Code adopted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 4, 1-20-76) 
State Law reference- Master electrician's license, C. R. S. § 12-23-105. 
Secs. 30-113, 30-114. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1987-03, §§ 15, 16, adopted Feb. 3, 1987, repealed §§ 30-113 and 30-114 which pertained to Class B, master and Class C, journeyman electrical registrations. Prior to repeal, such sections had been derived from Ord. No. 663, § 4, adopted Jan. 20, 1976. 
Sec. 30-115. - Unregistered helpers-Employment generally. 
    No persons who engage in the installation of electrical wiring or apparatus shall employ unregistered helpers unless under the direct supervision of a Class "A" registered electrician. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 4, 1-20-76; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 17, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-116. - Same-Number employed. 
    Not more than two (2) unregistered electrician's helpers may be employed per each master or journeyman electrician registration holder without the prior consent of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 4, 1-20-76) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that Ord. No. 1987-03, § 16 adopted Feb. 3, 1987, repealed the Class C journeyman electrical registrant provisions (§ 30-114), and § 17 of such ordinance provides as set forth in § 30-115 with regard to employment and supervision of unregistered helpers. 
Secs. 30-117-30-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MISCELLANEOUS LICENSES AND BONDS 

Sec. 30-126. - Appliance license. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "appliance" shall refer to any appliance whose installation would be subject to the regulations set out in the Uniform Building Code, this chapter and the Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(b)  An appliance license shall entitle the holder thereof to contract for and to install appliances as defined herein where the installation of such requires a permit under this Code or other city ordinances governing the same. 
(c)  Holders of plumbing, electrical, warm air heating, steam heating and gas fitting licenses are not required to hold licenses to install domestic appliances. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-127. - Gas fitter's license. 
(a)  A gas fitter's license shall entitle the individual holder thereof to install all gas piping, fittings, controls, burners and venting on all gas fired, oil fired and liquefied petroleum fired appliances in accordance with the plumbing code and the Uniform Building Code. 
(b)  Holders of Class "A" plumber's licenses, Class "A" steam-heating licenses, or warm-air heating and ventilating licenses, may do the work of a gas fitting license. 
(c)  No person may install gas piping, fitting, controls, burners or venting on gas fired, oil fired and liquefied petroleum fired appliances unless he is specifically licensed as mentioned under this section. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 18, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-128. - Masonry license. 
(a)  A masonry license shall entitle the individual license holder thereof to erect, construct, alter or demolish chimneys, fireplaces, walls, pilasters and other work on a building composed of masonry units in accordance with chapters 24, 28 and 37 of the Uniform Building Code adopted by this chapter. 
(b)  Holders of builder's licenses class "A," "B" or "C" need not have a masonry license to do the work referred to under this section. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-129. - Concrete and form license. 
(a)  A concrete and form license shall entitle the individual holder thereof to contract for and install forms for concrete products and to pour and finish concrete products and to mix concrete products subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  All concrete work shall be done in accordance with the Uniform Building Code adopted by this chapter. 
(2)  All concrete and form work on types I, II, III, IV and V structures of over one thousand (1,000) square feet shall be under the supervision of a holder of a builder's license class "A," "B" or "C." 
(b)  Holders of a class "A," "B" or "C" builder's license need not have a concrete and form license to do the work referred to under this section. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 19, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-130. - Warm air heating and ventilation license. 
    A warm air heating and ventilating license shall entitle the holder thereof to contract for and install warm air heating and ventilation and their appurtenances. All work shall be performed only in accordance with the Uniform Mechanical Code. All electrical work shall be performed by a holder of a Class "A" electrical license. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 20, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-131. - House and building mover's license. 
    The holder of a house and building mover's license shall be permitted to contract for and engage in moving of structures within, into and out of the city limits subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  New structural alterations, additions and foundation work are to be done by the holder of a builder's license class "A," "B" or "C." 
(2)  Plumbing work necessary in the moving and relocating of the structure is to be done by the holder of a Class "A" plumbing license. 
(3)  Electrical work necessary in the moving and relocating of the structure is to be done by the holder of a class "A" electrical license. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 21, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-132. - Wrecker's license. 
    A wrecker's license shall entitle the holder thereof to contract and engage in the demolition of existing structures. All work connected with wrecking and demolishing structures shall be done in accordance with the Uniform Building Code adopted by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 22, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-133. - Excavating license. 
(a)  An excavating license shall entitle the holder thereof to contract for and to do the work of cutting into public rights-of-way and excavating into the public rights-of-way and on private property within the city. The holder of an excavating license shall be subject to the provisions of the section controlling excavations of the Uniform Building Code. 
(b)  The holders of a license under any other section of this chapter shall not be required to hold a license under this section, but shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 23, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-134. - Special contractor's license. 
    A special contractor's license shall entitle the licensee to contract for and to do the work of a particular trade or job connected with the building industry excluding the enumerated licenses in this division. Such special contractor's license shall be limited to the trade or particular kind of work specified in such license and such other work as may be incidental thereto. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 2-20-73) 
Sec. 30-135. - Sign contractor's license. 
    A sign contractor's license shall entitle the licensee to contract for and to do the work of installing signs. The holder of a sign contractor's license shall be subject to the provisions of the sign code of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, and any and all other applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 1987-03, § 24, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-136. - Satellite dish antenna installer's license. 
    A satellite dish antenna installer's license entitles the licensee to contract for and to do the work of installing satellite dish antennas. 
(Ord. No. 1987-03, § 25, 2-3-87) 
Sec. 30-137. - Construction in public rights-of-way easements; bonding. 
(a)  Before any permit required by this article shall be issued to an applicant, the applicant shall file with the public works director a bond or letter of credit in favor of the city in an amount equal to the total cost of construction, including labor and materials, or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is greater. The bond or letter of credit shall be executed by the applicant as principal and by at least one (1) surety upon whom service of process may be had in the state. The bond or letter of credit shall be conditioned upon the applicant fully complying with all provisions of the Code, and its rules and regulations, and upon payment of all judgments and costs rendered against the applicant for any material violation of the Code or state statutes that may be recovered against the applicant by any person for damages arising out of any negligent or wrongful acts of the applicant in the performance of work done pursuant to the permit. The city may bring an action on the bond or letter of credit on its own behalf or on behalf of any person so aggrieved as beneficiary. The bond or letter of credit must be approved by the public works director as to form and as to the responsibility of the surety thereon prior to the issuance of the permit. However, the public works director may waive the requirements of any such bond or letter of credit or may permit the applicant to post a bond without surety thereon upon finding that the applicant has financial stability and assets located in the state to satisfy any claims intended to be protected against the security required by this section. 
(b)  A letter of responsibility will be accepted in lieu of a performance bond or letter of credit from all public utilities and all franchised entities operating within the city. 
(c)  The performance bond, letter of credit or letter of responsibility shall remain in force and effect for a minimum of two (2) years after completion and acceptance of the street cut, excavation or lane closure. The performance bond, letter of credit or letter of responsibility may be required to remain in full force and effect for up to three (3) years upon the public works director's determination that such is necessary given factors which include, but are not limited to, the work's scope, duration and or delays in performance. 
(Ord. No. 1988-03, § 1, 4-5-88; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1, 1-16-18) 
Secs. 30-138-30-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1993-5, adopted Mar. 2, 1993, repealed Art. III in its entirety. Formerly Art. III consisted of §§ 30-146-30-152, which pertained to the building code and derived from §§ 8-1-8-3 of the 1963 Code; §§ 1-3 of Ord. No. 798, adopted Oct. 3, 1978; § 2 of Ord. No. 995, adopted Oct. 4, 1983; § 1 of Ord. No. 1986-02, adopted Feb. 4, 1986; § 1 of Ord. No. 1989-22, adopted April 4, 1989; and §§ 12-15 of Ord. No. 1990-17, adopted Aug. 21, 1990. Section 1 of Ord. No. 1993-5 provided further for the addition of a new Art. III as herein set out. 
Charter reference- Building code, § 4.15. 
Cross reference- Development and zoning code, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Building and fire regulations-emission performance standards required, C. R. S. § 31-15-601. 

Sec. 30-146. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is hereby adopted as the building code of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, by reference thereto, the following: 
(a)  International Building Code 2015 edition, International Residential Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5360 S. Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted codes includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all residential buildings and structures for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 1999-2, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 1, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 1, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 1, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 1, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 1, 12-6-16) 
State Law reference- Ordinance codes adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-201 et seq. 
Sec. 30-147. - Code copies. 
    At least one (1) copy of the residential code previously adopted in section 30-146 have been and are now on file in the office of the building official and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 1999-2, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 2, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 2, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 2, 8-19-08) 
State Law reference- Filing copies of code adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-206. 
Sec. 30-148. - Penalties. 
(a)  The following penalty clause as contained in the International Building Code 2015 edition and International Residential Code, 2015 edition, is hereby set forth in full and adopted: 
    Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(b)  Any violation of the provisions of the International Building Code 2015 edition and International Residential Code, 2015 edition, adopted hereby, by a person who is eighteen (18) years of age or more on the date of said violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations, or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such violation by a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of said violation, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations. Each and every day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1994-6, § 5, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 1996-1, § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 1999-2, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 3, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 3, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 3, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 2, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 2, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 2, 12-6-16) 
State Law reference- Adoption of penalty clauses by reference prohibited, C. R. S. § 31-16-204. 
Sec. 30-149. - Amendments. 
(a)  The International Residential Code, 2015 edition, Section R108.2, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    The building permit fees under the International Building Code shall be set forth pursuant to resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  The International Residential Code, 2015 edition, Section R313 is hereby deleted entirely. 
(c)  The International Residential Code, 2015 edition, Section R302.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    Dwelling units in two-family dwellings be separated by wall and floor assemblies having not less than a 2-hour fire resistance rating where tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263. Fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 4, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 21, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 4, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 4, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 3, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-19, §§ 1, 2, 8-6-13; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 3, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 3, 12-6-16) 
Secs. 30-150-30-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 45. 

Sec. 30-161. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, by reference thereto, the following: 
(a)  The National Electric Code 2017 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein (in) every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes provisions and standards considered necessary for safety that will result in electrical installations, essentially free from hazards, for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 1963, § 11B-2; Ord. No. 404, § 1, 4-19-66; Ord. No. 530, § 1, 3-7-72; Ord. No. 867, § 1, 3-4-80; Ord. No. 910, § 1, 4-21-81; Ord. No. 1989-21, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1993-4, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1999-5, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 5, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 5, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 5, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-41, § 1, 11-15-11; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 1, 4-7-15; Ord. No. 2017-31, § 1, 8-15-17) 
State Law reference- Ordinance codes adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-201 et. seq. 
Sec. 30-162. - Code copies. 
    At least one (1) copy of the electric code previously adopted in section 30-161 has been and is now on file in the office of the building official and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. 
(Code 1963, § 11B-4; Ord. No. 867, § 2, 3-4-80; Ord. No. 910, § 2, 4-21-81; Ord. No. 1989-21, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1993-4, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1999-5, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 6, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 6, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 6, 8-19-08) 
State Law reference- Filing copies of code adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-206. 
Sec. 30-163. - Penalties. 
(a)  The following penalty clause as contained in the National Electric Code 2017 edition, is hereby set forth in full and adopted: 
    Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject penalties as prescribed by law. 
(b)  Any violation of the provisions of the National Electric Code 2017 edition, adopted hereby shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed on thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(Code 1963, § 11B-5; Ord. No. 404, § 3, 4-19-66; Ord. No. 530, § 2, 3-7-72; Ord. No. 867, § 3, 3-4-80; Ord. No. 910, § 3, 4-21-81; Ord. No. 1989-21, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1993-4, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1994-6, § 5, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 1999-5, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 7, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-41, § 2, 11-15-11; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 2, 4-7-15; Ord. No. 2017-31, § 2, 8-15-17) 
State Law reference- Adoption of penalty clause by reference prohibited, C. R. S. § 31-16-204. 
Sec. 30-164. - Inspection fees-Definitions. 
    For the purposes of sections 30-164-30-168, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Building: Any structure without reference to use or occupancy for which a building permit is required by the ordinances and codes of the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    Contractor: Any person, firm, partnership, joint venture or corporation, required to obtain a building permit pursuant to the ordinances and codes of the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    Electrical inspector: The official charged with the administration and enforcement of the National Electric Code as adopted by the City of Lafayette, Colorado, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Floor area: The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, measured from the inside of all exterior walls, excluding parking garages, public hallways and public stairwells. 
(Ord. No. 880, § 1, 7-1-80) 
Sec. 30-165. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 915, § 1, adopted July 7, 1981, amended the Code by repealing § 5 of Ord. No. 880 adopted July 1, 1980. Such section had been designated as § 30-165 and pertained to the creation of an electrical inspection fund. 
Sec. 30-166. - Same-Amount. 
    Inspection and reinspection fees shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 880, § 4, 7-1-80; Ord. No. 1987-03, § 26, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 2003-34, § 1, 9-16-03; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 22, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 30-167. - Same-Time of payment. 
    The electrical inspection fees, as provided by article IV of this chapter shall be due and payable at the time a building permit is issued by the city; however, said electrical inspection fees may be deferred pursuant to article XIV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 880, § 3, 7-1-80; Ord. No. 1990-17, § 16, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 7, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 7, 8-16-05) 
Sec. 30-168. - Same-Application. 
    The electrical inspection fee created in this article shall apply to the construction of all new buildings, all additions and/or substantial alterations or reconstruction of existing buildings and to the construction of mobile home parks. 
(Ord. No. 880, § 2, 7-1-80) 
Secs. 30-169-30-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt plumbing code, C. R. S. § 31-16-202. 

Sec. 30-176. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, by reference thereto, the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted codes includes comprehensive provisions and standards regulating the erection, installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance and use of plumbing systems within the City of Lafayette, Colorado, for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 1963, §§ 26-1, 26-2; Ord. No. 801, § 1, 10-3-78; Ord. No. 999, § 2, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 1986-03, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-20, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1996-3, § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 1999-3, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 8, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 8, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 8, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 4, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 4, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 4, 12-6-16) 
State Law reference- Ordinance codes adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-201 et seq. 
Sec. 30-177. - Code copies. 
    At least one (1) copy of the plumbing code previously adopted in section 30-176 has been and is now on file in the office of the building official and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. 
(Code 1963, § 26-4; Ord. No. 801, § 3, 10-3-78; Ord. No. 999, § 2, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 1986-03, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-20, 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1996-3, § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 1999-3, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 9, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 9, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 9, 8-19-08) 
State Law reference- Filing copies of code adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-206. 
Sec. 30-178. - Penalties. 
(a)  The following penalty clause as contained in the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, is hereby set forth in full and adopted: 
    Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(b)  Any violation of the provisions of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted hereby by a person who is eighteen (18) years of age or more on the date of said violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations, or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such violation by a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of said violation, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations. Each and every day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(Code 1963, § 26-5; Ord. No. 801, § 4, 10-3-78; Ord. No. 999, § 2, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 1986-03, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-20, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1993-3, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1994-6, § 5, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 1996-3, § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 1999-3, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 10, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 10, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 10, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 5, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 5, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 5, 12-6-16) 
State Law reference- Adoption of penalty clause by reference prohibited, C. R. S. § 31-16-204. 
Sec. 30-179. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1999-3, adopted Feb. 2, 1999, repealed § 30-179 which pertained to deferral and fee and cost payment, and derived from Ord. No. 1990-17, adopted Aug. 21. 1990 and Ord. No. 1993-3, adopted Feb. 2, 1993. 
Sec. 30-180. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 2013-34, adopted Jan. 7, 2014, repealed § 30-180 which pertained to water conservation devices required for new construction, and derived from Ord. No. 929, adopted Sept. 15, 1981. 
Sec. 30-181. - Amendments. 
    The International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, Section 106.6.2, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
(a)  The plumbing permit fees shall be set forth pursuant to resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1999-3, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 11, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 23, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 11, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 11, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 6, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 6, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 6, 12-6-16) 
Secs. 30-182-30-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1993-2, adopted Feb. 2, 1993, repealed Art. VI in its entirety. Formerly, Art. VI consisted of §§ 30-191-30-194, which pertained to the mechanical code and derived from §§ 1, 2 of Ord. No. 614, adopted Feb. 26, 1974; §§ 1, 3 and 4 of Ord. No. 800, adopted Oct. 3, 1978; § 2 of Ord. No. 998, adopted Oct. 4, 1983; § 1 of Ord. No. 1986-05, adopted Feb. 4, 1986; § 1 of Ord. No. 1989-19, adopted April 4, 1989; and § 24 of Ord. No. 1990-17, adopted Aug. 21, 1990. Section 1 of Ord. No. 1993-2 provided further for the addition of a new Art. VI as herein set out. 

Sec. 30-191. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, by reference thereto, the following: 
(a)  The International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, 5360 S. Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, health, property and construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators and other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances within the City of Lafayette, Colorado, for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, 5360 S. Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes the regulation of the design, construction, installation, location, operation, materials and maintenance and use of fuel gas systems, fuel gas appliances and other miscellaneous heat producing appliances within the City of Lafayette, Colorado, for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1993-2, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1996-2, § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 1999-4, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 12, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 12, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 12, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 7, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 7, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 7, 12-6-16) 
State Law reference- Ordinance codes adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-201 et seq.; power of city to adopt mechanical code, C. R. S. § 31-16-202. 
Sec. 30-192. - Code copies. 
    At least one (1) copy of the mechanical code and the fuel gas code previously adopted in section 30-191 has been and is now on file in the office of the building official, and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. 
(Ord. No. 1993-2, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1996-2, § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 1999-4, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 13, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 13, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 13, 8-19-08) 
State Law reference- Filing copies of code adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-206. 
Sec. 30-193. - Penalties. 
(a)  The penalty clause as contained in Section 108.4 of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of violating the code. Any such violation by a person who is eighteen (18) years of age or more on the date of said violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations, or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such violation by a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of said violation, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  The penalty clause as contained in Section 108.4 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, is hereby set forth, amended and adopted as follows: 
    Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of violating the code. Any such violation by a person who is eighteen (18) years of age or more on the date of said violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations, or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such violation by a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of said violation, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1993-2, § 1, 2-2-93; Ord. No. 1994-6, § 5, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 1996-2, § 1, 1-16-96; Ord. No. 1999-4, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 14, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 14, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 14, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 8, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 8, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 8, 12-6-16) 
State Law reference- Adoption of penalty clause by reference prohibited, C. R. S. § 31-16-204. 
Sec. 30-194. - Amendments. 
(a)  The International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, Section 106.5.2, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    The permit fees for mechanical work shall be set forth pursuant to resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, Section 106.5.2, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    The permit fees for mechanical work shall be set forth pursuant to resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1999-4, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 15, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 24, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 15, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 15, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 9, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 9, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 9, 12-6-16) 
Secs. 30-195-30-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Section 20 of Ord. No. 2008-08, adopted Aug. 19, 2008, amended the title of Art. VII, Dangerous Buildings, to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 45. 

Sec. 30-206. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16 Part 2, Colorado Revised Statues, as amended, there is hereby adopted by reference thereto the Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc. 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, 90601, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings in the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 420, §§ 1-4, 3-7-67; Ord. No. 826, § 1, 2-6-79; Ord. No. 1989-18, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 21, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 10, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 10, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 10, 12-6-16) 
State Law reference- Ordinance codes adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-201 et seq.; power of city to adopt building and housing codes, C. R. S. § 31-16-202. 
Sec. 30-207. - Code copies. 
    At least one (1) copy of the Existing Building Code previously adopted in section 30-206 has been and is now on file in the office of the building official and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. 
(Ord. No. 826, § 2, 2-6-79; Ord. No. 1989-18, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 22, 8-19-08) 
State Law reference- Filing copies of code adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-206. 
Sec. 30-208. - Penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to repair, alter, change occupancy, add to, and relocate any existing building in Lafayette, Colorado contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Existing Building Code, 2015 edition. Any person violating any provision of the Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, adopted hereby, who is eighteen (18) years of age or more on the date of said violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations, or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such violation by a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of said violation, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations. Each and every day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 420, § 5, 3-7-67; Ord. No. 826, § 3, 2-6-79; Ord. No. 1989-18, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 23, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 11, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 11, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 11, 12-6-16) 
State Law reference- Adoption of penalty clause by reference prohibited, C. R. S. § 31-16-204. 
Secs. 30-209-30-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ENERGY CONSERVATION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1989-15, § 1, adopted Apr. 4, 1989, repealed former Art. VIII, §§ 30-221-30-225, which pertained to an energy conservation code, its adoption, availability, and penalty provisions as well as amendments thereto concerning nonresidential and residential buildings. Such ordinance further enacted new provisions pertaining to similar subject matter designated as §§ 30-221-30-224. Prior to repeal, former Art. VIII was derived from Ord. No. 789, §§ 1-4, adopted Aug. 1, 1978; and Ord. No. 1987-03, § 27, adopted Feb. 3, 1987. 

Sec. 30-221. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is hereby adopted as the energy code of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, by reference thereto, the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes the regulation of the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical service, water heating and illumination systems and equipment which will enable effective use of energy in new building construction in the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 1989-15, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1999-6, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 16, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 16, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 16, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 12, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 12, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 12, 12-6-16) 
State Law reference- Ordinance codes adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-201 et seq.; power of city to adopt building and housing codes, C. R. S. § 31-16-202. 
Sec. 30-222. - Code copies. 
    At least one (1) copy of the energy conservation code previously adopted in section 30-221 has been and is now on file in the office of the building official and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. 
(Ord. No. 1989-15, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1999-6, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 17, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 17, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 17, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 17, 8-19-08) 
State Law reference- Filing copies of codes adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-206. 
Sec. 30-223. - Penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, renovate, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, convert, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in Lafayette, Colorado, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition. Any person violating any provision of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, adopted hereby, who is eighteen (18) years of age or more on the date of said violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations, or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such violation by a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of said violation, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations. Each and every day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1989-15, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1994-6, § 5, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 1999-6, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 18, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 18, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 18, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 13, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 13, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 13, 12-6-16) 
State Law reference- Adoption of penalty clause by reference prohibited, C. R. S. § 31-16-204. 
Sec. 30-224. - Amendments. 
    Section R402.1.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code, ("Testing") is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    Attached multifamily buildings or dwelling units shall be tested and verified as having an air leakage rate of less than five air changes per hours in Climate Zones 1 through 8, or 0.30 cubic feet per minute at 50 Pascals/square feet of dwelling unit enclosure area. 
(Ord. No. 1989-15, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1999-6, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2002-17, § 19, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-24, § 19, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 19, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 14, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 14, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 14, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 2017-55, § 1, 11-27-17) 
Secs. 30-225-30-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-31, adopted Oct. 7, 2008, revised the city's nuisance code. With that revision the provisions set out in §§ 30-241-30-254, as Art. IX, Removal of Weeds, Etc., are deemed to be inconsistent with and in conflict with the new provisions adopted and are hereby repealed pursuant to § 7 of Ord. No. 2008-31. Former §§ 30-241-30-254 derived from Ord. No. 491, adopted Oct. 20, 1970; Ord. No. 818, adopted Jan. 16, 1979; Ord. No. 937, adopted Jan. 5, 1982; Ord. No. 1986-23, adopted June 3, 1986; Ord. No. 1988-16, adopted Aug. 16, 1988; Ord. No. 1991-25, adopted Sept. 17, 1991; Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994; and Ord. No. 2007-33, adopted Aug. 21, 2007. 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 70; solid waste, Ch. 100. 

Secs. 30-241-30-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Section 24 of Ord. No. 2008-08, adopted Aug. 19, 2008, amended the title of Art. X, Housing Code, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 30-266. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16 Part 2, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, by reference thereto the Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc. 5360 Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California, 90601, all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. The subject matter of the adopted code includes the minimum standards for existing buildings for light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for the safe and sanitary maintenance in the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 889, § 1, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 997, § 2, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 1986-04, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-16, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 25, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 15, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 15, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 15, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 30-267. - Code copies. 
    At least one (1) copy of the Property Management Code previously adopted in section 30-266 has been and is now on file in the office of the building official and may be inspected by any interested person between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. 
(Ord. No. 889, § 2, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 997, § 2, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 1986-04, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-16, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 26, 8-19-08) 
Sec. 30-268. - Penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of the Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, adopted hereby, who is eighteen (18) years of age or more on the date of said violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations, or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such violation by a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of said violation, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the current maximum amount established by the state for municipal ordinance violations. Each and every day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 889, § 3, 10-7-80; Ord. No. 997, § 2, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 1986-04, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-16, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1994-6, § 5, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 27, 8-19-08; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 16, 6-7-11; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 16, 12-3-13; Ord. No. 2016-37, § 16, 12-6-16) 
Sec. 30-268.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 28 of Ord. No. 2008-08, adopted Aug. 19, 2008, repealed § 30-268.1, which pertained to deferral of fees and costs, and derived from Ord. No. 1990-17, adopted Aug. 21, 1990. 
ARTICLE XI. - RESIDENTIAL GROWTH MANAGEMENT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-11, adopted May 21, 2013, amended art. XI in its entirety to read as herein set out. See Code Comparative Table for amendatory history. 

Sec. 30-269. - Findings. 
    The city council of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, finds that there is substantial evidence from comprehensive plan and long range planning studies that excessively rapid community growth coupled with substantial demand for construction of new dwelling units within the city has the potential to strain the capacities of public facilities and services. Specifically, the city council finds that demand for construction of new dwelling units may, in the short term, exceed: 
(1)  The ability of the city to deliver and treat additional water; 
(2)  The ability of the city to treat sewage safely within acceptable federal and state standards; 
(3)  The ability of the city to acquire and store sufficient additional raw water resources to meet all seasonal water needs of the existing community when added to increased demands from additional dwelling units. 
    The city council further finds from a review of the comprehensive plan and long range planning studies and budget documents of the city, and from a review of the city's capital programs and its plans to expand the city's existing water treatment and wastewater treatment plants, that sound management of the city's fiscal condition and management of the city's future growth mandate a plan for growth management. 
    The city council further finds that it has enacted certain review criteria pertaining to all residential planned unit developments codified in section 26-18-5 of this Code, and that proper application of said criteria may require management of the city's future growth. 
    The city council further finds that the adoption of Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution mandates a steady and substantially uniform growth from year to year, in order to protect the city's ability to provide municipal services to its existing and future citizens. 
    On November 7, 1995, the city's electors adopted an amendment to the city's Charter, finding that it is the will of the people of Lafayette to maintain the economic, social and environmental advantages of having a small town character; that it is the will of the people of Lafayette to prevent actions that will increase city operating and capital construction expenses that would necessitate a tax increase or increases for these purposes; and determining that a cap of two hundred (200) dwelling units per year, allowing for approximately three (3) percent annual growth in the existing population of Lafayette, is an appropriate level of growth to preserve and maintain the economic, social and environmental advantages of having a small town character and preserving the quality of services provided by the city to its citizens and the quality of life enjoyed by those citizens. The city council of the City of Lafayette hereby adopts these findings by the city's electors. 
    The city council further finds that on November 7, 2000, the city's electors adopted an amendment to the Charter stating that (i) the approximately twelve-acre parcel located in the SE quarter of Section 35, Township 1 North, Range 69 West, north of the intersection of Brooks Avenue and Dounce Street, shall be exempt from the limitations of section 6.10 of the Charter so long as it is developed for residential purposes by the Boulder County Housing authority or its agent, and (ii) that dwelling units located within mixed use building complexes within the Urban Renewal Area - Lafayette Old Town, as that area existed as of January 1, 2000, shall also be exempt from the limitations of section 6.10 of the Charter. 
    The city council further finds that on November 6, 2001, the city's electors adopted an amendment to the Charter stating that (i) in addition to the other dwelling units authorized by section 6.10 of the Charter, the city council may authorize the construction of up to fifty (50) permanently affordable dwelling units per year, and (ii) "permanently affordable dwelling unit" shall mean a dwelling unit that is deed restricted for perpetuity to permit persons whose household income is less than or equal to eighty (80) percent of the then-current Boulder County area median income, as may be adjusted from time to time, to qualify to purchase or rent the dwelling unit, and (iii) unissued building permits for permanently affordable dwelling units may not be carried forward from year to year, but the council may approve the issuance of building permits for more than fifty (50) permanently affordable dwelling units in a single calendar year if the number of building permits for permanently affordable dwelling units approved in the following year is reduced by an equal amount. 
    The city council further finds that on November 6, 2012, the city's electors adopted an amendment to the Charter stating that the total number of new dwelling units between January 1, 2013, and January 1, 2019, shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200), and that city council shall adopt an ordinance setting out criteria it will utilize in determining the annual number of new dwelling units that are allowed to be built in any such year, which will address allocation of permits for new dwelling units over the entire six-year period. In addition, this Charter amendment stated that those developments within the city for which city council, prior to November 6, 2012, had determined and assigned by resolution a priority classification and building permit allocation pursuant to the city's residential growth management program that was in place prior to November 6, 2012, shall be exempt from the above limitation and may receive such building permits without regard to the calendar year for which their permits were allocated, but only to the extent that such properties are developed substantially in compliance with the approved preliminary plan upon which their allocations are based, and that those properties within the city that, prior to November 6, 2012, were eligible to be in the category of "otherwise entitled to priority," pursuant to the city's residential growth management program, by reason of commitments made by the city that existed prior to May 23, 1995, with respect to annexation, shall be exempt from the above limitation. 
    The city council further finds that section 6.10 of the Charter is not self-executing, and it is therefore necessary to adopt, by ordinance, certain policies and procedures as set forth in this article, to implement the Charter requirements and to administer the issuance of residential building permits in accordance with the Charter's requirements. 
    Based on its review and its knowledge of future growth plans of the city, the city budget and capital programs, various comprehensive plan and long range planning studies, reports from its water engineers and attorneys, and in consideration of the review criteria applicable to residential P.U.D.s, and in order to comply with the requirements of section 6.10 of the Charter, the city council of the City of Lafayette finds that it is essential to the public health, safety and welfare of all the residents and property owners within the city, both present and future, and it is further essential in order to maintain and promote orderly and planned growth, that a reasonable balance be maintained between the construction of additional buildings creating new demands on city services and facilities and the ability of the city to expand its services and facilities. In order to achieve such a balance, the city council finds that the issuance of building permits, which controls all new construction, should be managed in accordance with the provisions set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1993-25, § 1, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 1995-26, § 1, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 2002-11, § 1, 5-21-02; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 5-21-13) 
Sec. 30-270. - Definitions. 
    City means the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    Development (when used as a noun and when the context requires) means any proposed or approved residential project, including residential subdivisions and planned unit developments, that are intended to increase the number of dwelling units within the city. 
    Development's annual allocation means the maximum number of building permits for new nonexempt dwelling units, as established or modified by city council on an annual basis as provided herein, that may be issued to or on behalf of any nonexempt development in any particular calendar year. 
    Development's annual allocation schedule means the multi-year (if necessary) projection, as established or modified by city council as provided herein, of a particular development's annual allocations that will accommodate full build-out of the development. 
    Dwelling unit means a structure or portion of a structure designed for occupancy as a residence by a single-family or a single housekeeping unit. 
    Exempt dwelling unit means any dwelling unit: 
(i)  In a single-family residence, a duplex, a triplex or a four-plex constructed on a lot that existed pursuant to a recorded plat, prior to May 23, 1995, or on a lot that results from the subdivision of any lot that existed pursuant to a recorded plat, prior to May 23, 1995; or 
(ii)  Constructed on the approximately twelve-acre parcel located in the SE quarter of Section 35, Township 1 North, Range 69 West, north of the intersection of Brooks Avenue and Dounce Street, so long as said parcel is developed for residential purposes by the Boulder County Housing authority or its agent; or 
(iii)  Constructed within mixed use building complexes within the Urban Renewal Area - Lafayette Old Town, as that area existed as of January 1, 2000; or 
(iv)  Constructed within any developments within the city for which city council, prior to November 6, 2012, had determined and assigned by resolution a priority classification and building permit allocation pursuant to the city's residential growth management program that was in place prior to November 6, 2012, but only to the extent that such properties are developed substantially in compliance with the approved preliminary plan upon which their allocations are based; or 
(v)  Constructed on those properties within the city that, prior to November 6, 2012, were eligible to be in the category of "otherwise entitled to priority," pursuant to the city's residential growth management program, by reason of commitments made by the city that existed prior to May 23, 1995, with respect to annexation. 
    Nonexempt dwelling unit means any new dwelling unit that is not an exempt dwelling unit or a permanently affordable dwelling unit. 
    Nonexempt dwelling unit maximum means the number of nonexempt dwelling units authorized by the city council for construction during the current year, in accordance with subsection 30-271(b). 
    Permanently affordable dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that is deed restricted for perpetuity to permit persons whose household income is less than or equal to eighty (80) percent of the then-current Boulder County area median income, as may be adjusted from time to time, to qualify to purchase or rent the dwelling unit. 
    Permanently affordable dwelling unit maximum means the number of permanently affordable dwelling units, if any, authorized by the city council for construction during the current year, in accordance with subsection 30-271(c). 
(Ord. No. 1993-25, § 1, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 1995-26, § 2, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 1996-4, § 1, 2-20-96; Ord. No. 2002-11, § 2, 5-21-02; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 5-21-13) 
Sec. 30-271. - Establishment of dwelling unit maximum. 
(a)  By January 31 of the first year of each six-year growth management cycle, as referenced in section 6.10 of the Charter, city council shall adopt a resolution designating the number of building permits for nonexempt dwelling units that will be made available to allocate to nonexempt developments during the first half of the six-year cycle, with the balance of the total number of building permits allowed by section 6.10 of the Charter for that six-year cycle being reserved for allocation to nonexempt developments during the second half of the cycle (the "cycle distribution resolution"). For the purposes of the cycle distribution resolution, an allocation to a nonexempt development shall be deemed to occur upon approval of the development's annual allocation schedule and shall consist of the total number of building permits assigned to the developer for the entire period of the schedule. 
(b)  By January 31 of each year city council shall adopt a resolution that will establish the nonexempt dwelling unit maximum for the current year and the anticipated nonexempt dwelling unit maximum for the following year (the "annual resolution"). In adopting each annual resolution, the city council shall take into consideration each of the following: 
(1)  The water and sewer service capability of the city available for commercial and industrial development. 
(2)  The water and sanitary sewer service capability of the city available for special and unanticipated needs of the city. 
(3)  The anticipated pace of dwelling construction of all nonexempt units, as well as prior commitments that the city has made to issue building permits, such as development agreements, vesting agreements or permanently affordable housing project authorized by this section. 
(4)  The number of dwelling units which can be served with utilities during the applicable calendar years. 
(5)  The provisions of section 6.10 of the Charter, all of the factors listed in section 30-269 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances, the findings stated in this article, the review criteria applicable to residential P.U.D.s set out in section 26-18-5 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances, the needs of the community, and the city's ability to service additional growth. 
(c)  The city council may, by resolution at any time, authorize the issuance of building permits for the construction of up to fifty (50) permanently affordable dwelling units per year, which authorization shall be the permanently affordable dwelling unit maximum for the current year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the council may approve the issuance of building permits for more than fifty (50) permanently affordable dwelling units in a single calendar year if the number of any building permits for permanently affordable dwelling units authorized for issuance in the following year is reduced by an equal amount. 
(d)  At any time when the city council shall find that the actual pace of development within the city requires, in the best interests of the city, an adjustment to the annual resolution's nonexempt dwelling unit maximum, the city council may, by resolution, adjust any or all of said nonexempt dwelling unit maximums for the current year, so long as the total number does not exceed the number authorized by the cycle distribution resolution. In making such an adjustment, the city council shall consider all of the criteria set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  At any time when the city council shall find that an adjustment to the cycle distribution resolution is in the best interest of the city, the city council may amend the cycle distribution resolution to adjust the number of building permits available for allocation during the first half or the second half of the six-year growth management cycle, provided that the total number of dwelling unit allocations may not exceed the number authorized by the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1993-25, § 1, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 1995-26, § 3, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 2002-11, §§ 3, 4, 5-21-02; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 5-21-13) 
Sec. 30-272. - Conditions for residential building permit issuance. 
(a)  No building permits for structures containing new, nonexempt or permanently affordable dwelling units, which will require new or enhanced city utility services, shall be issued to permit the construction of dwelling units in excess of the nonexempt dwelling unit maximum, or the permanently affordable dwelling unit maximum, respectively, in effect for the current calendar year. 
(b)  At any time after approval of a sketch plan for a development, but before that development receives final plat approval, the city council shall, by resolution, determine whether said development is, or is not, exempt from the growth management limitations of section 6.10 of the Charter. Any development that is not found to be exempt from the limitations of section 6.10 of the Charter ("nonexempt development") will receive building permits for new dwelling units only upon compliance with the process and procedures as provided in this article. 
(c)  Residential building permits for permanently affordable dwelling units will be issued on a first-come, first-served basis, permitting the construction of permanently affordable dwelling units up to the permanently affordable dwelling unit maximum authorized under the provisions of subsection 30-271(c) for any given calendar year. After the permanently affordable dwelling unit maximum has been reached, residential building permit applications for permanently affordable dwelling units will be accepted and placed on a waiting list. When residential building permit issuance for permanently affordable dwelling units is resumed, those applications on the waiting list will be processed in the order in which they were received, and prior to the processing of any new applications. 
(d)  Residential building permits for nonexempt dwelling units will be issued on a first-come, first-served basis, but only up to the amount of a development's annual allocation, as determined below, authorizing the construction of nonexempt dwelling units up to the nonexempt dwelling unit maximum authorized for any given calendar year: 
(1)  Each proposed nonexempt development shall submit its projected annual allocation requirements for the issuance of dwelling unit permits with the preliminary plan submittal. The preliminary plan for such development shall not be approved if the total allocation requirement for build-out of the development cannot be fulfilled under the city's growth management limitation, as established by this article. If such total allocation requirements can be fulfilled, the planning director will assign to the development in conjunction with preliminary plan approval a proposed development's annual allocation and schedule for dwelling unit building permits in sufficient numbers to achieve the proposed build-out of the development. The proposed development annual allocation and schedule shall be subject to approval by city council in conjunction with the development's final plan; 
(2)  Beginning in the calendar year following the approval of a nonexempt development's final plan, and every year thereafter until build-out, each nonexempt development shall submit a "building permit status report", which may request a modification to development's annual allocation for the next calendar year. The building permit status report shall be in written form and shall be submitted to the planning director no sooner than December 1, and no later than December 15. In November, city staff shall send written notice to the affected developments advising the development of the requirement to provide a building permit status report. Such notice shall be by U.S. mail, and shall be addressed to the last address that the developer has on file with the city. The purpose of the building permit status report is to ensure that the pace of construction (by reference to the issuance of building permits for dwelling units) reasonable conforms to the schedule for the development's annual allocation. Each building permit status report shall include the following information: 
a.  The most current development's annual allocation schedule and the original development's annual allocation schedule as approved in conjunction with development's final plan; 
b.  The actual number of dwelling units for which building permits were issued within the nonexempt development, on a month-by-month basis for the current calendar year; 
c.  The number of dwelling unit allocations that are being requested, and are reasonably anticipated to be utilized in the next calendar year; 
d.  Any additional information necessary to justify the annual allocation number requested. 
(3)  The planning director shall take into account the information included in the building permit status report and shall recommend a development's annual allocation for each nonexempt development to city council as part of the next annual resolution. If a nonexempt development's actual permitted dwelling units are less than seventy (70) percent of its annual allocation for the preceding year, then the planning director may recommend that city council reduce the development's annual allocation to the actual number of dwelling units permitted in the development during the preceding year, plus twenty (20) percent of the actual number of dwelling units permitted during the preceding year. If a nonexempt development maximized, or came within ten (10) percent of maximizing, its annual allocation during the preceding year, then the planning director may recommend city council increase the development's annual allocation, if an increase has been requested by the developer. 
(4)  In the event that a nonexempt development's annual allocation is modified to a lesser number, the development will not lose its right to the total number of dwelling units necessary to build-out the development. However, the developer's annual allocation schedule shall be modified to reflect a reduction in future years of the same number, and the number of years for build-out to occur will be extended in order to accommodate the slower construction pace. If a nonexempt development's annual allocation is modified to a greater number, the annual allocation schedule shall be modified to reflect an increase in future years of the same number, and the number of years allowed for build-out will be shortened. 
(5)  In the event that a nonexempt development fails to timely submit a building permit status report, the development's annual allocation for the following year only shall be reduced to ten (10) percent of its annual allocation of the preceding year, and the developer's annual allocation schedule shall be modified accordingly. Once the development has built equaling the reduced allocation, the development may petition council to amend the annual resolution and reinstate the developments annual allocation, in full or in part, upon providing the building permit status report. City council may grant the petition, in full or in part, if city council, in its discretion, is satisfied that good cause has been established, and that sufficient allocations remain to fulfill other requests for allocations. 
    During any period after the nonexempt dwelling unit maximum has been reached, residential building permit applications for nonexempt dwelling units will be accepted and placed on a waiting list. When residential building permit issuance for nonexempt dwelling units has resumed those applications on the waiting list will be processed in the order in which they were received. 
(e)  If construction authorized by any building permit has not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after it is issued, the permit shall become void and may be reissued, by the city, but only on a first come, first served basis, up to the applicable dwelling unit maximum. 
(f)  In the event that applications for nonexempt dwelling unit building permits do not exceed the nonexempt dwelling unit maximum in a given calendar year, the authorized, but unissued permits for nonexempt dwelling units may be carried forward to the following year, subject to the one thousand two hundred (1,200) per six-year limitation. Any such unissued permits for nonexempt dwelling units cannot be carried forward beyond the six-year growth management cycle. 
(g)  Building permits issued in violation of this article shall be void. Nothing in this article shall alter or affect other requirements for compliance with all applicable zoning, subdivision and building regulations, codes, and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1993-25, § 1, 8-3-93; Ord. No. 1995-26, § 4, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 1996-4, § 2, 2-20-96; Ord. No. 2002-11, § 5, 5-21-02; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 5-21-13; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Secs. 30-273-30-289. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1993-25, adopted Aug. 3, 1993, repealed Art. XII in its entirety. Formerly, Art. XII consisted of §§ 30-290-30-295, which pertained to available service units and derived from § 1 of Ord. No. 991, adopted Sept. 6, 1983, and § 1 of Ord. No. 1985-16, adopted June 4, 1985. 

Secs. 30-290-30-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - WOOD-BURNING PROHIBITIONS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1988-24, § 1, adopted Nov. 15, 1988, added provisions concerning wood-burning prohibitions designated as Art. XII, §§ 30-300-30-304. Such article has been redesignated as Art. XIII in order to avoid duplicative numeric article designations, see Art. XII, available service units. 

Sec. 30-300. - Definitions. 
    The following terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this article: 
    Barbecue devices means devices that are utilized solely for the purpose of cooking food. 
    High pollution day means that period of time declared to be a high pollution day by the State of Colorado Department of Health. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, company or other association. 
    Phase II certified device means an airtight woodstove including, without limitation, a fireplace insert which the user can demonstrate to a reasonable scientific certainty has particulate emissions that do not exceed the following standards: 
(a)  On or after July 1, 1988, no wood-burning stove with a minimum heat output of forty thousand (40,000) BTU per hour or less shall be certified unless the stove meets the following emission standards: 
(1)  For stoves tested in accordance with Appendix A, Colorado Air Quality Control Commission, Regulation No. 4, 5CCR 1001-6, the stove shall emit particulates at a rate of twelve (12) grams per hour or less and carbon monoxide at a rate of two hundred (200) grams per hour or less. 
(2)  For stoves tested in accordance with Appendix B, Colorado Air Quality Control Commission, Regulation No. 4, 5CCR 1001-6, the stove shall emit particulates at a rate of eight and one-half (8.5) grams per hour or less and carbon monoxide at a rate of two hundred (200) grams per hour or less. 
(b)  On or after July 1st, 1988, no wood-burning stove with a minimum heat output of more than forty thousand (40,000) BTU per hour shall be certified unless the stove meets the following emission standards: 
(1)  For stoves tested in accordance with Appendix B, Colorado Air Quality Control Commission, Regulation No. 4, 5CCR 1001-6, with respect to particulates, the number of grams per hour emitted shall be less than or equal to the sum of twelve (12), and three-tenths (0.3) grams per hour for each one thousand (1,000) BTU per hour heat output; with respect to carbon monoxide, the number of grams per hour emitted shall be less than or equal to the sum of four hundred (400), and five (5) grams per hour for each one thousand (1,000) BTU per hour heat output. 
(c)  Stoves with a minimum long-life catalyst, a thermometer for reading the temperature of the catalyst, and a thermometer for reading the temperature of the stove. 
    Sole source of heat means one (1) or more solid fuel burning devices which constitute the only source of heating in a private residence. No solid fuel burning device or devices shall be considered to be the sole source of heat if the private residence is equipped with a permanently installed furnace or heating system utilizing oil, natural gas, electricity or propane, whether connected or disconnected from its energy source. 
    Solid fuel-fire heating device means a device designated for solid fuel combustion so that usable heat is derived from the interior of a building and includes solid fuel-fire stoves, fireplaces, solid fuel-fired cooking stoves and combination fuel furnaces or boilers which burn solid fuel. Solid fuel-fired heating devices do not include barbecue devices or natural gas fired fireplace logs. 
(Ord. No. 1988-24, § 1, 11-15-88; Ord. No. 1989-36, § 1, 6-20-89) 
Sec. 30-301. - High pollution prohibition. 
(a)  No person may operate a solid fuel-fired heating device during a high pollution day unless an exemption has been granted pursuant to section 30-302 below. It shall be the duty of all persons owning or operating a solid fuel-fired device to be aware of any declaration of a high pollution day by the Colorado Department of Health. 
(b)  At the time of the declaration of high pollution day, the city administrator shall allow three (3) hours for the burn down of existing fires in solid fuel burning devices prior to the initiation of enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 1988-24, § 1, 11-15-88) 
Sec. 30-302. - Exemption for sole heat source. 
(a)  A person who relies on a solid fuel-fired heating device as his sole source of heat or a person using a Phase II certified solid fuel-fired device as defined in section 30-300 may apply to the building official for a yearly exemption from section 30-301 above. 
(b)  A person applying for an exemption must sign a sworn statement that he relies on a solid fuel-fired heating device as his sole source of heat. 
(c)  An exemption obtained under this section shall be effective for twelve (12) months from the date it is granted. 
(Ord. No. 1988-24, § 1, 11-15-88; Ord. No. 1989-36, § 2, 6-20-89) 
Sec. 30-303. - Inspections. 
    For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this article, the city administrator, through authorized representatives, is hereby authorized to make inspections of solid fuel-fire heating devices which are being operated on high pollution days. If any person refuses or restricts entry and free access to any part of a premises or refuses inspection or sampling of any device, facility or process where inspection is sought, the city administrator, through authorized representatives, shall seek from the municipal court a search warrant for inspection and order that such person refusing inspection be required to permit an inspection at a reasonable time, without interference, restriction or obstruction. The municipal court shall have full power, jurisdiction and authority to enforce all orders issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1988-24, § 1, 11-15-88) 
Sec. 30-304. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. No. 1988-24, § 1, 11-15-88) 
Secs. 30-305-30-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - DEFERRAL OR WAIVER OF FEE PAYMENT AND ACTIVITY DEADLINES AND EXEMPTIONS FROM CERTAIN USE TAXES[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1999-15, adopted April 20, 1999, amended the title of Art. XIV to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 30-400. - Permitted; conditions. 
    The time of the payment of any fee and/or the time of the accomplishment of any action as required by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lafayette, Colorado and/or any resolution of the city all relating to the development of real property located within the city limits may be deferred by the city council to a time other than the time specified by the Code of Ordinances and/or a resolution of the city upon the following conditions: 
(1)  That the city council finds that the project is unique and/or necessary for the economic development of the city; and 
(2)  The city council finds that the location of the real property to be developed and the proposed development is in the best interests of the citizens of the city; and 
(3)  The section of the Code of Ordinances and/or the resolution of the city requiring the payment of a fee permits the deferral of the payment of such fee. 
(Ord. No. 1990-17, § 1, 8-21-90) 
Sec. 30-401. - Findings by city council. 
    A deferral of any fee and/or a deferral of the accomplishment of any action, as stated in section 30-400, which deferral is contained in any development agreement entered into between the city and the owner(s) of real property, shall be deemed as the making of findings by the city council that: 
(1)  The city council finds that the project is unique and/or necessary for the economic development of the city; and 
(2)  The location of the real property to be developed and the proposed development is in the best interests of the citizens of the city; and 
(3)  The section of the Code of Ordinances and/or the resolution of the city requiring the payment of a fee permits the deferral of the payment of a fee. 
(Ord. No. 1990-17, § 1, 8-21-90) 
Sec. 30-402. - Length of deferral. 
    Any deferral of the payment of any fee and/or the accomplishment of any action pursuant to this article shall not extend beyond any time immediately prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit issued by the city pursuant to the Code of Ordinances, unless otherwise provided by an ordinance or resolution, for a building or structure contemplated by any development agreement between the city and the owner(s) of real property located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1990-17, § 1, 8-21-90) 
Sec. 30-403. - Phased developments. 
    If a development agreement, as aforesaid, allows a development to be accomplished in phases, the time required for the payment of any fee and/or the time of the accomplishment of any action as required by the Code of Ordinances and/or any resolution of the city may be deferred pursuant to this article for each phase of the development as if each phase were a separate development. 
(Ord. No. 1990-17, § 1, 8-21-90) 
Sec. 30-404. - Waiver of fees for charitable organization. 
    The waiver of any building permit, service expansion fee pursuant to Code section 30-4, public art fee pursuant to Code section 28-34, plan check, inspection and reinspection fee pursuant to Code section 30-166, and engineering fee pursuant to Code section 30-11, which waiver is contained in any development agreement entered into between the city and the owner(s) of real property, shall be deemed as the making of findings by the city council that: 
(1)  The property owner(s) is (are) a charitable organization as defined by C.R.S. § 39-22-115; 
(2)  Future use of the subject property shall be restricted to residential use only; 
(3)  The residence to be constructed on the subject property shall be used to provide housing for a low income family as determined by the city council; and 
(4)  The prospective owner(s) of the residence will provide a substantial in-kind contribution in the way of labor in construction of the residence. 
(Ord. No. 1994-14, § 1, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 2005-18, § 5, 6-7-05; Ord. No. 2017-37, § 4, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 30-405. - Waiver of fees and exemption from use tax for new manufacturing and commercial facilities. 
(a)  The payment of any impact fee, pursuant to Code section 30-4, and plan check fee may be waived by the city council in whole or part, and an exemption from the city use tax established in Code sections 110-146 through 110-151 may be granted by the city council in whole or part and by ordinance, upon the following conditions: 
(1)  That the city council finds that the project for which the fees are waived and/or a use tax exemption is provided is a "new manufacturing facility," "new commercial facility," or "new mixed-use (apartment/commercial) facility," as such terms are defined herein; and 
(2)  That the city council finds that the project is unique and/or necessary for the economic development of the city; and 
(3)  That the city council finds that the location of the real property to be developed and the proposed development project is in the best interests of the citizens of the city; and 
(4)  That the city council finds that benefits to the city, including, but not limited to, the creation of a significant number of new jobs and a significant increase in tax revenues, are likely to result from the construction and use of the project, and further, that such benefits to the city clearly outweigh any burden to the city that may result from the loss of fee and tax revenue due to the fee waiver and use tax exemption provided for herein. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall be construed as providing any person or entity with any right to request, apply for or obtain any fee waiver or use tax exemption described herein, it being the intent of the city that this section is adopted solely for the purposes of authorizing the fee waivers and use tax exemption described herein and guiding the exercise of legislative discretion by the city council in considering the fee waivers and use tax exemption described herein. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section and section 30-406 of this Code, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  New manufacturing facility shall mean a new facility used to transform raw or finished materials by hand or machinery, and through human skill and knowledge, into something possessing a new nature and name, and adapted to a new use; 
(2)  New commercial facility shall mean a new facility used as an establishment for the sale of goods or services for profit; 
(3)  New mixed-use (apartment/commercial) facility shall mean a new facility, which may include more than one (1) structure, used for multifamily residential rental units, and which includes as a component of the project, facilities for the rental and sale of goods or services for profit; and 
(4)  New facility shall mean a facility not in existence in the city at the time of the fee waiver or use tax exemption and shall not be construed to mean an alteration, expansion or relocation of a manufacturing, commercial facility or mixed-use (apartment/commercial) facility existing in the city at the time of the fee waiver or use tax exemption. 
(Ord. No. 1999-15, § 2, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2000-28, § 1, 8-15-00; Ord. No. 2016-34, § 1, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 2017-37, § 5, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 30-405.5. - Deferrals and waivers of fees and exemption from use tax for the creation of certain affordable dwelling units. 
(a)  Upon written request of the owner of a development project in which a charter affordable housing unit (as such term is defined in section 28-7 of this Code of Ordinances) will be created, or in which a dwelling unit will be created that is not a charter affordable housing unit, but which unit will be legally restricted to be at least as restrictive with respect to affordability as such unit, the payment of any Impact Fee pursuant to section 3-4 of this chapter, public art fee pursuant to Code section 28-34 , engineering inspection fee pursuant to section 30-11 of this chapter, building permit fee and plan check fee pursuant to section 30-149 of this chapter, electrical inspection fee pursuant to section 30-166 of this chapter, residential water tap fee pursuant to section 120-39.1 of this Code, residential water reclamation tap fee pursuant to section 95-25 of this Code, water reclamation tap surcharge pursuant to section 120-24.1 of this Code and temporary electrical inspection fee applicable to such unit or units shall be and is hereby deferred until such time as the owner seeks the issuance of an occupancy permit by the city for such unit or units. Upon written request of the owner of a development project in which a charter affordable housing unit will be created, or in which a dwelling unit will be created that is not a charter affordable housing unit, but which unit will be legally restricted to be at least as restrictive with respect to affordability as such unit, the payment of the city use tax established in sections 110-146 through 110-151 of this Code that is applicable to such unit or units shall be and is hereby deferred until such time as the owner seeks the issuance of an occupancy permit by the city for such unit or units. 
(b)  For charter affordable housing units (as such term is defined in section 28-7 of this Code) and for other dwelling units that, while not a charter affordable housing unit, will be legally restricted to be at least as restrictive with respect to affordability as such unit, the payment of any impact fee pursuant to section 30-4 of this chapter, and building permit fee and plan check fee pursuant to section 30-149 of this chapter, that is applicable to such unit or units may be waived by the city council in whole or part, and an exemption from the city use tax established in sections 110-146 through 110-151 of this Code that is applicable to such unit or units may be granted by the city council in whole or part, by ordinance, upon consideration of, and the making of findings with regard to the following factors: 
(1)  Whether, and the degree to which, the project for which the fees waivers and/or a use tax exemption is sought is a project that provides for affordable housing that exceeds the requirements of article II of chapter 28 et seq. of this Code or the community housing guidelines; 
(2)  Whether, and the degree to which, the project is unique and/or necessary for the development of affordable housing within the city; 
(3)  Whether, and the degree to which, the location of the real property to be developed for affordable housing is in the best interests of the citizens of the city; 
(4)  Whether, and the degree to which, the dwelling units in an affordable housing project include characteristics and/or materials that are likely to lower the operation or maintenance costs of the units; 
(5)  Whether, and the degree to which, benefits to the city, including, but not limited to, the diversification of the housing stock and the expansion of opportunities for people who work in the city to live in the city, are likely to result from the construction and use of the project, and further, whether such benefits to the city are likely to outweigh any burden to the city that may result from the loss of fee and tax revenue due to the fee waiver and use tax exemption provided for herein; and 
(6)  Whether, and the degree to which, other aspects of an affordable housing project further the purposes set forth in article II of chapter 28 of this Code of Ordinances. 
Provided, however, that no fee waiver(s) and/or use tax exemption provided pursuant to this section shall, in the aggregate, exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per dwelling unit. 
(c)  Nothing in subsection (b) above shall be construed as providing any person or entity with any right to request, apply for or obtain any fee waiver or use tax exemption described herein, it being the intent of the city that this section is adopted solely for the purposes of authorizing the fee waivers and use tax exemption described herein and guiding the exercise of legislative discretion by the city council in considering the fee waivers and use tax exemption described herein. 
(d)  If, after any fee waiver or use tax exemption is provided pursuant to subsection (b) above for a charter affordable housing unit and such unit is to be sold or rented without a deed restriction, real covenant or other legal restriction, then any fee waiver or use tax exemption with respect to such unit shall be null and void and all payments waived or exempted shall be made to the city by the owner of such unit prior to the initial sale of the unit. 
(e)  It is the intent of this section that only the fees and use taxes directly applicable to charter affordable housing units and other units eligible for fee waivers and use tax exemptions be waived and exempted, respectively, if at all. If a development project includes the construction of improvements other than charter affordable housing units and/or other eligible units, the fee waiver and use tax exemption provided for herein shall be provided on a pro rata basis taking into consideration the relationship between the charter affordable housing units and/or other eligible units and all other improvements proposed within the development project. 
(f)  Any fee waiver and/or tax exemption provided by or granted pursuant to this section shall be reduced to a written agreement between the city and all owners of the property that benefits from the fee waiver and/or tax exemption. The written agreement shall guarantee performance or satisfaction of the fee waiver and/or tax exemption eligibility criteria and all other applicable development conditions. The written agreement shall be subject to specific enforcement, run with the land and be binding upon the successors and assigns of said owners. The written agreement shall provide that, if the owners, their successors or assigns shall fail to perform or satisfy any term or condition of the agreement, the city council may revoke the grant of any fee waiver and/or tax exemption and the owners and their successors and assigns shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of all fees and taxes that would, but for the fee waiver and/or tax exemption, have been applied. The written agreement shall provide for enforcement of any revocation of fee waivers/tax exemptions by way of a lien that may be foreclosed in the manner provided for foreclosure of a deed of trust under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2003-14, § 4, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 2005-18, § 5, 6-7-05; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 2-21-12; Ord. No. 2017-37, § 6, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 30-406. - Waiver and exemption findings of the city council. 
    A waiver of any fee and/or the exemption from any use tax, in whole or part, as stated in section 30-405, which waiver or exemption is contained in any development agreement entered into between the city and the owner(s) of real property, shall be deemed as the making of findings by the city council that: 
(1)  The project for which the fees are waived and/or a use tax exemption is provided is a "new manufacturing facility" or a "new commercial facility;" and 
(2)  The project is unique and/or necessary for the economic development of the city; and 
(3)  The location of the real property to be developed and the proposed development project is in the best interests of the citizens of the city; and 
(4)  Benefits to the city, including, but not limited to, the creation of a significant number of new jobs and a significant increase in tax revenues, are likely to result from the construction and use of the project, and further, that such benefits to the city clearly outweigh any burden to the city that may result from the loss of fee and tax revenue due to the fee waiver and use tax exemption provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 1999-15, § 3, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2000-28, § 2, 8-15-00) 
ARTICLE XV. - VISITABILITY 

Sec. 30-407. - Title. 
    These regulations may be known at the "Visitability Regulations" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39, § 3, 8-4-07) 
Sec. 30-408. - Legislative findings. 
    The city council finds that the provisions contained herein are declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy to be necessary to secure and promote the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39, § 3, 8-4-07) 
Sec. 30-409. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to further the public policy of the City of Lafayette to provide that certain new residential developments include dwelling units with visitable features and that residential building construction be designed and built to provide visitability and enhanced livability for persons with limited mobility, as well as to encourage home designs that allow owners to enter and move about freely as they age. Visitability is a set of construction requirements that will allow homeowners to more easily welcome guests of all abilities into their homes. In addition, homes built with visitable features often allow homeowners to remain in their homes as they age, reducing the cost of retrofitting the dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39, § 3, 8-4-07) 
Sec. 30-410. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply only to residential developments that: 
1)  Are designed to accommodate four (4) or more residential dwelling units, and 
2)  Have not obtained preliminary plan/planned unit development (PUD) or minor subdivision plan approval, as appropriate, prior to the effective date of this article (September 14, 2007). 
(b)  For the purpose of applying this subsection, all real property at one (1) location in Lafayette under common ownership or control, including contiguous (without regard to intervening streets, rights-of-way, watercourses and undevelopable outlots or tracts) real property owned or controlled by separate corporations in which any applicant or family member of the applicant owns ten (10) percent or more of the stock or ownership interest shall be included. This article shall not be circumvented by submitting piecemeal applications for preliminary plan/PUD review or minor subdivision plan review. 
(c)  The visitability requirements set forth in this article are in addition to the accessibility requirements set forth in the International Building Code, International Residential Code, or state or federal law. Any dwelling unit that meets such standards for accessible housing as well as the visitability requirements set forth herein shall count toward the visitable home requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39, § 3, 8-4-07) 
Sec. 30-411. - Definitions. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof used for residential occupancy, and conforming to any building code, fire code and safety code adopted by the City of Lafayette. 
    Dwelling unit means a structure or portion of a structure designed for occupancy as a residence by a single family. 
    Mixed-use development means a development consisting of one (1) or more principal buildings containing, either individually or collectively, both residential and nonresidential principal uses. 
    Residential development means the subdividing of land into two (2) or more parcels (lots, outlots, or tracts) designed for residential use, including mixed-use development with residential components and single lot or tract developments that are used for residential purposes. 
    Visitable dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that complies with the requirements of article XV of chapter 30 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances. 
    Visitable floor level means the floor level of the visitable dwelling unit that is accessed by the visitable route. 
    Visitable route means the pathway that leads to an entrance of a visitable dwelling unit. Such pathway does not include any steps or stair risers and does not include provisions for a chair lift. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39, § 3, 8-4-07) 
Sec. 30-412. - Required percentage of dwelling units. 
(a)  No fewer than twenty-five (25) percent of all dwelling units located within any residential development shall be designated, designed and constructed to comply with the visitability requirements of section 30-413. 
    Multifamily developments, and mixed-use developments that include a vertical mix of uses, that have less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of dwelling units located on the ground floor level shall have those dwelling units that are not located at the ground floor level exempt from these regulations; provided, however, that all ground floor units shall be visitable dwelling units as defined herein. Accessory dwelling units not located on the ground floor level are also exempt from these regulations. 
(b)  If the calculation of the number of visitable dwelling units that are required pursuant to subsection (a) above results in a whole number and a fraction that is equal to or greater than seventy-five (75) percent then the total number of visitable dwelling units required within the residential development shall be equal to the whole number plus one (1). If the calculation of the number of visitable dwelling units that are required pursuant to subsection (a) above results in a whole number and a fraction that is less than seventy-five (75) percent then the total number of visitable dwelling units required within the residential development shall be equal to the whole number. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39, § 3, 8-4-07) 
Sec. 30-413. - Visitability requirements. 
(a)  Visitable route. One (1) zero-step entrance route (no steps/stair risers) shall be provided to every visitable dwelling unit. The route shall have a minimum width of thirty-six (36) inches. The maximum allowed slope shall be 1:12 (eight and three-tenths (8.3) percent) and shall comply with Section R311.6 of the International Residential Code 2006 (IRC 2006). 
    The zero-step entrance into a visitable floor level of the dwelling unit is allowed to be located at the front, sides, or rear of the dwelling unit, or in an attached garage. When the zero-step entrance is located within an attached garage the visitable route shall begin within the garage. When the zero-step entrance is not located within an attached garage then the visitable route shall begin at the opposite end of the thirty-six-inch wide walkway that connects to the visitable entrance. The building official, or his/her representative, shall be responsible for determining where the visitable route begins in the event that an interpretation is necessary. 
(b)  Doors and doorways. The zero-step entrance route door and all interior doors and doorways on the visitable floor level, except those serving closets or pantries less than fifteen (15) square feet in area, intended for user passage shall have minimum net clear opening width of thirty-two (32) inches and shall comply with Section 404.2.2 of the International Code Council/American National Standards A117.1-2003 (ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003). 
    Where provided, thresholds on the visitable floor level at doorways shall have a maximum beveled height of one-half (1/2) inch and shall comply with Section 404.2.4 ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003. 
    Door hardware on doors required to comply with the minimum thirty-two-inch net clearing opening width shall include handles, pulls, latches, and/or locks in compliance with Section 404.2.6 ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003. 
(c)  Interior hallways. All interior hallways on the visitable floor level shall have a minimum clear width of thrity-six (36) inches and shall comply with Table 403.5 ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003. 
(d)  Bathrooms. The visitable floor level shall include at least one (1) bathroom, which shall, at a minimum, contain a water closet (toilet) and lavatory (sink). The minimum net clear floor area of the visitable bathroom shall be thirty (30) inches by forty-eight (48) inches and shall comply with Section 305 ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003. Additional net clear floor area shall be required, if necessary, to accommodate the opening and closing of the bathroom door. 
    All bathrooms, regardless of their location within the dwelling unit, shall include reinforced walls in order to allow the installation of horizontal grab bars between thirty-three (33) inches and thirty-six (36) inches above the floor in compliance with Section 609.4 ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003 for all walls adjacent to water closets (toilets), shower stalls, and bathtubs. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39, § 3, 8-4-07) 
Sec. 30-414. - Marketing. 
    When model homes are provided as part of the development, at least one (1) single-family dwelling unit model, one (1) two-family dwelling unit model and one (1) multifamily dwelling unit model, as defined in chapter 26 of the Lafayette Code or Ordinances, shall comply with the requirements of section 30-413. Visitable features shall be listed as an option in all marketing materials for all units within the residential development. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39, § 3, 8-4-07) 
Sec. 30-415. - Cash in lieu fee. 
(a)  If a developer desires to provide cash in lieu of complying with all or part of the visitability regulations then he/she shall, prior to submitting the development's preliminary plan application to the planning commission, seek the approval of the city council for such cash in lieu of visitable dwelling units. 
(b)  The cash in lieu fee shall be established by a resolution of city council. 
(c)  The cash in lieu fee shall be placed in an account and shall be used only to benefit qualified persons, as determined by the city council, seeking assistance to make existing Lafayette housing stock visitable or accessible. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39, § 3, 8-4-07) 
Sec. 30-416. - Waiver. 
(a)  The requirements of article XV of this chapter may be waived, in whole or in part, by the city council based on a recommendation of the planning commission. 
(b)  A waiver may be granted if the developer demonstrates the following: 
(1)  That the number of lots having an excessive slope or other site conditions makes it impracticable to comply with the requirements. 
(2)  That the number of lots subject to property restrictions, such as easements, makes it impracticable to comply with the requirements. 
(c)  The developer seeking a waiver shall file all documents necessary to prove the existence of the waiver standards herein concurrently with the submittal of the preliminary plan to the planning commission. 
(d)  In the event a lot owner, owning a lot designated by an approval final plan/PUD or minor subdivision plan as a visitable lot, desires to obtain a waiver of the visitability requirements the council may consider such request based upon a recommendation of the planning commission. If the lot owner fails to demonstrate that excessive slope or property restrictions makes it impracticable to comply with the requirements then the council may consider, at its sole discretion, a request by the lot owner for a cash in lieu payment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39, § 3, 8-4-07) 
Chapter 32 - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2000-34, adopted Oct. 3, 2000, repealed Ch. 32 in its entirety, and enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 32 derived from Ord. No. 909, adopted April 21, 1981; Ord. No. 963, adopted Nov. 1, 1982; Ord. No. 1989-14, adopted March 21, 1989; and Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994. 

Sec. 32-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Cable Television Franchise Law." 
(Ord. No. 2000-34, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 32-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning, or where applicable, the definitions of Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as amended, shall apply. 
    Applicant shall mean a natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, association, joint venture, or organization of any kind that applies for a franchise to provide cable services. 
    Application includes all written proposals, in whatever form, made by the applicant to the city concerning construction, rendition of services, maintenance, or any other matter pertaining to permission to construct and operate a cable system to provide cable services as contemplated herein. 
    Charter means the Home Rule Charter of the City. 
    City means the City of Lafayette, a municipal corporation of the State of Colorado. 
    City administrator shall mean the chief administrative officer of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, or his designee. 
    City council or council shall mean the present governing body of the city or any successor to the legislative powers of the present city council. 
    Company means a successful applicant awarded a franchise pursuant to the Charter of the City of Lafayette for purposes of operating a cable system within the city, or the successor, transferee, or assignee of the original applicant for such franchise. 
    Franchise shall mean the nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to the Lafayette City Charter and applicable federal and state law to construct and operate a cable system along the streets, alleys, and public ways of the city. 
    Franchise fee shall mean that fee paid to the city as compensation for the grant of permissions to utilize public rights-of-way for private business purposes. A franchise fee is not a tax. 
    Property of the company means all property, real or personal, owned, installed or used within the city by the company in the conduct of the business to provide cable services under the authority of the franchise granted by the city. 
    Public property is any real property owned by the city other than a street, highway, sidewalk, easement or dedication. 
    State shall mean the State of Colorado. 
    Street shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way, or place, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall include such other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city, and which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and the company to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting signals over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a cable system. 
(Ord. No. 2000-34, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 32-3. - Grant, acceptance and effective date of franchise. 
(a)  Any initial franchise granted pursuant to the Charter and applicable federal or state law shall take effect and be in force from and after the effective date of the ordinance granting said franchise after approval thereof by the city's electors, and any renewal franchise shall take effect on the effective date set forth in the adopting ordinance, provided, that on or before said date and no later than thirty (30) days thereafter, the successful company shall: 
(1)  File with the city clerk an unconditional acceptance of the franchise grant and enter into and execute such documents as required by the city consistent with the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise. Said acceptance shall be in a form as prescribed by the city and shall contain provisions that the company, by its acceptance agrees to provide all services specifically set forth in its application to provide cable services within the city, and further, that its application is incorporated by reference and made a part of the franchise. In the event of conflict between any application, franchise and the provisions of this chapter, the provision that provides the greatest benefit to the city, in the opinion of the council, shall prevail. Any acceptance filed by the company pursuant to this section shall be in writing, duly executed and sworn to, by or on behalf of the company, before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(2)  File such bonds, letters of credit and/or other sureties as required by the franchise. 
(b)  In the event that the company fails to comply in full with subsection (a) hereof, then it shall be conclusively considered that the company has abandoned its application and rights to such grants and award of the franchise, and any such rights that the company may have acquired under this chapter or the grant of the franchise shall immediately terminate, and the company shall have no right, privilege or authority whatsoever under this chapter. In any event, the provisions of subsection 32-5(d) shall apply with respect to the application fee and the company's responsibility for expenses related to its application. 
(c)  The company shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for or on account of any loss, cause, expense or damage arising out of any provisions or requirements of this chapter and/or the grant of any franchise pursuant to the Charter or applicable federal or state law. 
(d)  The company, by acceptance of any franchise award pursuant to the Lafayette City Charter and applicable federal or state law, acknowledges that it has relied upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant such franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2000-34, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 32-4. - Franchise required. 
    No person shall be permitted to operate a cable system to provide cable services in the city without first being granted a franchise by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-34, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 32-5. - Application. 
(a)  Applications for a cable franchise pursuant to the Charter shall be filed with the city administrator and shall contain at least the following: 
(1)  The name and business address of the applicant, date of application, and signature of the applicant or appropriate corporate officer. 
(2)  A general description of the applicant's proposed operation including, but not limited to: business hours, operating staff, a general statement of services to be provided, and a description of the system design. 
(3)  A description of the applicant's organization and structure including: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, partnership, or unincorporated association, it shall state the names and address of all persons, including corporations, having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the applicant's business operation, and in and to the prospective franchise, if awarded. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignments or value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment, or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a franchise pursuant to the Charter and applicable federal or state law. 
b.  If the applicant is a nonpublic corporation, the application shall state additionally the names and addresses of all officers, directors and shareholders of said corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder, the date of incorporation, the date of the last annual report, and a statement as to whether or not the corporation is licensed to do business in the State of Colorado. 
c.  If the applicant is a publicly held corporation as defined by the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall contain the states in which it is incorporated and/or qualified to do business, the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation, and the names and addresses and number of shares owned of all stockholders, both nominal and beneficial, owning ten (10) percent or more of the outstanding stock of the applicant. 
d.  A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in providing the cable service. 
(4)  A statement describing all intra-company relationships of the applicant, including, for example, parent, subsidiary or affiliated companies. 
(5)  A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written or oral, existing between the applicant and any other person, firm, group or corporation with respect to any franchise awarded pursuant to the Charter and applicable federal or state law, and the conduct of the operation thereof existing at the time the application is made. 
(6)  Audited financial statements for the applicant's two (2) latest fiscal years unless the applicant has not been in existence for at least two (2) years, in which case the applicant shall furnish audited financial statements for such lesser period of time covering the period that the applicant has been in existence. 
(7)  Additional financial information, in the discretion of the applicant, to show that the applicant has the financial ability to provide cable services within the franchise area. At the city's sole discretion, the applicant may be required to provide supplemental financial information to assist the city in its evaluation. 
(8)  A technical description of the type of network proposed by the applicant, including, but not necessarily limited to, network configuration, network capacity, two-way operation capability and service to be provided, and a description of the public, educational and government support proposed to be made available to government, public and/or educational institutions or agencies. 
(9)  A statement of existing franchises held by the applicant indicating, with particularity, when the franchises were issued or awarded and when the systems were constructed together with the name, address and telephone number of a government official knowledgeable of the applicant and its performance in each such franchise area. This statement shall include reference to any franchises that have previously been awarded to the applicant, but which were revoked, not constructed or abandoned by the applicant. Specific information with regard to the dates, locations, and reasons for revocation, nonconstruction or abandonment shall be included. 
(10)  A statement as to whether the applicant or any of its officers, directors, or shareholders of ten (10) percent or more of its voting stock has in the past been convicted of a felony. 
(11)  A statement describing the prior experience in the operation of cable systems of the applicant, including that of the applicant's officers, management and staff to be associated with the proposed operation. 
(12)  If an application is for renewal of the franchise, the proposal must include, in addition to the information required in subsections (1) through (11) above: 
a.  A summary of the technical, financial and programming history of the cable system since the granting of the previous franchise. 
b.  A statement and timetable that outlines all proposed changes, expansion, improvements, or upgrades in the network as to services, programming or technical specifications during the forthcoming proposed term of renewal. 
(b)  Fifteen (15) copies of the application shall be filed. Supplementary, additional or other information that the applicant deems reasonable for consideration may be submitted at the same time as its application, but must be separately bound and submitted in the above number of copies. The city may, at its discretion, consider such additional information as part of the application. 
(c)  The city council reserves the right to require such supplementary, additional or other information that it deems reasonably necessary for its determination of whether to grant a franchise. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other requirement, each applicant for a franchise to provide cable services must accompany its application with an application fee in the form of a certified check in an amount set by resolution of city council, in the case of a franchise renewal, in an amount set by resolution of city council in the case of a new franchise, made payable to the City of Lafayette, Colorado. No application for a cable franchise will be considered without the accompaniment of said application fee. 
(1)  All sums received will be deposited to an account of the city and will serve to recover all expenses incurred by the city in the consideration of the franchise application and the granting of any franchise. Said expenses for franchise renewals shall be limited to reasonable value of services performed by the city's employees and costs of any election required for the granting of said franchise. With respect to applications for new franchises, said expenses shall additionally include the city's reasonable costs incurred for consulting and legal services. 
(2)  Any funds remaining after all expenses have been paid will be refunded to the applicant. The city shall not guarantee any amounts to be refunded. 
(3)  In the event the expenses exceed the total amount of the fees collected from the applicant, and if a franchise is granted, then the company shall pay to the city the excess amount within thirty (30) days after the award of the franchise as certified to the company by the city. 
(e)  Upon receipt of an application for a new franchise, city staff shall review the substance of the application, and thereafter recommend to the city council whether to proceed with negotiations for a new franchise. Should city council direct staff to commence franchise negotiations, upon completion of negotiations, city council shall determine whether to accept the franchise and proceed with an election pursuant to the Charter. With respect to a renewal franchise, upon receipt of an application, the city shall consider the request in accordance with federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2000-34, § 1, 10-3-00; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 26, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 32-6. - Compliance with state, federal and local laws. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, the company shall at all times comply with all laws, regulations and ordinances of the state and federal government, or of any administrative agencies thereof, or of the City of Lafayette. Provided, however, if any state, federal or local law, regulation or ordinance shall prohibit the company from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of this chapter, of the franchise, or of any other law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the company shall notify the city in writing of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation, law or ordinance and the laws, regulations, and ordinances of the city or this chapter, or of the franchise. 
(b)  Any franchise granted shall contain an obligation to pay a franchise fee to the city as consideration for the use of public rights-of-way. The amount of the franchise fee shall be set in each franchise agreement, but shall not exceed the maximum amount set by applicable law. 
(c)  No party receiving a franchise from the city shall evade or avoid the obligation to pay franchise fees by allocating revenues to non-cable services so as to result in an allocation of revenue to cable services that is less than the fair market value of those services. 
(Ord. No. 2000-34, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 32-7. - Police powers. 
    Nothing in this chapter or in any agreement or ordinance in accordance herewith shall be construed as an abrogation by the city of any of its police powers. 
(Ord. No. 2000-34, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 32-8. - Supervision by city. 
(a)  The city administrator, or his designee, shall be appointed and act in the city's behalf as cable communication officer and his responsibilities and duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Liaison between the city and the company. 
(2)  Supervision and monitoring of the company's adherence to franchise provisions. 
(3)  To assure compliance with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2000-34, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 32-9. - Company not to challenge validity of ordinance or franchise. 
    By acceptance of the grant of any franchise pursuant to the Lafayette City Charter and applicable state and federal law for the provision of cable service, the company covenants and agrees that it will not at any time or in any manner or proceeding set up against the city any claim or proceeding challenging this chapter or the grant of a franchise pursuant to the Charter or applicable federal or state law as being unreasonable, arbitrary, voidable or void, nor that the city did not have the power or authority to make such term or condition. By accepting the grant of any such franchise the company accepts the validity of this chapter in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2000-34, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 32-10. - Penalty clause. 
    Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine and/or a jail sentence upon conviction by the municipal court of the City of Lafayette. 
(Ord. No. 2000-34, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Chapter 33 - CABLE TELEVISION CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS 

Sec. 33-1. - Statement of policy. 
(a)  The cable operator should resolve citizen complaints without delay and interference from the franchising authority. 
(b)  Where a given complaint is not addressed by the cable operator to the citizen's satisfaction, the franchising authority should intervene. In addition, where a pattern of unremedied complaints or noncompliance with the standards is identified, the franchising authority should prescribe a cure and establish a reasonable deadline for implementation of the cure. If the noncompliance is not cured within established deadlines, monetary sanctions should be imposed to encourage compliance and deter future noncompliance. 
(c)  These standards are intended to be of general application, and are expected to be met under normal operating conditions; however, the cable operator shall be relieved of any obligations hereunder if it is unable to perform due to a region-wide natural emergency or in the event of force majeure affecting a significant portion of the franchise area. The cable operator is free to exceed these standards to the benefit of its customers and such shall be considered performance for the purposes of these standards. 
(d)  These standards supersede any contradictory or inconsistent provision in federal, state or local law in accordance with 47 U.S.C. § 552(a)(1) and (d)), provided, however, that any provision in federal, state or local law, or in any original franchise agreement or renewal agreement, that imposes a higher obligation or requirement than is imposed by these standards, shall not be considered contradictory or inconsistent with these standards. In the event of a conflict between these standards and a franchise agreement, the franchise agreement shall control. 
(e)  These standards apply to the provision of any cable service, provided by a cable operator over a cable system, within the City of Lafayette. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, 3-7-17) 
Sec. 33-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different interpretation, the following words, phrases, and terms shall have the meanings given below: 
    Adoption shall mean the process necessary to formally enact the standards within the franchising authority's jurisdiction under applicable ordinances and laws. 
    Affiliate shall mean any person or entity that is owned or controlled by, or under common ownership or control with, a cable operator, and provides any cable service or other service. 
    Applicable law means, with respect to these standards and any cable operator's privacy policies, any statute, ordinance, judicial decision, executive order or regulation having the force and effect of law, that determines the legal standing of a case or issue. 
    Cable operator shall mean any person or group of persons: 
(a)  Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or 
(b)  Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    Cable service shall mean: 
(a)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of: 
(1)  Video programming, or 
(2)  Other programming service, and 
(b)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    For purposes of this definition, "video programming" is programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station. "Other programming service" is information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally. 
    Cable system shall mean a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(a)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the televisions signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; or 
(b)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way. 
    City shall mean the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    Colorado Communications and Utilities Alliance or CCUA shall mean an association comprised primarily of local governmental subdivisions of the State of Colorado, or any successor entity. The CCUA may, on behalf of its members, be delegated the authority to review, investigate or otherwise take some related role in the administration and/or enforcement of any functions under these standards. 
    Contractor shall mean a person or entity that agrees by contract to furnish materials or perform services for another at a specified consideration. 
    Customer shall mean any person who receives any cable service from a cable operator. 
    Customer service representative or CSR shall mean any person employed with or under contract or subcontract to a cable operator to assist, or provide service to, customers, whether by telephone, writing service or installation orders, answering customers' questions in person, receiving and processing payments, or performing any other customer service-related tasks. 
    Escalated complaint shall mean a complaint that is referred to a cable operator by the franchising authority. 
    Franchising authority shall mean the city. 
    Necessary shall mean required or indispensable. 
    Non-cable-related purpose shall mean any purpose that is not necessary to render or conduct a legitimate business activity related to a cable service or other service provided by a cable operator to a customer. Market research, telemarketing, and other marketing of services or products that are not related to a cable service or other service provided by a cable operator to a customer shall be considered non-cable-related purposes. 
    Normal business hours shall mean those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include at least some evening hours one (1) night per week, and include some weekend hours. 
    Normal operating conditions shall mean those service conditions which are within the control of a cable operator. Conditions which are not within the control of a cable operator include, but are not necessarily limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Conditions which are ordinarily within the control of a cable operator include, but are not necessarily limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade to the cable system. 
    Other service(s) shall mean any wire or radio communications service provided using any of the facilities of a cable operator that are used in the provision of cable service. 
    Personally identifiable information shall mean specific information about an identified customer, including, but not be limited to, a customer's: 
(a)  Login information for the use of cable service and management of a customer's cable service account; 
(b)  Extent of viewing of video programming or other services; 
(c)  Shopping choices; 
(d)  Interests and opinions; 
(e)  Energy uses; 
(f)  Medical information; 
(g)  Banking data or information; or 
(h)  Any other personal or private information. 
    "Personally identifiable information" shall not mean any aggregate information about customers which does not identify particular persons, or information gathered by a cable operator necessary to install, repair or service equipment or cable system facilities at a customer's premises. 
    Service interruption or interruption shall mean the loss or substantial impairment of picture and/or sound on one (1) or more cable television channels. 
    Service outage or outage shall mean a loss or substantial impairment in reception on all channels. 
    Subcontractor shall mean a person or entity that enters into a contract to perform part or all of the obligations of another's contract. 
    Writing or written as the term applies to notification shall include electronic communications. 
    Any terms not specifically defined in these standards shall be given their ordinary meaning, or where otherwise defined in applicable federal law, such terms shall be interpreted consistent with those definitions. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 3-7-17) 
Sec. 33-3. - Customer service. 
(a)  Courtesy. Cable operator employees, contractors and subcontractors shall be courteous, knowledgeable and helpful and shall provide effective and satisfactory service in all contacts with customers. 
(b)  Accessibility. 
(1)  A cable operator shall provide customer service centers/business offices ("service centers") which are conveniently located, and which are open during normal business hours. Service centers shall be fully staffed with customer service representatives offering the following services to customers who come to the service center: Bill payment, equipment exchange, processing of change of service requests, and response to customer inquiries and request. 
a.  Unless otherwise requested by the city, a cable operator shall post a sign at each service center, visible from the outside of the service center, advising customers of its hours of operation and of the telephone number at which to contact the cable operator if the service center is not open at the times posted. 
b.  The cable operator shall use commercially reasonable efforts to implement and promote "self-help" tools and technology, in order to respond to the growing demand of customers who wish to interact with the cable operator on the customer's own terms and timeline and at their own convenience, without having to travel to a service center. Without limitation, examples of self-help tools or technology may include self-installation kits to customers upon request; pre-paid mailers for the return of equipment upon customer request; an automated phone option for customer bill payments; and equipment exchanges at a customer's residence in the event of damaged equipment. A cable operator shall provide free exchanges of faulty equipment at the customer's address if the equipment has not been damaged in any manner due to the fault or negligence of the customer. 
(2)  A cable operator shall maintain local telephone access lines that shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week for service/repair requests and billing/service inquiries. 
(3)  A cable operator shall have dispatchers and technicians on call twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, including legal holidays. 
(4)  If a customer service telephone call is answered with a recorded message providing the customer with various menu options to address the customer's concern, the recorded message must provide the customer the option to connect to and speak with a CSR within sixty (60) seconds of the commencement of the recording. During normal business hours, a cable operator shall retain sufficient customer service representatives and telephone line capacity to ensure that telephone calls to technical service/repair and billing/service inquiry lines are answered by a customer service representative within thirty (30) seconds or less from the time a customer chooses a menu option to speak directly with a CSR or chooses a menu option that pursuant to the automated voice message, leads to a direct connection with a CSR. Under normal operating conditions, this thirty-second telephone answer time requirement standard shall be met no less than ninety (90) percent of the time measured quarterly. 
(5)  Under normal operating conditions, a customer shall not receive a busy signal more than three (3) percent of the time. This standard shall be met ninety (90) percent or more of the time, measured quarterly. 
(c)  Responsiveness. 
(1)  Guaranteed seven-day residential installation. 
a.  A cable operator shall complete all standard residential installations or modifications to service requested by customers within seven (7) business days after the order is placed, unless a later date for installation is requested. "Standard" residential installations are those located up to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system. If the customer requests a nonstandard residential installation, or the cable operator determines that a nonstandard residential installation is required, the cable operator shall provide the customer in advance with a total installation cost estimate and an estimated date of completion. 
b.  All underground cable drops to the home shall be buried at a depth of no less than twelve (12) inches, or such other depth as may be required by the franchise agreement or local code provisions, or if there are no applicable franchise or code requirements, at such other depths as may be agreed to by the parties if other construction concerns preclude the twelve-inch requirement, and within no more than one (1) calendar week from the initial installation, or at a time mutually agreed upon between the cable operator and the customer. 
(2)  Residential installation and service appointments. 
a.  The "appointment window" alternatives for specific installations, service calls, and/or other installation activities will be either a specific time, or at a maximum, a four-hour time block between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., six (6) days per week. A cable operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of the above days and hours for the express convenience of customers. For purposes of this subsection "appointment window" means the period of time in which the representative of the cable operator must arrive at the customer's location. 
b.  A cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment, unless the customer's issue has otherwise been resolved. 
c.  If a cable operator is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the cable operator shall take reasonable efforts to contact the customer promptly, but in no event later than the end of the appointment window. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary at a time that is convenient to the customer, within normal business hours or as may be otherwise agreed to between the customer and cable operator. 
d.  A cable operator shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives within the agreed upon time, and, if the customer is absent when the technician arrives, the technician leaves written notification of arrival and return time, and a copy of that notification is kept by the cable operator. In such circumstances, the cable operator shall contact the customer within forty-eight (48) hours. 
(3)  Residential service interruptions. 
a.  In the event of system outages resulting from cable operator equipment failure, the cable operator shall correct such failure within two (2) hours after the third customer call is received. 
b.  All other service interruptions resulting from cable operator equipment failure shall be corrected by the cable operator by the end of the next calendar day. 
c.  Records of complaints. 
1.  A cable operator shall keep an accurate and comprehensive file of any complaints regarding the cable system or its operation of the cable system, in a manner consistent with the privacy rights of customers, and the cable operator's actions in response to those complaints. These files shall remain available for viewing by the franchising authority during normal business hours at the cable operator's business office, and shall be retained by the cable operator for a period of at least three (3) years. 
2.  Upon written request a cable operator shall provide the franchising authority an executive summary quarterly, which shall include information concerning customer complaints referred by the franchising authority to the grantee and any other requirements of a franchise agreement but no personally identifiable information. These summaries shall be provided within fifteen (15) days after the end of each quarter. Once a request is made, it need not be repeated and quarterly executive summaries shall be provided by the cable operator until notified in writing by the franchising authority that such summaries are no longer required. 
3.  Upon written request a summary of service requests, identifying the number and nature of the requests and their disposition, shall also be completed by the cable operator for each quarter and submitted to the franchising authority by the fifteenth day of the month after each calendar quarter. Once a request is made, it need not be repeated and quarterly summary of service requests shall be provided by the cable operator until notified in writing by the franchising authority that such summaries are no longer required. Complaints shall be broken out by the nature of the complaint and the type of cable service subject to the complaint. 
4.  Records of service interruptions and outages. A cable operator shall maintain records of all outages and reported service interruptions. Such records shall indicate the type of cable service interrupted, including the reasons for the interruptions. A log of all service interruptions shall be maintained and provided to the franchising authority quarterly, upon written request, within fifteen (15) days after the end of each quarter. Such records shall be submitted to the franchising authority with the records identified in subsection 33-3(c)(3)c.2. above if so requested in writing, and shall be retained by the cable operator for a period of three (3) years. 
5.  All service outages and interruptions for any cause beyond the control of the cable operator shall be corrected within thirty-six (36) hours, after the conditions beyond its control have been corrected. 
(4)  TV reception. 
a.  A cable operator shall provide clear television reception that meets or exceeds technical standards established by the United States Federal Communications Commission (the "FCC"). A cable operator shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system, preferably between midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
b.  If a customer experiences poor video or audio reception attributable to a cable operator's equipment, the cable operator shall: 
1.  Assess the problem within one (1) day of notification; 
2.  Communicate with the customer regarding the nature of the problem and the expected time for repair; 
3.  Complete the repair within two (2) days of assessing the problem unless circumstances exist that reasonably require additional time. 
c.  If an appointment is necessary to address any video or audio reception problem, the customer may choose a block of time described in subsection 33-3(c)(2)a. At the customer's request, the cable operator shall repair the problem at a later time convenient to the customer, during normal business hours or at such other time as may be agreed to by the customer and cable operator. A cable operator shall maintain periodic communications with a customer during the time period in which problem ascertainment and repair are ongoing, so that the customer is advised of the status of the cable operator's efforts to address the problem. 
(5)  Problem resolution. A cable operator's customer service representatives shall have the authority to provide credit for interrupted service, to waive fees, to schedule service appointments and to change billing cycles, where appropriate. Any difficulties that cannot be resolved by the customer service representative shall be referred to the appropriate supervisor who shall contact the customer within four (4) hours and resolve the problem within forty-eight (48) hours or within such other time frame as is acceptable to the customer and the cable operator. 
(6)  Billing, credits, and refunds. 
a.  In addition to other options for payment of a customer's service bill, a cable operator shall make available a telephone payment option where a customer without account irregularities can enter payment information through an automated system, without the necessity of speaking to a CSR. 
b.  A cable operator shall allow at least thirty (30) days from the beginning date of the applicable service period for payment of a customer's service bill for that period. If a customer's service bill is not paid within that period of time the cable operator may apply an administrative fee to the customer's account. The administrative fee must reflect the average costs incurred by the cable operator in attempting to collect the past due payment in accordance with applicable law. If the customer's service bill is not paid within forty-five (45) days of the beginning date of the applicable service period, the cable operator may perform a "soft" disconnect of the customer's service. If a customer's service bill is not paid within fifty-two (52) days of the beginning date of the applicable service period, the cable operator may disconnect the customer's service, provided it has provided two (2) weeks' notice to the customer that such disconnection may result. 
c.  The cable operator shall issue a credit or refund to a customer within thirty (30) days after determining the customer's entitlement to a credit or refund. 
d.  Whenever the cable operator offers any promotional or specially priced service(s) its promotional materials shall clearly identify and explain the specific terms of the promotion, including, but not limited to, manner in which any payment credit will be applied. 
(7)  Treatment of property. To the extent that a franchise agreement does not contain the following procedures for treatment of property, operator shall comply with the procedures set forth in this section. 
a.  A cable operator shall keep tree trimming to a minimum; trees and shrubs or other landscaping that are damaged by a cable operator, any employee or agent of a cable operator during installation or construction shall be restored to their prior condition or replaced within seven (7) days, unless seasonal conditions require a longer time, in which case such restoration or replacement shall be made within seven (7) days after conditions permit. Trees and shrubs on private property shall not be removed without the prior permission of the owner or legal tenant of the property on which they are located. This provision shall be in addition to, and shall not supersede, any requirement in any franchise agreement. 
b.  A cable operator shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the property owner and the franchising authority, restore any private property to as good condition as before the work causing such disturbance was initiated. A cable operator shall repair, replace or compensate a property owner for any damage resulting from the cable operator's installation, construction, service or repair activities. If compensation is requested by the customer for damage caused by any cable operator activity, the cable operator shall reimburse the property owner one hundred (100) percent of the actual cost of the damage. 
c.  Except in the case of an emergency involving public safety or service interruption to a large number of customers, a cable operator shall give reasonable notice to property owners or legal tenants prior to entering upon private premises, and the notice shall specify the work to be performed; provided that in the case of construction operations such notice shall be delivered or provided at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to entry, unless such notice is waived by the customer. For purposes of this subsection, "reasonable notice" shall be considered: 
1.  For pedestal installation or similar major construction, seven (7) days. 
2.  For routine maintenance, such as adding or dropping service, tree trimming and the like, reasonable notice given the circumstances. Unless a franchise agreement has a different requirement, reasonable notice shall require, at a minimum, prior notice to a property owner or tenant, before entry is made onto that person's property. 
3.  For emergency work a cable operator shall attempt to contact the property owner or legal tenant in person, and shall leave a door hanger notice in the event personal contact is not made. Door hangars must describe the issue and provide contact information where the property owner or tenant can receive more information about the emergency work. 
Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing access or entry to private property, or any other property, where such right to access or entry is not otherwise provided by law. 
d.  Cable operator personnel shall clean all areas surrounding any work site and ensure that all cable materials have been disposed of properly. 
(d)  Services for customers with disabilities. 
(1)  For any customer with a disability, a cable operator shall deliver and pick up equipment at customers' homes at no charge unless the malfunction was caused by the actions of the customer. In the case of malfunctioning equipment, the technician shall provide replacement equipment, hook it up and ensure that it is working properly, and shall return the defective equipment to the cable operator. 
(2)  A cable operator shall provide either TTY, TDD, TYY, VRS service or other similar service that are in compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act and other applicable law, with trained operators who can provide every type of assistance rendered by the cable operator's customer service representatives for any hearing-impaired customer at no charge. 
(3)  A cable operator shall provide free use of a remote control unit to mobility-impaired (if disabled, in accordance with subsection 33-3(d)(4)) customers. 
(4)  Any customer with a disability may request the special services described above by providing a cable operator with a letter from the customer's physician stating the need, or by making the request to the cable operator's installer or service technician, where the need for the special services can be visually confirmed. 
(e)  Cable services information. 
(1)  At any time a customer or prospective customer may request, a cable operator shall provide the following information, in clear, concise written form, easily accessible and located on cable operator's website (and in Spanish, when requested by the customer): 
a.  Products and services offered by the cable operator, including its channel lineup; 
b.  The cable operator's complete range of service options and the prices for these services; 
c.  The cable operator's billing, collection and disconnection policies; 
d.  Privacy rights of customers; 
e.  All applicable complaint procedures, including complaint forms and the telephone numbers and mailing addresses of the cable operator, and the FCC; 
f.  Use and availability of parental control/lock out device; 
g.  Special services for customers with disabilities; 
h.  Days, times of operation, and locations of the service centers; 
(2)  At a customer's request, a cable operator shall make available either a complete copy of these standards and any other applicable customer service standards, or a summary of these standards, in a format to be approved by CCUA and the franchising authority, which shall include at a minimum, the URL address of a website containing these standards in their entirety; provided however, that if the CCUA or franchising authority does not maintain a website with a complete copy of these standards, a cable operator shall be under no obligation to do so; 
If acceptable to a customer, cable operator may fulfill customer requests for any of the information listed in this section by making the requested information available electronically, such as on a website or by electronic mail. 
(3)  Upon written request, a cable operator shall meet annually with the franchising authority to review the format of the cable operator's bills to customers. Whenever the cable operator makes substantial changes to its billing format, it will contact the franchising authority at least thirty (30) days prior to the time such changes are to be effective, in order to inform the franchising authority of such changes. 
(4)  Copies of notices provided to the customer in accordance with subsection (5) below shall be filed (by fax or email acceptable) concurrently with the franchising authority and the CCUA. 
(5)  A cable operator shall provide customers with written notification of any change in rates for nondiscretionary cable services, and for service tier changes that result in a deletion of programming from a customer's service tier, at least thirty (30) days before the effective date of change. For purposes of this section, "nondiscretionary" means the subscribed tier and any other cable services that a customer has subscribed to, at the time the change in rates are announced by the cable operator. 
(6)  All officers, agents, and employees of the cable operator or its contractors or subcontractors who are in personal contact with customers and/or when working on public property, shall wear on their outer clothing identification cards bearing their name and photograph and identifying them as representatives of the cable operator. The cable operator shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the cable operator shall be clearly visually identified to the public as working for the cable operator. Whenever a cable operator work crew is in personal contact with customers or public employees, a supervisor must be able to communicate clearly with the customer or public employee. Every vehicle of a subcontractor or contractor shall be labeled with the name of the contractor and further identified as contracting or subcontracting for the cable operator. 
(7)  Each CSR, technician or employee of the cable operator in each contact with a customer shall state the estimated cost of the service, repair, or installation orally prior to delivery of the service or before any work is performed, and shall provide the customer with an oral statement of the total charges before terminating the telephone call or before leaving the location at which the work was performed. A written estimate of the charges shall be provided to the customer before the actual work is performed. 
(f)  Customer privacy. 
(1)  Cable customer privacy. In addition to complying with the requirements in this subsection, a cable operator shall fully comply with all obligations under 47 U.S.C. Section 551. 
(2)  Collection and use of personally identifiable information. 
a.  A cable operator shall not use the cable system to collect, monitor or observe personally identifiable information without the prior affirmative written or electronic consent of the customer unless, and only to the extent that such information is: 
1.  Used to detect unauthorized reception of cable communications; or 
2.  Necessary to render a cable service or other service provided by the cable operator to the customer and as otherwise authorized by applicable law. 
b.  A cable operator shall take such actions as are necessary using then-current industry standard practices to prevent any affiliate from using the facilities of the cable operator in any manner, including, but not limited to, sending data or other signals through such facilities, to the extent such use will permit an affiliate unauthorized access to personally identifiable information on equipment of a customer (regardless of whether such equipment is owned or leased by the customer or provided by a cable operator) or on any of the facilities of the cable operator that are used in the provision of cable service. This subsection shall not be interpreted to prohibit an affiliate from obtaining access to personally identifiable information to the extent otherwise permitted by this subsection. 
c.  A cable operator shall take such actions as are necessary using then-current industry standard practices to prevent a person or entity (other than an affiliate) from using the facilities of the cable operator in any manner, including, but not limited to, sending data or other signals through such facilities, to the extent such use will permit such person or entity unauthorized access to personally identifiable information on equipment of a customer (regardless of whether such equipment is owned or leased by the customer or provided by a cable operator) or on any of the facilities of the cable operator that are used in the provision of cable service. 
(3)  Disclosure of personally identifiable information. A cable operator shall not disclose personally identifiable information without the prior affirmative written or electronic consent of the customer, unless otherwise authorized by applicable law. 
a.  A minimum of thirty (30) days prior to making any disclosure of personally identifiable information of any customer for any non-cable related purpose as provided in this subsection, where such customer has not previously been provided the notice and choice provided for in this section, the cable operator shall notify each customer (that the cable operator intends to disclose information about) of the customer's right to prohibit the disclosure of such information for non-cable related purposes. The notice to customers may reference the customer to his or her options to state a preference for disclosure or non-disclosure of certain information, as provided in this section. 
b.  A cable operator may disclose personally identifiable information only to the extent that it is necessary to render, or conduct a legitimate business activity related to, a cable service or other service provided by the cable operator to the customer. 
c.  To the extent authorized by applicable law, a cable operator may disclose personally identifiable information pursuant to a subpoena, court order, warrant or other valid legal process authorizing such disclosure. 
(4)  Access to information. Any personally identifiable information collected and maintained by a cable operator shall be made available for customer examination within thirty (30) days of receiving a request by a customer to examine such information about himself or herself at the local offices of the cable operator or other convenient place within the city designated by the cable operator, or electronically, such as over a website. Upon a reasonable showing by the customer that such personally identifiable information is inaccurate, a cable operator shall correct such information. 
(5)  Privacy notice to customers. 
a.  A cable operator shall annually mail or provide a separate, written or electronic copy of the privacy statement to customers consistent with 47 U.S.C. Section 551(a)(1), and shall provide a customer a copy of such statement at the time the cable operator enters into an agreement with the customer to provide cable service. The written notice shall be in a clear and conspicuous format, which at a minimum, shall be in a comparable font size to other general information provided to customers about their account as it appears on either paper or electronic customer communications. 
b.  In or accompanying the statement required by this subsection, a cable operator shall state substantially the following message regarding the disclosure of customer information: "Unless a customer affirmatively consents electronically or in writing to the disclosure of personally identifiable information, any disclosure of personally identifiable information for purposes other than to the extent necessary to render, or conduct a legitimate business activity related to, a cable service or other service, is limited to: 
1.  Disclosure pursuant to valid legal process authorized by applicable law. 
2.  Disclosure of the name and address of a customer subscribing to any general programming tiers of service and other categories of cable services provided by the cable operator that do not directly or indirectly disclose: (I) A customer's extent of viewing of a cable service or other service provided by the cable operator; (II) The extent of any other use by a customer of a cable service; (III) The nature of any transactions made by a customer over the cable system; or (IV) The nature of programming or websites that a customer subscribes to or views (i.e., a cable operator may only disclose the fact that a person subscribes to a general tier of service, or a package of channels with the same type of programming), provided that with respect to the nature of websites subscribed to or viewed, these are limited to websites accessed by a customer in connection with programming available from their account for cable services." 
The notice shall also inform the customers of their right to prohibit the disclosure of their names and addresses in accordance with this section. If a customer exercises his or her right to prohibit the disclosure of name and address as provided in this section, such prohibition against disclosure shall remain in effect, unless and until the customer subsequently changes their disclosure preferences as described below. 
(6)  Privacy reporting requirements. The cable operator shall include in its regular periodic reports to the franchising authority required by its franchise agreement information summarizing: 
a.  The type of personally identifiable information that was actually collected or disclosed by cable operator during the reporting period; 
b.  For each type of personally identifiable information collected or disclosed, a statement from an authorized representative of the cable operator certifying that the personally identifiable information collected or disclosed was: 
1.  Collected or disclosed to the extent necessary to render, or conduct a legitimate business activity related to, a cable service or other service provided by the cable operator; 
2.  Used to the extent necessary to detect unauthorized reception of cable communications; 
3.  Disclosed pursuant to valid legal process authorized by applicable law; or 
4.  A disclosure of personally identifiable information of particular subscribers, but only to the extent affirmatively consented to by such subscribers in writing or electronically, or as otherwise authorized by applicable law. 
c.  The standard industrial classification (SIC) codes or comparable identifiers pertaining to any entities to whom such personally identifiable information was disclosed, except that a cable operator need not provide the name of any court or governmental entity to which such disclosure was made pursuant to valid legal process authorized by applicable law; 
d.  The general measures that have been taken to prevent the unauthorized access to personally identifiable information by a person other than the customer or the cable operator. A cable operator shall meet with franchising authority if requested to discuss technology used to prohibit unauthorized access to personally identifiable information by any means. 
(7)  [Authority to obtain information.] Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the franchising authority from obtaining personally identifiable information to the extent not prohibited by Section 631 of the Communications Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 551 and applicable laws. 
(8)  Destruction of personally identifiable information. A cable operator shall destroy any personally identifiable information if the information is no longer necessary for the purpose for which it was collected and there are no pending requests or orders for access to such information under this section, pursuant to a court order or other valid legal process, or pursuant to applicable law. 
(9)  Notice and choice for customers. The cable operator shall at all times make available to customers one (1) or more methods for customers to use to prohibit or limit disclosures, or permit or release disclosures, as provided for in this section. These methods may include, for example, online website "preference center" features, automated toll-free telephone systems, live toll-free telephone interactions with customer service agents, in-person interactions with customer service personnel, regular mail methods such as a postage paid, self-addressed post card, an insert included with the customer's monthly bill for cable service, the privacy notice specified in this section, or such other comparable methods as may be provided by the cable operator. Website "preference center" features shall be easily identifiable and navigable by customers, and shall be in a comparable size font as other billing information provided to customers on a cable operator's website. A customer who provides the cable operator with permission to disclose personally identifiable information through any of the methods offered by a cable operator shall be provided follow-up notice, no less than annually, of the customer's right to prohibit these disclosures and the options for the customer to express his or her preference regarding disclosures. Such notice shall, at a minimum, be provided by an insert in the cable operator's bill (or other direct mail piece) to the customer or a notice or message printed on the cable operator's bill to the customer, and on the cable operator's website when a customer logs in to view his or her cable service account options. The form of such notice shall also be provided on an annual basis to the franchising authority. These methods of notification to customers may also include other comparable methods as submitted by the cable operator and approved by the franchising authority in its reasonable discretion. 
(g)  Safety. A cable operator shall install and locate its facilities, cable system, and equipment in compliance with all federal, state, local, and company safety standards, and in such manner as shall not unduly interfere with or endanger persons or property. Whenever a cable operator receives notice that an unsafe condition exists with respect to its equipment, the cable operator shall investigate such condition immediately, and shall take such measures as are necessary to remove or eliminate any unsafe condition. 
(h)  Cancellation of new services. In the event that a new customer requests installation of cable service and is unsatisfied with their initial cable service, and provided that the customer so notifies the cable operator of their dissatisfaction within thirty (30) days of initial installation, then such customer can request disconnection of cable service within thirty (30) days of initial installation, and the cable operator shall provide a credit to the customer's account consistent with this section. The customer will be required to return all equipment in good working order; provided such equipment is returned in such order, then the cable operator shall refund the monthly recurring fee for the new customer's first thirty (30) days of cable service and any charges paid for installation. This provision does not apply to existing customers who request upgrades to their cable service, to discretionary cable service such as PPV or movies purchased and viewed On Demand, or to customer moves and/or transfers of cable service. The service credit shall be provided in the next billing cycle. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 3-7-17) 
Sec. 33-4. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  Complaints to a cable operator. 
(1)  A cable operator shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon, and resolving customer complaints, and crediting customer accounts and shall have such procedures printed and disseminated at the cable operator's sole expense, consistent with the standards set forth in this section. 
(2)  Said written procedures shall prescribe a simple manner in which any customer may submit a complaint by telephone or in writing to a cable operator that it has violated any provision of these customer service standards, any terms or conditions of the customer's contract with the cable operator, or reasonable business practices. If a representative of the franchising authority notifies the cable operator of a customer complaint that has not previously been made by the customer to the cable operator, the complaint shall be deemed to have been made by the customer as of the date of the franchising authority's notice to the cable operator. 
(3)  At the conclusion of the cable operator's investigation of a customer complaint, but in no more than ten (10) calendar days after receiving the complaint, the cable operator shall notify the customer of the results of its investigation and its proposed action or credit. 
(4)  A cable operator shall also notify the customer of the customer's right to file a complaint with the franchising authority in the event the customer is dissatisfied with the cable operator's decision, and shall thoroughly explain the necessary procedures for filing such complaint with the franchising authority. 
(5)  A cable operator shall immediately report all customer escalated complaints that it does not find valid to the franchising authority. 
(6)  A cable operator's complaint procedures shall be filed with the franchising authority prior to implementation. 
(b)  Complaints to the franchising authority. 
(1)  Any customer who is dissatisfied with any proposed decision of the cable operator or who has not received a decision within the time period set forth below shall be entitled to have the complaint reviewed by the franchising authority. 
(2)  The customer may initiate the review either by calling the franchising authority or by filing a written complaint together with the cable operator's written decision, if any, with the franchising authority. 
(3)  The customer shall make such filing and notification within twenty (20) days of receipt of the cable operator's decision or, if no decision has been provided, within thirty (30) days after filing the original complaint with the cable operator. 
(4)  If the franchising authority decides that further evidence is warranted, the franchising authority shall require the cable operator and the customer to submit, within ten (10) days of notice thereof, a written statement of the facts and arguments in support of their respective positions. 
(5)  The cable operator and the customer shall produce any additional evidence, including any reports from the cable operator, which the franchising authority may deem necessary to an understanding and determination of the complaint. 
(6)  The franchising authority shall issue a determination within fifteen (15) days of receiving the customer complaint, or after examining the materials submitted, setting forth its basis for the determination. 
(7)  The franchising authority may extend these time limits for reasonable cause and may intercede and attempt to negotiate an informal resolution. 
(c)  Security fund or letter of credit. A cable operator shall comply with any franchise agreement regarding letters of credit. If a franchise agreement is silent on letter of credit the following shall apply: 
(1)  Within thirty (30) days of the written notification to a cable operator by the franchising authority that an alleged franchise violation exists, a cable operator shall deposit with an escrow agent approved by the franchising authority fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or, in the sole discretion of the franchising authority, such lesser amount as the franchising authority deems reasonable to protect subscribers within its jurisdiction. Alternatively, at the cable operator's discretion, it may provide to the franchising authority an irrevocable letter of credit in the same amount. A letter of credit or cash deposit, with the approval of the franchising authority, may be posted jointly for more than one (1) member of the CCUA, and may be administered, and drawn upon, jointly by the CCUA or drawn upon individually by each member; provided however that if such letter of credit or cash deposit is provided to CCUA on behalf of more than one (1) of its members, the letter of credit or cash deposit may, in the sole discretion of CCUA and its effected members, be required in an amount not to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The escrowed funds or letter of credit shall constitute the "security fund" for ensuring compliance with these standards for the benefit of the franchising authority. The escrowed funds or letter of credit shall be maintained by a cable operator at the amount initially required, even if amounts are withdrawn pursuant to any provision of these standards, until any claims related to the alleged franchise violation(s) are paid in full. 
(2)  The franchising authority may require the cable operator to increase the amount of the security fund, if it finds that new risk factors exist which necessitate such an increase. 
(3)  The security fund shall serve as security for the payment of any penalties, fees, charges or credits as provided for herein and for the performance by a cable operator of all its obligations under these customer service standards. 
(4)  The rights reserved to the franchising authority with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the franchising authority, whether reserved by any applicable franchise agreement or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to same shall in any way affect, or diminish, any other right the franchising authority may otherwise have. 
(d)  Verification of compliance. A cable operator shall establish its compliance with any or all of the standards required through annual reports that demonstrate said compliance, or as requested by the franchising authority. 
(e)  Procedure for remedying violations. 
(1)  If the franchising authority has reason to believe that a cable operator has failed to comply with any of these standards, or has failed to perform in a timely manner, the franchising authority may pursue the procedures in its franchise agreement to address violations of these standards in a like manner as other franchise violations are considered. 
(2)  Following the procedures set forth in any franchise agreement governing the manner to address alleged franchise violations, if the franchising authority determines in its sole discretion that the noncompliance has been substantiated, in addition to any remedies that may be provided in the franchise agreement, the franchising authority may: 
a.  Impose assessments of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day, to be withdrawn from the security fund in addition to any franchise fee until the noncompliance is remedied; and/or 
b.  Order such rebates and credits to affected customers as in its sole discretion it deems reasonable and appropriate for degraded or unsatisfactory services that constituted noncompliance with these standards; and/or 
c.  Reverse any decision of the cable operator in the matter; and/or 
d.  Grant a specific solution as determined by the franchising authority; and/or 
e.  Except for in emergency situations, withhold licenses and permits for work by the cable operator or its subcontractors in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 3-7-17) 
Sec. 33-5. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Severability. Should any section, subsection, paragraph, term, or provision of these standards be determined to be illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction with regard thereto, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, term, or provision of these standards, each of the latter of which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  Non-waiver. Failure to enforce any provision of these standards shall not operate as a waiver of the obligations or responsibilities of a cable operator under said provision, or any other provision of these standards. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 3-7-17) 
Chapter 34 - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 34-1. - Legislative intent. 
    It is the intent of the city council to protect the city's water distribution system from contamination or pollution by backflow from a property owner's internal distribution system or private water system, and to provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control, which will systematically prevent the contamination or pollution of the city's water distribution system. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 1, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 34-2. - Adoption. 
    The city council adopts by reference the following manuals and standards: 
(a)  Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual, 5th Edition, published in 2006 by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, Water Quality Control Division, 4300 Cherry Creek Drive South, Denver, Colorado, 80246-1530. 
(b)  The Manual of Cross Connection Control, 10th Edition, published in October 2009 by the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California, University Park, Los Angeles, California, 80089. 
(c)  The National Fire Protection Association standards: NFPA 13 - Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 2013 Edition, and NFPA 24 - Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances, 2013 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, 02169-7471. 
(d)  American Water Works Association C510-07, Standard for Double Check Valve Backflow-Prevention Assembly, and C511-07, Standard for Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow-Prevention Assembly. 
(e)  The subject matter of the manuals and standards concerns a minimum standard for cross-connection control. Adoption includes all amendments and supplements. In the event of a conflict between the adopted manuals and standards and this chapter the requirements of this chapter shall prevail. Copies of the above-referenced documents shall be maintained on file at the public works department and may be inspected during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 2, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 34-3. - Authority. 
    In addition to the city's home rule powers, the authority to implement and maintain controls and regulations on cross connections is contained in the following legislation and regulations: 
(a)  Clean Water Act 33, United States Code (U.S.C.) § 1251 et seq. (1987). 
(b)  Safe Drinking Water Act; Title XIV - Safety of Public Drinking Water Systems of the Public Health Service Act, codified as 42 U.S.C. § 300f et seq. (1974), Public Law 104-182 Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996. 
(d)  Colorado Department of Health Law Title 25-1-114, 25-1-114.1, Colorado Revised Statute (C.R.S). 
(e)  Colorado Primary Drinking Water Regulations Section 14.1 (Hazardous Cross-Connections). 
(f)  Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual, 5th Edition, published in 2006 by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, Water Quality Control Division, 4300 Cherry Creek Drive South, Denver, Colorado, 80246-1530. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1, § 1, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 3, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 34-4. - Responsibility. 
(a)  The director of public works is hereby delegated the responsibility for implementing a cross connection control program in accordance with this chapter and for enforcement thereof. If a backflow prevention device is required at the city water service connection to any property owner's premises for the protection of the city water system, the director of public works shall give notice in writing to the property owner to install an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the premises. The property owner shall install an approved device or devices at the owner's own expense. 
(b)  No provision of this chapter exempts the property owner from the cross connection control provisions for internal water distribution systems as set forth in the most current International Plumbing Code, adopted by reference in chapter 30 of the Code. 
(c)  The property owner is solely responsible for preventing pollutants and contaminants in water distributing pipes located within their property from entering the municipal potable water supply. 
(1)  The property owner's responsibility starts at the point of delivery and includes all of the connections to, and the operation of any domestic, irrigation, or fire sprinkler systems. 
(2)  The property owner is solely responsible for the purchase, installment and maintenance of any required backflow prevention device, and for ensuring that all initial and annual testing is completed per the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  The property owner must keep accurate records of all tests, inspections and repairs for at least three (3) years. The property owner is required to provide the public works department with copies of these records upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 4, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 34-5. - Definitions. 
    When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following words and phrases in this chapter have the following meanings: 
    Air-gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An approved air-gap will be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel; and, in no case less than one (1) inch. When an air-gap is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the city's potable water system, an emergency bypass shall be installed around the air-gap system and an approved reduced pressure principle device will be installed in the bypass system. 
    Approved means accepted by the public works department as meeting the applicable specification stated or cited in this chapter, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, pond, lake, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids". These waters may be polluted or contaminated or may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control. 
    Backflow means the undesirable reversal of the direction of flow of the water or mixtures of water and other liquid, gases, or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable water supply from any source or sources caused by backpressure and/or back-siphonage. 
    Backflow prevention device means any device, method, or type of construction designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage into the city's water supply by isolating the owner's water system from the city's water system. 
    Back-pressure means the backflow of water or other contaminated fluids caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler or other means that could create pressure within the owner's system greater than the city supply pressure. 
    Back-siphonage means the backflow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Certified backflow prevention assembly tester means any person who has passed a State of Colorado certified or sponsored testing and inspection course, and who is listed by the State of Colorado as a certified backflow prevention assembly tester. 
    Certified inspector and tester means any person who has passed a state approved or sponsored testing and inspection course, and who is listed by the state as a certified inspector/tester. 
    Check valve means a self-closing device which is designed to permit the flow of fluids in one (1) direction and to close if there is a reversal of flow. 
    City means the City of Lafayette. 
    Colorado Cross Connection Control Manual means the manual published by the state addressing cross connection control practices, which is adopted by reference herein for use by the city in implementing a cross connection control program. 
    Compliance date means the day upon which such installation, testing, or repair shall be completed as set forth in section 34-40. 
    Compliance period means the time between the receipt by the owner of a notice from the director of public works or designee thereof to install, test, or repair a backflow prevention assembly and the day upon which such installation, testing, or repair shall be completed or ready for inspection by the director of public works or a designee thereof. 
    Contamination means any impairment of the quality of the city's potable water by pollution from sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
    Critical level means the critical level C-L or C/L marking on a backflow prevention device or vacuum breaker which is a point conforming to approved standards and established by the testing laboratory (usually stamped on the device by the manufacturer), which determines the minimum elevation above the flood-level rim of the fixture or receptacle served at which the device may be installed. When a backflow prevention device does not bear a critical level marking, the bottom of the vacuum breaker, combination valve, or the bottom of any such approved device shall constitute the critical level. 
    Cross connection means any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other waste or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur are considered to be cross connections. 
    Cross connections, controlled means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Director of public works means the person appointed by the city administrator to supervise the operation of the municipal water utility and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter or the director of public works authorized designee. 
    Double check valve assembly means an assembly of two (2) independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city-approved testing establishment for backflow prevention devices. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance. 
    Flood-level rim means the edge of the receptacle from which water overflows. 
    Fire sprinkler system means an automatic sprinkler system for fire suppression that operates automatically when its heat-activated element is heated to its thermal rating or above, allowing water to discharge over a specified fire area and includes a device for actuating an alarm when the system is in operation. 
    Hazard, degree of is the term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the public potable water system. 
    Hazard, health means any condition, device, or practice in the city's water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the director of public works, may create a danger to the health and the well being of the water consumer. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect, including cross connections, in a water supply system. 
    Hazard, plumbing means a plumbing type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air-gap separation or backflow prevention device. Unprotected plumbing type cross connections are considered to be a health hazard. 
    Hazard, pollution means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
    Hazard, system means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
    Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to, polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process water and "used waters" originating from the public water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, lakes, dams, ponds, retention pits, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. 
    Multistory building means any building having two (2) or more levels, excluding the basement, or over forty (40) feet in height. Single-family units are excluded from this definition. 
    Nonpotable water means water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable potability. 
    Non-single-family residential connections means all multifamily (two dwelling units or more), commercial, industrial, irrigation, and fire suppression water connections. 
    Passing test means a passing or satisfactory result of the testing procedures as set forth in the Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual. 
    Point of delivery means the location of the water meter for in building water use, the location of the irrigation meter for outdoor water use, or the location of the fire sprinkler system tap into the city's water distribution system for fire system water use. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or biological) in the water that may degrade the water quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair its usefulness. 
    Potable water means water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. The bacteriological, chemical, and radiological quality shall conform with state drinking water regulations. 
    Property owner means any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others, or in a representative capacity (including, without limitation, an authorized agent, executor or trustee) has legal or equitable title to any property in question 
    Reduced pressure principle device means an assembly of two (2) independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve between the two (2) check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks, for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly will meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city-approved testing laboratory for backflow prevention assemblies. The device will operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two (2) check valves at a level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two (2) check valves will be less than the pressure on the public water supply of the device. In case of leakage of either of the check valves, the differential relief valve will operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two (2) pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve will open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance, and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged. 
    Submerged inlet means a water pipe or extension thereto from the public water supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected against backflow. 
    Vacuum means any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere. 
    Vacuum breaker, atmospheric nonpressure type means a vacuum breaker designed so as not to be subjected to static line pressure or installed where it would be under pressure for not more than twelve (12) hours in any twenty-four-hour period. 
    Vacuum breaker, pressure type means a vacuum breaker designed so as not to be subjected to static line pressure. 
    Water service connection means the terminal end of the city's service connection from the city water system, i.e., at the curb stop shut-off valve, property line, or meter. There will be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the owner's water system. Service connection will also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 5, 4-7-15; Ord. No. 2015-37, § 1, 10-20-15) 
Secs. 34-6-34-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-20. - Water system. 
    The city's water system consists of the source and distribution facilities of the water system to the point of the property owner's system. The source includes all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system. The distribution system includes the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the water service connection. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05) 
Secs. 34-21-34-23. - Reserved. 
Sec. 34-24. - Plan approval. 
(a)  All building plans involving water/waste water service, plumbing plans for additions or alterations to existing plumbing systems, and/or irrigation system installation submitted to the planning and building department shall be reviewed by the public works department and must be approved prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Submitted plans must show: 
(1)  Water service type, size and location. 
(2)  Meter size and location. 
(3)  Backflow prevention assembly size, type and location. 
(4)  Fire sprinkling systems service line, size and type of backflow prevention assembly. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-25. - Reserved. 
Sec. 34-26. - Installation. 
(a)  An approved backflow prevention device will be installed at or near the property line, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the director of public works, the city's water system will be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
(2)  In the case of premises in which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the city's water system, the city's water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This will include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the city's water system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  In the case of premises having internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or having intricate plumbing and piping arrangements, or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist, the city's water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line. 
(b)  Backflow prevention devices are to be installed in an accessible location to facilitate inspection, testing and maintenance. Adequate drainage area for the device must be provided for in the event that water is released. 
(c)  All connections to the city's water system, including all existing connections, shall conform or be brought into conformance with the requirements of this chapter within one (1) year of adoption of this chapter. 
(d)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed downstream of the water meter in accordance with the installation details contained in the manuals, standards and codes set forth in section 34-3 of this chapter. 
(e)  Before installing a backflow prevention assembly, pipelines shall be thoroughly flushed to remove foreign material. 
(f)  Backflow prevention valves shall not be used as the inlet or outlet valve of the water meter. Test cocks shall not be used as supply connections. 
(g)  In order to ensure that backflow prevention assemblies continue to operate satisfactorily, it is necessary that they be tested by a Colorado state certified backflow prevention assembly tester approved by the public works department, at the time of installation, and at least annually as required herein thereafter. Such test shall be conducted in accordance with the Colorado Cross-Connection Control Manual or the Manual of Cross-Connection Control performance standards and field test procedures as directed by the Colorado Department of Health. The backflow assembly test results, plumbing permit and test permit number shall be submitted to the public works department within five (5) days of the test, in the manner as prescribed in section 34-33 of this chapter. 
(h)  The public works department will inspect all containment installations. 
(i)  All costs for design, installation, maintenance, repair and testing shall be borne by the property owner. 
(j)  All fire sprinkling systems shall be equipped with appropriate backflow prevention assembly to protect the potable water supply: 
(1)  All glycol (ethylene or propylene) or antifreeze systems shall have an approved reduced pressure principal assembly for containment. 
(2)  Dry fire systems shall have an approved double check valve installed upstream of the air pressure valve. 
(k)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and inspected in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the manuals, standards and codes set forth in section 34-2 of this chapter. 
(l)  Backflow prevention assembly installations shall be inspected and approved for use by the public works department. Inspections must be scheduled at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the desired inspection time. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 6, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 34-27. - Reserved. 
Sec. 34-28. - Standards. 
    Backflow prevention devices shall adhere to the following standards: 
(a)  Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the public works department. The term approved backflow prevention assembly shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the manuals, standards and codes set forth in section 34-2 of this chapter. 
(b)  No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed in ground or below ground. 
(c)  Backflow assemblies used on fire lines shall have O.S. and Y. valves listed by Underwriter Laboratories (UL), Factory Manual (FM) and the National Fire Protection Association. 
(d)  Backflow prevention devices currently installed that are not approved or backflow devices of the incorrect type shall be replaced with an approved device within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the ordinance [codified in this chapter]. 
(e)  Only backflow devices tested and certified by the following organization will be allowed to be installed: 
Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research 
University of Southern California 
University Park 
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0231 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 7, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 34-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TESTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-30. - Inspections, testing, and repair-Non-single-family residential connections. 
    It is the responsibility of the property owner of all non-single-family residential connections to have certified inspections and operational tests made on the backflow prevention device upon installation and at least annually thereafter. The director of public works may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be made at the expense of the property owner and will be performed by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester approved by the director of public works. A backflow prevention device will be repaired or replaced at the expense of the property owner whenever a device is found to be defective. 
(a)  Annually, it will be the obligation of the property owner of any premises where any backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have a certified test made of the assemblies. In those specific instances where the public works department deems the hazard to be great enough, it will require certified inspection at more frequent intervals. The cost for any test under this section shall be at the property owner's expense. All tests shall be performed by a certified technician approved by the public works department. 
(b)  As necessary, the assembly shall be repaired or replaced and retested within five (5) business days at the expense of the property owner whenever the assembly or assemblies are found to be defective. The certified backflow assembly prevention tester shall notify the public works department of any defect or failure of annual testing with[in] twenty-four (24) hours of the test. Records or copies of same, of all such tests, repairs or replacement shall be kept by the tester of the assembly and the property owner, and a copy or copies shall be sent to the public works department within five (5) business days of the test, in the manner as prescribed in section 34-33 of this chapter. 
(c)  All testing gauges shall be kept in proper working condition and tested and calibrated for accuracy yearly, or more often in the event of questionable readings. 
(d)  The public works department retains the right to test or otherwise check the installation and operation of any containment assembly at any time. 
(e)  All fire sprinkler system backflow devices must be tested by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester who is registered as a Fire Suppression System Contractor - Backflow with the Colorado Department of Public Safety Division of Fire Prevention and Control. 
(f)  All fire sprinkler systems with chemical or antifreeze additives must drain to the sanitary waste water system, and not to the stormwater system, when being backflow tested and maintained. 
(g)  This section shall also apply to all irrigation services. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 8, 4-7-15; Ord. No. 2015-37, § 2, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 34-31. - Same-Single-family residential connections. 
    It is strongly encouraged that all residential water service connections have certified inspections completed annually on their irrigation backflow devices. All inspections and tests shall be made at the expense of the property owner and will be performed by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester and reported in the manner as prescribed in section 34-33 of this chapter. 
(a)  All water service connections served by the city or a consecutive water system or water district served by the city that have any type of auxiliary water supply will be tested according to section 34-30 of this chapter. 
(b)  In those specific instances where the public works department deems that a hazard to the city water system exists, it will require a certified inspection to be completed within five (5) working days of written notification. Annual inspections shall be required until the public works director deems that a hazard no longer exists. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 9, 4-7-15; Ord. No. 2015-37, § 3, 10-20-15) 
Sec. 34-32. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The public works department representative and/or designee assigned to inspect premises relative to possible hazards shall carry proper credentials of his or her office and, upon exhibit of which, said representative shall have the right of entry to inspect any and all buildings and premises for cross-connections in the performance of his or her duties. If such entry is refused, the city shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  This right of entry shall be a condition of continuation of water service in order to protect the city's water distribution system and the health, safety and welfare of the community. Where building security is required, the backflow assembly or assemblies should be located in an area not subject to security. Questions regarding proper credentials should be directed to the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 34-33. - Reporting and record-keeping. 
    The certified backflow prevention assembly tester will report on a form approved by the city, the results of inspections, tests, and maintenance to the director of public works and the property owner. This report will be submitted to the director of public works within five (5) business days following the completion of the inspection, test, or maintenance of the device. The report will be submitted to the public works department via e-mail, FAX or hand delivery and hand written reports are not acceptable. The certified tester shall also, on a tag approved by the city, attach a tag to the backflow prevention device following each inspection, test, or maintenance activity with the following information: date of test, device serial number and the state issued certification number of the backflow prevention assembly tester that performed the activities. Records of all inspections, tests, or maintenance activities, including materials and parts changed, shall be kept by the certified backflow prevention assembly tester, the property owner, and the director of public works for a period of not less than five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 10, 4-7-15) 
Secs. 34-34-34-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 34-40. - Compliance. 
(a)  Certified backflow prevention testers shall submit completed passing test forms for irrigation backflow systems to the public works department by no later than May 31 of each calendar year, and for domestic and fire backflow systems by no later than August 31 of each calendar year. 
(b)  Property owners shall be solely responsible for the installation, maintenance, testing or inspection of backflow prevention assemblies as set forth in this chapter. Failure to meet these requirements shall be grounds for the discontinuance of water service to the premises. 
(c)  Service of water to any premises may also be discontinued by the public works department if unprotected cross-connections exist on the premises, or if any defect is found in an installed backflow prevention assembly, or if a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, not repaired, failed to be retested after repairs or for failure to perform the annual certification inspection. Service shall not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(d)  Discontinuance of service may be summary, immediate and without notice whenever, in the judgment of the city administrator, the administrator's designated representative, or upon the recommendation of the public works director, such action is immediately necessary to protect the purity of the city's potable water supply or the safety of the city's water distribution system. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2015-13, § 11, 4-7-15) 
Sec. 34-41. - Reserved. 
Sec. 34-42. - Violations and penalties. 
    Violations of the ordinance [codified in this chapter] shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of section 1-10 of the Code of Ordinances of Lafayette Colorado provided however that in addition to any other punishment there shall be imposed a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-1, § 1, 2-15-05) 
Chapter 40 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Elections generally, Ch. III; initiative and referendum. § 7.9 et seq.; election to approve taxes, § 9.2; granting of public utility franchise, § 14.2; amendments to charter, § 16.10. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 5. 
State Law reference- Constitutional authority of city as to elections, Art. XX, § 6, Colo. Const.; Municipal Election Code, C. R. S. § 31-10-101 et seq. 

Sec. 40-1. - Compliance with state law. 
(a)  The City of Lafayette hereby adopts the Uniform Election Code of 1992 for the purpose of participating in all coordinated elections and the Colorado Municipal Election Code of 1965 for the purpose of participating in all non-coordinated elections, except that, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the person or persons requesting a recount shall bear the cost of such recount. 
(b)  The city clerk is hereby directed to work with the Boulder County Clerk and Recorder and to take all necessary actions to conduct any municipal election, which is conducted as part of a coordinated election as defined in section 1-1-104(6.5) of the Colorado Revised Statutes, in accordance with Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution, the Uniform Election Code of 1992, and all other appropriate statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1993-24, § 1, 7-20-93; Ord. No. 2001-46, § 1, 1-2-02) 
Sec. 40-2. - Write-in votes and cancellation of elections. 
    No write-in vote for any municipal office shall be counted unless the person whose name appears on the write-in vote has filed an affidavit of intent with the city clerk by the close of business on the sixty-fourth day before the election indicating that such person desires the office and is qualified to assume the duties of the office if elected. If the only matter before the voters is the election of persons to office and if, at the close of business on the nineteenth day before the election, there are not more candidates than offices to be filled at such election, or in the case of candidates for the city council, if there are not more than three (3) candidates, including candidates filing affidavits of intent, the clerk, if instructed by resolution of the city council either before or after such date, shall cancel the election and declare the candidates elected. Upon such declaration, the candidates shall be deemed elected. Notice of such cancellation shall be posted at each polling place, one (1) other public place and be published in a legal newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 1986-09, § 1, 2-18-86; Ord. No. 1991-22, § 1, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 2000-1, § 1, 2-15-00) 
Chapter 42 - CODE OF ETHICS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2008-19, adopted May 20, 2008, amended ch. 42 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 42 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2000-38, adopted Oct. 17, 2000. 

Sec. 42-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to promote public confidence in the city government, to maintain conformity with the provisions and intent of the City Code and Charter and to provide guidance in the event of real or potential conflicts of interest to the city employees and members of the city council and to the boards, commissions, committees and other authorities operating on behalf of the City of Lafayette. This chapter is intended to foster public trust by defining the parameters of honest government and by prohibiting the use of public office for private gain. 
(b)  While it is critical that board members and employees follow both the letter and spirit of this chapter, it is equally important that they strive to avoid situations that may create public perceptions of violations of this chapter. Perceptions of such violations can have the same negative impact on public trust as actual violations. 
(c)  To the extent matters addressed in this chapter are also addressed in state law, it is the intent of the city council that, pursuant to Lafayette's home rule powers, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 5-20-08) 
Sec. 42-2. - Definitions. 
    The following terms and words, for purposes of this chapter, shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Appear on behalf of shall mean to act as a witness, advocate, or expert or otherwise to support the position of another person. 
    Board shall mean the city council, the planning commission, the board of adjustment and any other board, commission, committee, authority, and any other advisory, policy-making, rule-making, or formally constituted body of the City of Lafayette. 
    Board member shall mean a member of any board, including regular and alternate members and the mayor, but does not include any full-time or part-time city employee, unless the employee is also a board member. 
    Business shall mean any corporation, limited liability corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, trust or foundation, or other individual or organization carrying on a business, whether or not operated for profit. 
    Confidential information shall mean any information that is not available to the general public or is deemed confidential in accordance with local, state or federal law, and which is obtained by reason of a board member or employee's official position or under circumstances by which a reasonable person could anticipate that such information not be disclosed. Confidential information shall also include matters discussed in executive sessions; however, information otherwise available to the general public does not become "confidential" merely because it was discussed in executive session. 
    Conflict of interest shall mean a personal or financial interest of a board member or employee that interferes with or influences or may interfere with or influence the performance of his or her duties on behalf of the city. Conflict of interest does not include a personal or political bias which does not inhere to a personal or financial interest, as defined in this code, of a board member or employee. 
    Contract shall mean any arrangement or agreement pursuant to which any land, material, service or other thing of value is to be furnished to the city for a valuable consideration to be paid by the city or sold or transferred by the city. 
    Council or city council shall mean the city council of the City of Lafayette. 
    Employee shall mean any temporary or permanent employee of the city, including the city attorney and the municipal judge, but does not include council members. 
    Family shall mean any employee's or board member's parents, siblings, spouse and children and the spouse of any of them. 
    Financial interest shall mean a substantial interest held by an employee or board member that is: 
(1)  An ownership of securities of a corporation, or of any beneficial interest in a partnership or firm, the aggregate amount of which securities or interest owned by the employee or board member and the employee's or board member's family is five (5) percent or more of any class of securities of such corporation or five (5) percent or greater ownership in such partnership or firm. 
(2)  A creditor interest in an insolvent business; 
(3)  An employment or a prospective employment for which negotiations have begun, or a contractual relationship that directly relates to a matter under consideration; 
(4)  An ownership interest in real or personal property; 
(5)  A loan or any other debtor interest; or 
(6)  A directorship or officership in a business. 
    Official action shall mean any vote, decision, recommendation, approval, disapproval, or other action, including inaction, that involves the use of discretionary authority. 
    Personal interest shall mean a direct or indirect interest, not shared by the general public, having value peculiar to a particular employee or board member, whether or not the value is related to monetary, financial, commercial, or property matters, which value may accrue to such employee or board member or result in such employee's or board member's deriving or potentially deriving a personal benefit as a result of the approval or denial of any ordinance, resolution, order or other official action, or the performance or nonperformance thereof, by a public servant. Personal interest does not include any matter in which a similar benefit is conferred to all persons or property similarly situated to that of the employee or board member. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 5-20-08) 
Sec. 42-3. - Rules of conduct for board members and employees. 
(a)  The following shall apply to all board members and employees: 
(1)  Contracting with the city. 
a.  No board member shall have any direct or indirect financial interest in any contract with the city unless the contract is awarded through a process of public notice and competitive bidding as provided in the City of Lafayette's Code of Ordinances or city policies, rules, or regulations, and the board member complies with all relevant procedures prescribed in section 42-4. Any such contract entered into in violation of the prohibition of this subsection shall be void. 
b.  Employees may have a direct or indirect financial interest in a contract with the city, but only if the subject matter of the contract is (i) unrelated to the employee's official duties; and (ii) the financial interest is disclosed in the contract. Any such contract entered into in violation of the prohibition of this subsection shall be void. 
c.  The prohibitions of this subsection shall not apply to any contract determined by the council to be an incidental transaction. Transactions of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or less shall be considered to be of an incidental nature. Transactions of greater value shall be handled on a case-by-case basis. 
(2)  Confidential information. 
a.  No board member or employee may use any confidential information in furtherance of any personal or financial interest or the personal or financial interest of any other person, unless such information is obtainable by the public at large. 
b.  No board member or employee may disclose to third parties any confidential information, unless authorized to do so by a 2/3 vote of the applicable board. 
(3)  No board member or employee, in his or her official capacity, may solicit or accept from any one donor a present or future gift, favor, loan, service, honorarium, or thing of value, whose cumulative value is more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per annum, or under circumstances that would lead a reasonably prudent person to believe that such gift, favor, loan, service, honorarium, or thing of value was made or given primarily for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence such board member or employee in connection with an official act, or as a reward for official action he or she has previously taken. This prohibition shall not apply to: 
a.  Acceptance of food and refreshment at conferences, seminars, training sessions, luncheon and dinner meetings, special occasions and other instances in conjunction with city business. 
b.  Admissions to conferences, seminars, training sessions, cultural events, award ceremonies, or conventions related to or in connection with city business. 
c.  Campaign contributions reported under the Fair Campaign Practices Act. 
(4)  No board member or employee may solicit or accept from any person or entity a present or future gift, favor, loan, service, honorarium, or thing of value whatsoever, if the gift, favor, loan, service, honorarium, or thing of value was made or given for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence such board member or employee in connection with an official act, or as a reward for official action which he or she has previously taken. 
(5)  No board member or employee shall engage in a substantial financial transaction for his or her private business purposes with a person whom he or she inspects or supervises in the course of his or her official duties. 
(6)  No board member or employee shall perform an official act that directly and substantially affects to its economic benefit a business or other undertaking in which such board member or employee has a substantial personal or financial interest or that directly and substantially affects to its economic detriment any business or other undertaking when such board member or employee has a substantial personal or financial interest in a competing business or undertaking. 
(7)  No board member or employee, during his or her term with the city, may appear or be affiliated with a firm appearing concerning any transaction with the city, except under the following circumstances: 
a.  An employee or board member may appear on his or her own behalf, or through an agent, before any board of which he or she is not a member. A board member may appear on his or her own behalf, but only through an agent, before the body of which he or she is a member, if the board member follows the procedure prescribed by section 42-4 below. 
b.  An employee or board member, other than a member of the city council, may appear on behalf of another person before any board except the body of which the board member is a member. A city council member may appear on behalf of his or her spouse, parents, children, brothers, sisters, parents-in-law, grandparents, grandchildren, and children-in-law before any board except the city council. 
(b)  The following shall, in addition to subsection (a) above, apply to all members of the city council: 
(1)  During his or her term of office, no member of the council, including the mayor, shall be a salaried employee of the city, except as a council member. 
(2)  A member of the council may be affiliated with a firm appearing on behalf of or employed by another person concerning any transaction with the city before the council if the council member follows the procedures prescribed by section 42-4 below. 
(3)  If a newly elected or appointed member of the council, including the mayor, finds himself or herself in violation of any portion of this chapter, he or she shall have forty-five (45) days after his or her election or appointment to either divest himself or herself from the personal or financial conflict or to resign from the council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 5-20-08) 
Sec. 42-4. - Voting prohibited in certain instances. 
(a)  No board member may vote on any matter before the board if the board member has a conflict of interest as defined above. On such a question, the member shall disclose the nature of the conflict of interest to the board prior to abstaining from voting. If the member requests the remaining members to determine whether the member has a conflict of interest, the remaining members shall determine, by motion adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the remaining members, whether a conflict of interest exists. Such motion shall state the basis of the determination and shall be conclusive of the question of whether a conflict of interest exists. 
(b)  When a board member is precluded from voting on a matter because of a conflict of interest, then the board member shall physically remove himself or herself from the board and the room in which it is meeting, and shall refrain from attempting to influence the decisions of the other members of the board of which the person is a member. After the board has completed consideration of the matter, the board member may return and resume his or her duties as a member of the board. 
(c)  As soon as a board member determines that he or she has a conflict of interest on any matter before the board, then he or she shall immediately refrain from attempting to influence the decision of the other members of the board of which he or she is a member. 
(d)  No board member shall vote on any question concerning the member's own conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 5-20-08) 
Sec. 42-5. - Voting required/quorum. 
(a)  Except as provided in the Charter or this chapter, and except when recusal is required by reason of constitutional "due process" considerations, each board member who is present at a meeting shall vote when the question is called. Any board member who refuses to vote, except when required to abstain, shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. 
(b)  While acting in a quasi-judicial capacity, Board members shall refrain from conduct that would require their disqualification from participation. 
(c)  If board members are disqualified from voting pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, and such disqualification causes the board to lose its quorum on the matter before the board, the matter shall be tabled until the next meeting at which a sufficient number of qualified board members are present to constitute a quorum. In the event that the number of disqualifications are such that tabling the matter will not result in a quorum of qualified board members, the quorum necessary to conduct that item of business shall be adjusted to consist of at least fifty percent of those members not disqualified . 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 5-20-08) 
Sec. 42-6. - Duties of the city attorney. 
(a)  Any employee or board member may request the city attorney for an advisory opinion whenever a question arises as to the applicability of this chapter to a particular situation. 
(b)  Any person alleging that a board member has violated any provision of this chapter shall file a written complaint of such alleged violation with the city administrator, who may at his discretion refer the complaint to the city attorney. The city council hereby appoints the city attorney, pursuant to section 6.8 of the Charter, to inquire into said allegations. The city attorney shall make appropriate investigation and shall, within a reasonable time after receiving a written complaint, make a written finding as to whether there is probable cause to believe that this chapter has been violated. The city attorney shall provide a copy thereof to the city council, the complainant, and the board member in question. The City Attorney's finding that "probable cause" exists does not constitute a finding that a violation has in fact occurred. Rather, a finding of "probable cause" means that there is a reasonable basis to believe the underlying facts are true, and if found to be true by the subsequent decision maker, could constitute violation of this Chapter. If the city attorney determines that probable cause exists, then the matter shall be referred to the city council for further proceedings, pursuant to section 42-7. Nothing in this subsection (b) shall limit the authority of the city administrator to investigate the conduct of and discipline employees. 
(c)  Should the city attorney at any time determine that he or she has a conflict of interest in carrying out the duties of this section, the city attorney may, in his or her sole discretion, appoint special counsel to undertake such duties, and such appointment is hereby deemed to comply with the requirements of sections 4.9(f) and 4.10 of the Charter, otherwise requiring approval of the council for the appointment of special legal counsel. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 5-20-08) 
Sec. 42-7. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any board member or employee who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  If a violation by any member of the council is established to the satisfaction of a majority of the council, the violation shall be grounds for an official reprimand by the council. Provided, however, that if such violation constitutes statutory grounds for the removal of a city officer, or constitutes an act declared by the Charter to constitute misconduct in office, the violation shall be grounds for removal from office. 
(b)  If a violation by any board member other than a council member is established to the satisfaction of a majority of the council, the violation shall be grounds for removal of the board member from the board of which he or she is a member. If the council votes to remove a board member from a board, there shall exist a vacancy on such board that shall be filled as provided by applicable law. 
(c)  If a violation by any employee is established by the city administrator, the violation shall be grounds for discipline up to and including termination. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 5-20-08) 
Sec. 42-8. - Exemption. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to an employee or board member, other than a member of the council, who appears before a board to urge action on a policy or issue of a general civic nature. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 5-20-08) 
Chapter 43 - ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 43-1-43-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENERGY SUSTAINABILITY ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 43-21. - Establishment of the energy sustainability advisory committee. 
    Pursuant to Sections 4.13 and 5.1 of the Lafayette Charter, there is hereby established the energy sustainability advisory committee ("committee") for the purposes stated in this ordinance. The committee shall be appointed by city council to serve without pay and shall consist of seven (7) regular members. The committee may recruit and recommend nominees to city council for appointment. 
(a)  One (1) member from the city council shall serve as the council liaison and a nonvoting member. 
(b)  The council may appoint one or more members from the planning commission. 
(c)  The council may appoint one or more technical representative(s) from appropriate organizations or businesses. 
(d)  The city administrator or his designee shall serve as a nonvoting staff liaison. 
(e)  All members shall have been a resident of the city for at least one (1) year immediately prior to the day of the appointment and shall be registered electors of the city. 
(f)  Council may, upon recommendation of the committee, appoint up to two (2) alternate members, which member(s) shall be called upon to serve and vote in the absence of a regular member(s). 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, § 1, 11-6-07; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 3, 2-1-11) 
Sec. 43-22. - Organization. 
    Upon their appointment, members of the committee shall meet and elect such officers they deem necessary. The committee shall also adopt rules of procedure consistent with applicable city codes and requirements, the charter and state laws. Committee meetings shall be open to the public. The committee shall cause to be kept written records of its proceedings, which shall be available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, § 2, 11-6-07) 
Sec. 43-23. - Purpose. 
    The committee is established to serve in an advisory capacity and to make recommendations to the city council on the following matters: 
(a)  To examine and assess the benefits and impacts of energy conservation and clean energy generation in the City of Lafayette. 
(b)  To advise the city council on policy matters relating to energy conservation and clean energy generation in the City of Lafayette. 
(c)  To prepare and recommend to city council an energy sustainability master plan to address matters such as existing and future energy issues and technologies. 
(d)  In conjunction with such plan, to prepare and make timely recommendations to city council for specific actions related to the plan. 
(e)  To make recommendations to city officials regarding implementation of the plan as related to public improvements and other municipal activities, functions, projects, actions and operations. 
(f)  To develop public communications and educational activities related to energy sustainability and implementation of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, § 3, 11-6-07) 
Sec. 43-24. - Intent of appointment. 
    It is the intent of the city council to make appointments to the committee among qualified citizens of the community representing differing businesses, organizations, industries, geographic areas and constituencies, in an effort to provide balance to the committee and to enable it to make recommendations to the city council after considering the needs of the community as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, § 4, 11-6-07) 
Sec. 43-25. - Terms. 
    The city council shall appoint all members of the committee to three-year terms. All members serve at the pleasure of city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, § 5, 11-6-07; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 3, 2-1-11) 
Sec. 43-26. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the committee shall be filled for the unexpired term by city council as soon as possible. The committee may recommend any alternate member for appointment by council to a vacant position. 
(Ord. No. 2007-49, § 6, 11-6-07; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 3, 2-1-11) 
Secs. 43-27-43-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES 

Sec. 43-30. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  "Auditorium" means the part of a public building where an audience gathers to attend a performance, and includes any corridors, hallways, or lobbies adjacent thereto. 
(2)  "Bar" means any indoor area that is operated and licensed under article 3 of title 44, C.R.S., primarily for the sale and service of alcohol beverages for on-premises consumption and where the service of food is secondary to the consumption of such beverages. 
(3)  "Electronic smoking device," means any electronic oral device such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit which provides a vapor of nicotine, vapor of a solution including nicotine, or aerosol of a solution including nicotine, or any other substance for inhalation. This term shall include every variation and type of such devices whether they are manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pen, an electronic pipe, or an electronic hookah or any other product name or descriptor. 
(4)  "Cigar-tobacco bar" means a bar that generates at least five (5) percent or more of its total annual gross income or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in annual sales from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors, not including any sales from vending machines, in each and every calendar year. A bar that fails to generate, in any calendar year, at least five (5) percent of its total annual gross income or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in annual sales from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors shall not be defined as a "cigar-tobacco bar" and shall not thereafter be included in the definition regardless of sales figures. 
(5)  (a)  "Employee" means any person who: 
(1)  Performs any type of work for benefit of another in consideration of direct or indirect wages or profit; or 
(2)  Provides uncompensated work or services to a business or nonprofit entity. 
(b)  "Employee" includes every person described in this subsection, regardless of whether such person is referred to as an employee, contractor, independent contractor, or volunteer or by any other designation or title. 
(6)  "Employer" means any person, partnership, association, corporation, or nonprofit entity that employs one (1) or more persons. "Employer" includes, without limitation, the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of state government; any county, city and county, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the state, special district, authority, commission, or agency; or any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of state or local government. 
(7)  "Entryway" means the outside of the front or main doorway leading into a building or facility that is not exempted from chapter under section 43-32. "Entryway" also includes the area of public or private property within a fifteen-foot radius outside of the doorway. 
(8)  "Environmental smoke", "ES", or "secondhand smoke" means the complex mixture formed from the escaping smoke of a burning tobacco or marijuana product, or the escaping vapor or aerosol of an electronic smoking device, also known as "side stream smoke", and smoke, vapor, or aerosol exhaled by the smoker. 
(9)  "Food service establishment" means any indoor area or portion thereof in which the principal business is the sale of food for on-premises consumption. The term includes, without limitation, restaurants, cafeterias, coffee shops, diners, sandwich shops, and short-order cafes. 
(10)  "Indoor area" means any enclosed area or portion thereof. The opening of windows or doors, or the temporary removal of wall panels, does not convert an indoor area into an outdoor area. 
(11)  "Marijuana" shall have the same meaning as in section 16(2)(f) of article XVIII of the Colorado State Constitution. 
(12)  "Place of employment" means any indoor area or portion thereof under the control of an employer in which employees of the employer perform services for, or on behalf of, the employer. 
(13)  "Public building" means any building owned or operated by: 
(a)  The state, including the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of state government; 
(b)  Any county, city and county, city, or town, or instrumentality thereof, or any other political subdivision of the state, a special district, an authority, a commission, or an agency; or 
(c)  Any other separate corporate instrumentality or unit of state or local government. 
(14)  "Public meeting" means any meeting open to the public pursuant to any city ordinance or state law. 
(15)  "Smoke-free work area" means an indoor area in a place of employment where smoking is prohibited under this article. 
(16)  "Smoking" means the burning of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other matter or substance that contains tobacco, marijuana, or the active use of an electronic smoking device. 
(17)  "Tobacco" means cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies, and periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff and snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobacco; shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or for smoking in a cigarette, pipe, or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking. "Tobacco" also includes cloves and any other plant matter or product that is packaged for smoking. "Tobacco" includes tobacco prepared, treated, or modified in such a manner that it may be ingested through the use of an electronic smoking device. 
(18)  "Tobacco business" means a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, or other enterprise engaged primarily in the sale, manufacture, or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products, or smoking devices or accessories, either at wholesale or retail, and in which the sale, manufacture, or promotion of other products is merely incidental. 
(19)  "Work area" means an area in a place of employment where one (1) or more employees are routinely assigned and perform services for or on behalf of their employer. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 1-20-15; Ord. No. 2018-25, § 8, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 43-31. - General smoking restrictions. 
(1)  Except as provided in section 43-32, and in order to reduce the levels of exposure to environmental tobacco and marijuana smoke, smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke in any indoor area, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Public meeting places; 
(b)  Elevators; 
(c)  Government-owned or operated means of mass transportation, including, but not limited to, buses, vans, and trains; 
(d)  Taxicabs and limousines; 
(e)  Grocery stores; 
(f)  Gymnasiums; 
(g)  Jury waiting and deliberation rooms; 
(h)  Courtrooms; 
(i)  Child day care facilities; 
(j)  Health care facilities including hospitals, health care clinics, doctor's offices, and other health care related facilities; 
(k)  (1)  Any place of employment that is not exempted. 
(2)  In the case of employers who own facilities otherwise exempted from this article, each such employer shall provide a smoke-free work area for each employee requesting not to have to breathe environmental smoke. Every employee shall have a right to work in an area free of environmental smoke. 
(l)  Food service establishments; 
(m)  Bars; 
(n)  Indoor sports arenas; 
(o)  Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in public and private buildings, condominiums, and other multiple-unit residential facilities; 
(p)  Restrooms, lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in hotels and motels, and in at least seventy-five (75) percent of the sleeping quarters within a hotel or motel that are rented to guests; 
(q)  Bowling alleys; 
(r)  Billiard or pool halls; 
(s)  (1)  The common areas of retirement facilities, publicly owned housing facilities, and, except as specified in [section] 43-32, nursing homes, but not including any resident's private residential quarters or areas of assisted living facilities specified in [section] 43-32. 
(2)  Nothing in this article affects the validity or enforceability of a contract that specifies that a part or all of a facility or home specified in this paragraph is a smoke-free area. 
(t)  Public buildings; 
(u)  Auditoria; 
(v)  Theaters; 
(w)  Museums; 
(x)  Libraries; 
(y)  Public and nonpublic schools; 
(z)  Other educational and vocational institutions; and 
(aa)  The entryways of all buildings and facilities listed in paragraphs (a) to (z) of this section. 
(2)  A cigar-tobacco bar shall display signage in at least one (1) conspicuous place and at least four (4) inches by six (6) inches in size stating: "Smoking allowed. Children under eighteen years of age must be accompanied by a parent or guardian." 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 43-32. - Exceptions to smoking restrictions. 
(1)  This section shall not apply to: 
(a)  Private homes, private residences, and private automobiles; except that this article shall apply if any such home, residence, or vehicle is being used for child care or day care or if a private vehicle is being used for the public transportation of children or as part of health care or day care transportation; 
(b)  A hotel or motel room rented to one (1) or more guests if the total percentage of such hotel or motel rooms in such hotel or motel does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent; 
(c)  Any retail tobacco business; 
(d)  A cigar-tobacco bar; 
(e)  The outdoor area of any business; 
(f)  A place of employment that is not open to the public and that is under the control of an employer that employs three (3) or fewer employees; 
(g)  A private, nonresidential building on a farm or ranch, as defined in section 39-1-102, of the Colorado Revised Statutes, that has annual gross income of less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00); or 
(h)  (1)  The areas of assisted living facilities: 
a.  That are designated for smoking for residents; 
b.  That are fully enclosed and ventilated; and 
c.  To which access is restricted to the residents or their guests. 
(2)  As used in this paragraph (h), "assisted living facility" means a nursing facility, as that term is defined in section 25.5-4-103 of the Colorado Revised Statutes, and an assisted living residence, as that term is defined in section 25-27-102 of the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 43-33. - Optional prohibitions. 
(1)  The owner or manager of any place not specifically listed in section 43-31, including a place otherwise exempted under section 43-32, may post signs prohibiting smoking or providing smoking and nonsmoking areas. Such posting shall have the effect of including such place, or the designated nonsmoking portion thereof, in the places where smoking is prohibited or restricted pursuant to this article. 
(2)  If the owner or manager of a place not specifically listed in section 43-31, including a place otherwise exempted under section 43-32, is an employer and receives a request from an employee to create a smoke-free work area as contemplated by section 43-31, the owner or manager shall post a sign or signs in the smoke-free work area as provided in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 43-34. - Scope. 
    This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 43-35. - Unlawful acts. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls the use of a premises subject to this article to violate any provision of this article. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a person to smoke in an area where smoking is prohibited pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 1-20-15) 
Secs. 43-36-43-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CLIMATE BILL OF RIGHTS 

Sec. 43-51. - In general. 
(a)  Right to a healthy climate. All residents and ecosystems of the city possess a right to a healthy climate and life sustaining resources, which shall include the right to be free from all activities within the city that interfere with that right, including the extraction of coal, oil, or gas, disposal of drilling waste contaminated drinking water, lethal carcinogens, toxic gases and other byproducts of industrial activity which threaten human physical and neurological systems. 
(b)  Right to local, community self-government. All residents of the city possess the right to a form of governance which recognizes that all power is inherent in the people of the city, and that all free governments are founded on the people's authority and consent. Laws adopted by the people of the city shall only be preempted or nullified if they interfere with rights secured by the state or federal constitution to the people of the city, or if they interfere with protections provided to the people or ecosystems of the city by state, federal, or international law. 
(c)  Right to defend. All residents of the city possess the right to defend this law. To secure this right, entities which violate the people's right to a healthy climate and sustainable ecosystem shall not be deemed to be "persons," nor possess any other legal rights, privileges, powers, or protections which would interfere with the enforcement of that right. 
(d)  Right to defense. All residents of the city possess the right to have the city government defend this law on the basis that a constitutional right of local, community self-government exists, that this law is an assertion of that right as it seeks to expand the rights of the people of the city, and that the doctrines of ceiling preemption, municipal subordinancy to state government, or corporate "rights" unconstitutionally violate the right of the residents of the city to local, community self-government. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 3-21-17) 
Chapter 44 - FINANCE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Retention and expenditure of revenues notwithstanding spending limitations for library, police and fire protection services. 
(a)  The city council for the city is hereby authorized to: 
(1)  Retain all revenue derived from its sales and use taxes and all revenue derived from its development-related fees and charges (comprising its development fees, construction permit fees, service expansion fees, public land dedication in lieu payments, parkland acquisition and development fees, and storm drainage fees), in 1995 and in all subsequent years; and 
(2)  Spend all of such revenue and any investment earnings thereon as a voter-approved revenue change and an exception to any spending limitations which might otherwise apply. 
(b)  Such revenue and investment earnings on said tax and fee revenues, which would, in the absence of such revenue change, be subject to refund pursuant to Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution, shall be spent exclusively for library, police, and fire protection services. 
(c)  All retention and spending authorized hereunder shall not limit the retention and spending of any other revenue of the city in any year. 
(Ord. No. 1995-27, § 1, 12-19-95; Ord. No. 2007-38, § 5, 9-4-07) 
Secs. 44-2-44-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 44-10. - Capital Projects Fund. 
(a)  Fund established. There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the "Capital Projects Fund" to which shall be allocated such revenues as the city council may, from to time, determine. Monies in the Capital Projects Fund may be appropriated to pay for capital construction or projects, as defined herein. All unappropriated balances in said fund at the close of any fiscal year shall remain there and shall not revert to the general fund. All interest earned from investments of monies in said fund shall remain in said fund and become a part thereof. 
(b)  [Defined.] As used in this section, "capital construction or project" means: 
(1)  Purchase of land regardless of the value thereof; 
(2)  Purchase, construction or demolition of buildings or other physical facilities, including utilities and streets or highways, or remodeling or renovation of existing buildings or other physical facilities, including utilities and streets or highways, to make physical changes, to meet standards required by applicable codes to correct other conditions hazardous to health and safety of persons which are not covered by codes, to effect conservation of energy resources, to effect cost savings for staffing, operations, or maintenance of the facility, or to approve appearance; 
(3)  Site improvement or development; 
(4)  Purchase and installation of the fixed and moveable equipment necessary for the operation of new, remodeled, or renovated buildings or other physical facilities, and for the conduct of programs initially housed therein, upon completion of the new construction, remodeling or renovation; 
(5)  Purchase of the services of architects, engineers, or other consultants, to prepare plans, program documents, life cycle cost studies, energy analysis, or other studies associated with any capital construction project, and to supervise construction or execution of such capital construction projects; 
(6)  Any mechanical or scientific equipment, if the cost will exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(c)  Use of funds. Except as provided herein, all monies deposited into the Capital Projects Fund shall be used only to pay for capital construction or projects. The foregoing notwithstanding, city council may, by the adoption of an ordinance, authorize use of monies in the Capital Projects Fund for municipal purposes other than capital construction or projects. 
(d)  Annual transfers to Capital Projects Fund. Subject to annual appropriations by city council in the budgetary process, as of July 1, 2012, and on July 1 of each year thereafter through July 1, 2032, the city finance director shall transfer the sum of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) out of the general fund and into the Capital Projects Fund. Scheduled transfers pursuant to this subsection shall not preclude additional transfers by city council into the Capital Projects Fund. 
(Ord. No. 2010-32, § 1, 12-7-10) 
Secs. 44-11-44-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY AND OTHER RESERVES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1992-48, adopted Dec. 15, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1-7 of said ordinance as §§ 44-21-44-27 herein was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 44-21. - Definitions. 
(a)  Amendment shall mean the amendment to Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution, as approved by the electors of the State of Colorado on November 3, 1992, and identified as Amendment One on the 1992 general election ballot. 
(b)  Emergency shall be as defined in the amendment. 
(c)  Emergency reserve shall mean that reserve established for the purpose of defraying expenses of declared emergencies. 
(d)  General reserve shall mean all available cash in the city's governmental and proprietary fund types as of December 31, 1992, less all cash in the emergency reserve and the special reserves as of December 31, 1992. 
(e)  Increase in reserves shall mean the net increase in cash in all reserves combined as of December 31 of any given year, as compared to December 31 of the previous year. 
(f)  Special reserves shall mean those reserves enumerated in Section 3 hereof, and any other encumbered reserve accounts which may be established from time to time by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1992-48, § 1, 12-15-92) 
Sec. 44-22. - Emergency reserve established. 
    There is hereby established an emergency reserve. The finance director is hereby authorized and directed to fund the emergency reserve as required by the amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1992-48, § 2, 12-15-92) 
Sec. 44-23. - Special reserves established or recognized. 
    The following special reserves are hereby established or, if previously established, recognized for the purposes of this article. The finance director is hereby authorized and directed to fund the special reserves as follows: 
(1)  Reserve fund established by Ordinance No. 832, section 17, currently funded in the amount of seventy thousand dollars ($70,000.00); 
(2)  Reserve fund established by Ordinance No. 6, series 1988, section 15, currently funded in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00); 
(3)  Reserve account established by Ordinance No. 1, series 1990, section 14, currently funded in the amount of four hundred thirty-five thousand dollars ($435,000.00); and 
(4)  Reserve account established by Ordinance No. 32, series 1991, section 17, currently funded in the amount of four hundred eighty-three thousand dollars ($483,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1992-48, § 3, 12-15-92) 
Sec. 44-24. - General reserve established. 
    There is hereby established a general reserve. The general reserve shall be automatically funded initially as of December 31, 1992, with all appropriate funds as defined in section 44-21(d) above. 
(Ord. No. 1992-48, § 4, 12-15-92) 
Sec. 44-25. - Calculation of increase in reserves. 
    The finance director is hereby authorized and directed to calculate annually in the amount of increase in the city's reserves. 
(Ord. No. 1992-48, § 5, 12-15-92) 
Sec. 44-26. - Pro rata reductions in reserves. 
    If at any time compliance with the amendment requires the city to make reductions in its fiscal year spending or refunds to the taxpayers, pro rata adjustments may be made to all funds, including any reserves established by this article, with the exception of the emergency reserve, to avoid distortion of spending limits by virtue of the dedications of funds set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1992-48, § 6, 12-15-92) 
Sec. 44-27. - Expenditures from general reserve. 
    Expenditures from the general reserve shall be governed by the budget resolution and appropriation ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1992-48, § 7, 12-15-92) 
Secs. 44-28-44-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PURCHASING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 44-40. - Legislative intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to prescribe purchasing procedures that the city will follow in contracting for constructing capital improvements, purchasing tangible property and securing contract services. To the extent inconsistent with state law, city council intends that these procedures supercede provisions of state law governing city purchasing procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2005-41, § 1, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 2007-28, § 1, 7-17-07) 
Sec. 44-41. - Definitions. 
(a)  Bid list shall mean a list of vendors and prices or price agreements negotiated or obtained by a public agency through a competitive bidding process. 
(b)  City administrator shall mean the city administrator appointed by city council or his/her authorized designee. 
(c)  Capital improvement means a fixed public improvement including, without limitation, streets, alleys, sidewalks, water or wastewater facilities, flood control facilities, traffic control devices, street lighting, parks, public structures, and landscaping. 
(d)  Professional services means services of a specialized nature provided by persons possessing specialized educational qualifications, practical experience or professional certification, including, without limitation, architects, engineers, legal counsel, planners, accountants, actuaries and high tech equipment repair and maintenance. 
(e)  Public agency shall mean the State of Colorado or any agency, department or political subdivision thereof, or any association of any of the foregoing. 
(f)  Purchased services means services other than professional services for the performance of specified tasks, including, without limitation, janitorial, maintenance, repair, secretarial or clerical services, as determined by the city administrator. 
(g)  Tangible property means personal property and materials, including, without limitation, supplies, equipment, art, printing, software that is not customized, and consumable supplies, but not including insurance, real property leases, securities or water rights. 
(Ord. No. 2005-41, § 1, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 2007-28, § 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 2010-25, § 1, 10-5-10) 
Sec. 44-42. - When formal competitive bidding is required. 
(a)  The city administrator shall call for formal competitive bids for the purchase of tangible property and for capital improvement contracts that are anticipated to exceed an amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) unless: 
(1)  The contract is awarded to a person or entity who has been awarded a contract by another public agency through a competitive bid process within the last year and the unit prices in the city contract do not exceed the unit prices in the public agency contract; 
(2)  The contract is for goods to be re-sold by the city at retail; or 
(3)  The city administrator determines that it is not practical and advantageous to call for a competitive bid and city council is advised of the reasons therefore prior to the award of the contract; or 
(4)  The contract is awarded to a person or entity who is a responsible bidder whose bid is the lowest available bid, or at nominal variance with the lowest available bid, pursuant to a bid list maintained by a public agency. 
(b)  The city administrator shall call for formal competitive bids for obtaining purchased services in an amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more unless: 
(1)  The contract is awarded to a person who has been awarded a contract by another public entity through a competitive bid process within the last year and the unit prices in the city contract do not exceed those in the public entity contract; or 
(2)  The contract is for purchased services, which, as determined by the city administrator are most practically or advantageously obtained from a sole source; or 
(3)  The city administrator determines that it is not practical or advantageous to call for a competitive bid and city council is advised of the reasons therefore prior to the award of the contract. 
(c)  All contracts for purchases of tangible property, for capital improvements, professional services, or purchased services in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) must be authorized by city council regardless of whether the project is competitively bid. 
(d)  The city administrator may call for competitive bids for any product, capital construction project or purchased services. 
(Ord. No. 2005-41, § 1, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 2007-28, § 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 2010-25, § 2, 10-5-10) 
Sec. 44-43. - Formal bid requirements. 
(a)  Each formal bid submitted to the city shall meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Each bid is signed, enclosed in a sealed envelope, and timely filed as stated in the advertisement for the bid. 
(2)  No bidder submits more than one (1) bid. 
(3)  Each bid is accompanied by a check or bid bond equal to five (5) percent of the bid, to be forfeited to the city if a bid is accepted and the bidder fails to sign a contract within fifteen (15) days of acceptance, unless the city administrator determines that it is not practical or advantageous to require a bid bond. 
(b)  The city administrator may require that no bid be withdrawn up to forty-five (45) days after the date and time for opening bids, but a bid may be withdrawn up to twenty-four (24) hours prior to the expiration of the deadline for submitting bids. 
(c)  The city administrator may waive technical irregularities in the bid requirements in this article or in the call for bids if the city administrator finds that such waiver does not compromise the integrity of the bidding process. 
(Ord. No. 2005-41, § 1, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 2007-28, § 1, 7-17-07) 
Sec. 44-44. - Formal bidding procedure. 
(a)  The city administrator shall publish a notice of call for bids at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city containing: 
(1)  A description of the project or work to be performed or the product to be purchased; 
(2)  The location of where copies of plans, specifications and other documents may be examined; 
(3)  The time and place where bids will be received and the time and place where bids will be opened; 
(4)  A statement that the city reserves the right to reject any or all bids and to waive any minor informalities or irregularities therein; 
(5)  Time and budget limitations, if applicable; and 
(6)  A statement that the bid is prepared at the submitter's expense and becomes city record and therefore public record. 
(b)  Among other conditions in a call for bids, the city administrator may require standard brands of tangible property, recycled and environmentally preferable products, and a multiple-year relationship of up to five (5) years with the selected bidder. In the event that a multiple-year relationship is anticipated, the call for bid shall specify that continuation of the contract for years subsequent to the year of the award of the contract will be subject to annual appropriations by city council. 
(c)  Bids not submitted by the required deadline are ineligible for consideration and will not be opened, but the city administrator may change the deadline at any time. 
(d)  Bids shall be opened at the time and place provided for in the call for bids. 
(e)  Bidders may inspect the bids after they are opened in accordance with the provisions of the Colorado Open Records Act. However, if the city administrator determines that all bids should be rejected and a rebid may be necessary, the city administrator may hold the bid in confidence until the rebid has been completed. 
(f)  Confidential data, if identified as such, will be held in confidence upon request, if the request is made as a part of the bid and if the city attorney determines that the data meet the requirements of the Colorado Open Records Act. 
(g)  Nothing in this article shall preclude the city administrator from issuing a call for bids in stages for the purpose of prequalifying bidders for projects or tangible property required by the city. The city administrator may prequalify prospective contractors or vendors and maintain a list for particular types of construction, tangible property, and services. 
(Ord. No. 2005-41, § 1, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 2007-28, § 1, 7-17-07) 
Sec. 44-45. - Informal procedures for bids or quotes. 
(a)  The city administrator may require an informal competitive bidding or quote procedure for any purchase or contact for which formal competitive bidding is not required under this article. 
(b)  An informal bid or quote requires request to at least two (2) vendors for prices, where possible, unless purchases are made by reference to a previously established bid list maintained by a public agency. 
(c)  An informal bid or quote does not require detailed specifications or a published notice of call for bids. 
(d)  Informal bids or quotes may be received orally. 
(e)  Bid bonds are not required for informal bids or quotes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-41, § 1, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 2007-28, § 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 2010-25, § 3, 10-5-10) 
Sec. 44-46. - Section of bids for capital improvement contracts, tangible property purchases and purchased services. 
(a)  Monetary authority for acceptance of bids and awards of contract for capital improvements, tangible property, and purchased services shall be established by city council resolution. 
(b)  The following criteria and procedures shall apply to capital improvement contracts and tangible property purchases: 
(1)  The city may reject any and all bids but otherwise shall accept the lowest bid satisfying the minimum bid requirements and the responsibility criteria prescribed by paragraph (3) of this subsection. For the purposes of this article, the definition of "lowest bid" will include consideration of initial cost and, when applicable, life-cycle costs, including without limitation, maintenance costs over the normal lifetime of the product and energy efficiency and consumption of nonrenewable fuels. 
(2)  The city shall determine if the bidder satisfies the minimum bid requirements and the responsibility criteria prescribed by paragraph (3) of this subsection. If the city determines that the lowest bidder does not meet the minimum bid requirement and responsibility criteria, the city may reject the bid. 
(3)  In determining to accept a bid, the city shall consider the following responsibility criteria: the bidder's integrity, financial responsibility, skill, relevant technical expertise, ability to complete the contract promptly and satisfactorily, whether the bidder maintains a permanent place of business, whether the bidder has adequate plant, equipment and support services to perform the contract, whether the bidder has previously performed similar work satisfactorily, whether the bidder is likely to be engaged in work that may impair the ability to finance the work covered by the bid or provide equipment for its proper execution, whether the bidder proposes a reasonable approach to achieve the objective sought, and whether there have been or are any claims raising a substantial question about the bidder's ability to perform the contract. 
(c)  Award of contracts for purchased services shall utilize the same criteria and procedures as is applicable to capital improvement contracts and tangible property purchases, as described in subsection (b) above, except that the lowest bidder need not be awarded the contract if the authority awarding the contract determines, based upon documented evidence or experience, that the quality of the services to be performed by a bidder other than the lowest bidder justifies the increased cost to the city. 
(d)  Local preference. The foregoing provisions of this section notwithstanding, for capital improvements, tangible property purchases and purchased services, a local preference in accordance with this subsection shall be afforded to any bidder that maintains its principal place of business within the corporate boundaries of the City of Lafayette, Colorado ("resident bidder") if such bid is not for supplies or services of inferior quality to those offered by nonresident bidders. Such local preference shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  If a bid of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less is from a resident bidder, and such bid is within twenty (20) percent of the amount bid by a nonresident bidder, the bid of the resident bidder shall be considered as the lower of the two (2) bids. 
(2)  If a bid of between one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) is from a resident bidder, and such bid is within ten (10) percent of the amount bid by a nonresident bidder, the bid of the resident bidder shall be considered as the lower of the two (2) bids. 
(3)  If a bid from a resident bidder is greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the amount of such bid shall be reduced by five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), but only for the purpose of comparison to the amount bid by nonresident bidders. 
(4)  If a bid of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or less is from a resident bidder who maintains its principal place of business within the boundaries of the Lafayette Urban Renewal Authority Area, and such bid is within twenty (20) percent of the amount bid by a nonresident bidder, the bid of such resident bidder shall be considered as the lower of the two (2) bids. 
(5)  In the event that the bid of two (2) or more resident bidders are considered to be lower than the apparent low bidder, by virtue of this subsection, then as between those resident bidders, the bidder with the lower bid shall be considered as the lowest, without regard to whether the bidder is located within the Lafayette Urban Renewal Area. 
    If it is determined by the city authority awarding the bid that compliance with this subsection may cause a denial of federal or state monies which would otherwise be available or would otherwise be inconsistent with the requirements of federal or state law, this subsection shall be suspended, but only to the extent necessary to prevent denial of the federal or state monies or to eliminate the inconsistency with federal or state requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2005-41, § 1, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 2007-28, § 1, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 2008-18, § 1, 5-20-08) 
Sec. 44-47. - Professional service contracts. 
(a)  Monetary authority for awards of professional service contracts shall be established by city council resolution. 
(b)  Professional services need not be procured through either a formal or informal bidding procedure. A request for proposal for professional services may be utilized; however, such a request for proposal process shall not be required, depending on the needs of the city and nature of services required. 
(c)  The award of the professional service contract may be based upon criteria other than price alone. 
(Ord. No. 2007-28, § 1, 7-17-07) 
Chapter 45 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Fire department, § 4.11. 
Cross reference- Ambulance service, Ch. 15; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 30; dangerous building, § 30-206 et seq.; disaster emergency services, Ch. 35; nuisances, Ch. 70; false fire alarms, § 75-33; solid waste, Ch. 100; traffic, Ch. 115. 
State Law reference- Firefighter generally, C. R. S. Title 31, Art. 30; obstructing firefighter, C. R. S. § 18-8-104.; false alarm of fire, C. R. S. § 18-8-111. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 45-1-45-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2011-44, adopted Dec. 6, 2011, repealed in its entirety Art. II, Fire Department, which was comprised of §§ 45-16-45-31, and derived from the Ch. 15 of the 1963 Code; Ord. No. 398, adopted July 20, 1965; and Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994. 

Secs. 45-16-45-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 2011-44, adopted Dec. 6, 2011, repealed and reenacted Art. III to read as hereein set out. Former Art. III pertained to the same subject matter, was comprised of Divs. 1-3, §§ 45-46-45-72, and derived from the Ch. 11C of the 1963 Code and amendatory legislation, the history for which can be found in the Code Comparative Table located at the back of this volume. 
State Law reference- Building and fire regulations, C. R. S. §§ 31-15-201 & 31-16-201 et seq. 

Sec. 45-46. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Title 31, Article 16, Part 2, Colorado Revised Statutes, as amended, there is hereby adopted as the fire code for the City of Lafayette, Colorado, by reference thereto, the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Ste. 708, Falls Church, Virginia, 22041-3401, including except as specifically amended herein Chapters 1 through 80, inclusive, and Appendix B - Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings, Appendix C - Fire Hydrant Location and Distribution, Appendix D - Fire Apparatus Access Roads, Appendix E - Hazard Categories, Appendix F - Hazard Ranking, and Appendix G - Cryogenic Fluids - Weight and Volume Equivalents, Appendix H - Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) Instructions, Appendix I - Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant Conditions all to have the same force and effect as if set forth herein in every particular. 
(Ord. No. 2011-44, § 2, 12-6-11; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 2-6-18) 
Sec. 45-47. - Amendments to the International Fire Code. 
    The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
(a)  Department of fire prevention. Section 103 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition is amended as follows: 
103.4 Liability. Subsection is deleted in its entirety. 
103.4.1 Legal Defense. Subsection is deleted in its entirety. 
(b)  Enforcement authority. Section 104.1 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition is amended as follows: 
The Fire Chief and the Chief's designees are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition. 
(c)  Required operational permits. Subsection 105.6 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows: 
105.6 Required Operational Permits. An operational permit shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention Bureau prior to engaging in the following activities, functions, operations, or practices unless otherwise specified in the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition. 
1.  105.6.2 Amusement buildings; 
2.  105.6.5 Carnivals and fairs; 
3.  105.6.11 Cryogenic fluids; 
4.  105.6.15 Explosives, explosive materials, and fireworks; 
5.  105.6.17 Flammable and combustible liquids: 
(a)  To remove Class I or II liquids from an underground storage tank used for fueling motor vehicles by any means other than the approved, stationary on-site pumps normally used for dispensing purposes. 
(b)  To install, alter, remove, abandon, place temporarily out of service (for more than 90 days) or otherwise dispose of an underground, protected above-ground or above-ground flammable or combustible liquid tank. 
(c)  To change the type of contents stored in a flammable or combustible liquid tank to a material which poses a greater hazard than that for which the tank was designated and constructed. 
6.  105.6.20 Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging; 
7.  105.6.20.1 Fumigation and/or associated operations for removing biological, chemical, or other naturally occurring agents, chemicals, organisms, or substances. 
8.  105.6.21 Hazardous Materials 
9.  105.6.27 Liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles or equipment in buildings for display, demonstrating, or operation. This shall not apply to parking garages, private garages, repair garages, or other buildings normally utilized for the operation, repair, restoration, and storage of motor vehicles. 
10.  105.6.28 LP7 gas; 
11.  105.6.29 Magnesium; 
12.  105.6.32 Open burning; 
13.  105.6.37 Private fire hydrants; 
14.  105.6.38 Pyrotechnic special effects material; 
15.  105.6.45 Temporary membrane structures and tents. 
(d)  Required construction permits. Subsection 105.7 of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition is amended to read as follows: 
105.7 Required Construction Permits. Upon approval of required construction documents, as required by subsection 105.4, a fire protection permit shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention Bureau prior to initiating any alterations, construction, installation, modification, remodel, of any fire protection system or other fire- or life-safety system, as defined by the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition. The following fire protection systems shall require submittal of plans, specifications, design and installation criteria, as required by the Fire Code Official, prior to issuance of a fire protection permit, those not listed are excluded from the requirements of this section: 
1.  105.7.1 Automatic fire-extinguishing systems; 
2.  105.7.3 Compressed gases; 
3.  105.7.4 Cryogenic Fluids; 
4.  105.7.6 Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment; 
5.  105.7.7 Fire pumps and related equipment; 
6.  105.7.8 Flammable and combustible liquids; 
7.  105.7.10 Hazardous materials; 
8.  105.7.12 LP-gas; 
9.  105.7.13 Private fire hydrants; 
10.  105.7.16 Spraying and dipping; 
11.  105.7.17 Standpipe systems; 
12.  105.7.18 Temporary membrane structures, and tents. 
(e)  Fees. Section 105 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition is amended to add sections 105.8 and 105.9 to read as follows: 
105.8 Operational Permit Fees. The fee for operational permits required by subsection 105.6 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition shall be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by resolution by the City Council. Fees shall be collected by the City's Planning and Building Department. The Fire Code Official is authorized to waive the fee in accordance with approved standard operating guidelines for administering permits for activities described in subsection 105.8. 
105.9 Construction Permit Fees. Permit fees and taxes are required for fire protection and life safety systems required by subsection 105.7 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition for initiating any alterations, construction, installation modification, remodel, of any fire protection system or other fire- or life-safety system, as defined by the International Fire Code 2015 Edition. These fees shall be assessed by and paid to the City in accordance with the provisions of the fee schedule adopted by resolution by the City Council. 
(f)  Board of appeals. Section 108 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition is amended to read as follows: 
108.1 Board of Appeals. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals consisting of three members. This board shall be composed of a person appointed by the city administrator, a person appointed by the appellant, and a person appointed by the two appointees. The fire code official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as the secretary to the board but shall have no vote on any matter before the committee. The board members shall serve for the duration of the appeal. The board shall render their decisions and findings in writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the fire code official. A party may appeal the board's decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
108.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training, as verified by the fire code official, to pass on matters pertaining to the hazards of fire, explosions, and or fire protection systems. The board members may not be employees of either the jurisdiction or the appellant. The board members may not be personally, financially, contractually, professionally, or otherwise indebted, obligated, or bound to the appellant in any manner, nor may they be in any position where they might receive benefit, either personally or professionally, from any decision rendered. 
(g)  Violations. Section 109 of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition is amended to read as follows: 
109.1 Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or utilize a building, occupancy, premises or system regulated by the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition. 
109.3 Notice of Violation. When the Fire Code Official finds a building, premises, vehicle, storage facility or outdoor area that is in violation of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, the Fire Code Official is authorized to prepare a written notice of violation describing the conditions deemed unsafe and, when compliance is not immediate, specifying a time for re-inspection. 
109.3.1 Service. A notice of violation issued pursuant to the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service, mail, or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by first class mail to the owner of the subject property at the address shown in the records of the Boulder County Assessor. Notice shall be deemed served on the date of receipt by the owner, if personally served, or upon the fifth day after mailing of the notice. 
109.3.2 Compliance with Orders and Notices. A notice of violation issued or served as provided by the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition shall be complied with by the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation to which the notice of violation pertains. 
109.3.3 Prosecution of Violations. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Fire Code Official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant hereto. 
109.3.4 Unauthorized Tampering. Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the Fire Code Official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with or removed without authorization from the Fire Code Official. 
109.4 Violation Penalties is deleted in its entirety. 
109.4.1 Abatement of Violation. In addition to the imposition of the penalties herein described, the Fire Code Official is authorized to institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises. 
(h)  Stop work order. Section 111 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition is amended as follows: 
111.4 Failure to Comply is deleted in its entirety. 
11-10-4: CHAPTER 5 FIRE SERVICE FEATURES of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition is amended to read as follows: 
(A)  Markings. Section 503.3 of the International Fire Code is amended to add Section 503.3.1 to read as follows: 
503.3.1. The marking of fire lanes on private property devoted to public use shall be approved by the Fire Code Official in accordance with the International Fire Code 2015 Edition and the latest edition of the Uniform Traffic Control Manual. 
(B)  Obstruction Of Fire Apparatus Access Roads. Section 503.4 of the International Fire Code is amended to add Section 503.4.1 to read as follows: 
503.4.2. The Fire Code Official or any of the Fire Code Officials designees, or the Police Department with knowledge of the existence of any vehicle parked in the fire lane, or in such manner as to interfere with the use of may fire hydrant, or in any manner in violation of this Section may have such vehicle towed away and the charges of such towing shall be assessed to the owner of such vehicle. The aforesaid violation shall be sufficient grounds to cause a citation to be issued. In the event of an emergency, the Fire Department shall have the authority to cause any vehicle blocking a fire hydrant or fire lane to be removed with the vehicle's owner to be responsible for any loss or damage resulting from removal of the vehicle. 
(C)  Premises Identification. Section 505.1 of the International Fire Code 20154 Edition is amended to add Section 505.1.1 and 505.1.2 to read as follows: 
505.1.1. Buildings having exterior rear or side access doors shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position approved by the Fire Code Official. 
505.1.2. Buildings with multiple tenants with interior access doors shall have approved unit or space identification numbers, address numbers or other approved means of identifying individual tenant spaces or units. 
(D)  Privately Owned Hydrant Systems. Section 507 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition is amended to add Section 507.5.3.1 and 507.5.7 to read as follows: 
507.5.3.1. Privately owned hydrants shall be maintained at the expense of the private property owner, subject to the direction and requirements of the Fire Code Official. Such private hydrants shall be flushed and tested periodically according to the International Fire Code 2015 Edition. In the event such testing reveals that the flow from private hydrants is inadequate according to applicable standards, modifications necessary to meet these standards shall be ordered by the Fire Code Official and made at the expense of the property owner. All private hydrants shall be painted the same color as hydrants on public rights-of-way or elsewhere throughout the City. Appropriate markings or signs restricting parking in front of or adjacent to fire hydrants shall be required and must be approved by the Fire Code Official and implemented at the expense of the owner of the property. No point of connection to any private fire hydrant shall be left uncapped without permission of the Fire Code Official. 
507.5.7. Existing Private Fire Hydrants. Existing hydrants which do not conform to City specifications or which do not face in the direction most consistent with emergency use by the Fire Department, as established by the Fire Code Official, shall be changed to meet the City's requirements by the property owner and at the property owner's expense, within 15 days of service of notice of the required changes upon the property owner or its agent. 
(E)  Sprinklers. Section 903.3 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition is amended to read as followers 
903.3.2.1 Quick-response Automatic Sprinkler Heads. Quick-response sprinkler heads shall be installed in light hazard occupancies as defined in NFPA 13. Residential automatic sprinkler heads are prohibited. 
903.3.2.2 Residential and Quick-response Automatic Sprinkler Heads. All installation of residential and quick-response automatic sprinkler heads shall be in strict accordance with their listings. Where listings authorize installation where prohibited in 903.3.2 and 903.3.2.1 the Fire Code Official may waive the requirements mandated by 903.3.2 and 903.3.2.1. 
903.3.7.1 The Fire Department Connection (FDC) shall be located whenever possible on the street addressed side of the building in a location visible to the responding fire engine. The FDC shall have a fire hydrant within 100 feet in a location approved by the Fire Department. 
(F)  Standpipe Systems. Section 905 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition is amended to add the following: 
905.3.1. Building Height shall be amended by adding the following exceptions: 
EXCEPTION 6: Class I standpipes are allowed to be manual systems. 
EXCEPTION 7: Fire hose is not required for Class I standpipes. Standpipe hose outlets shall be 21/2-inch outlets with a 21/2-inch to 11/2-inch reducing cap. 
905.3.8 Bridges and Roadway Overpasses. Where required to extend water supply to streets, highways, and rail systems a dry standpipe shall be installed in accordance with Fire Department requirements. 
(G)  Fire Alarm and Detection Systems. Section 907 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition is amended to add Section 907.7.3.3 to read as follows: 
907.7.3.3 The Fire Code Official shall determine the extent of zone coverage for fire alarm systems in all buildings and structures. 
11-10-7: CHAPTER 56 EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition is amended to read as follows: 
(A)  Explosives Materials Storage and Handling. Section 5604 of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition is amended to add Section 5604.1.1 to read as follows: 
5604.1.1 General Storage Limitations. The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited within all zones except PUD (Planned Unit Development) where such storage is specifically listed as an allowed use, except for temporary storage for use in connection with approved blasting operations; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to wholesale and retail stocks of small arms, ammunition, explosive bolts, explosive rivets, or cartridges for explosive-actuated power tools in aggregate quantities involving less than 500 pounds of explosive material. 
11-10-8: CHAPTER 61 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES of the International Fire Code 2015 Edition is amended to read as follows: 
(A)  Subsection 6104.2 of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition is amended to read as follows: 
6104.2 Maximum Capacity within Established Limits. This maximum capacity limitation specifically applies to the following zoning areas: RA, RE, R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, B 1, C1, T1, and PUD (Planned Unit Development) zoned districts. 
(Ord. No. 2011-44, § 2, 12-6-11; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 2-6-18) 
Sec. 45-48. - Code copies. 
    At least one (1) copy of the International Fire Code adopted herein shall be on file and available for inspection at the office of the fire chief during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2011-44, § 2, 12-6-11) 
Chapter 46 - FALSE FIRE ALARMS 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any device designed or used for the detection of fire or other hazard to life or property, which when activated causes an audible and/or visual signal or transmits a signal or message to which fire department personnel are expected to respond or that would imply that fire department personnel are needed at the premises. Alarm system does not include individual smoke detectors. 
    Excessive false alarms means three (3) or more false alarms received by the fire department within forty-eight (48) hours from the same premises. 
    False alarm means any signal originating from an alarm system to which the fire department responds and which results from: 
(1)  False activation, including reporting fire or other life or property emergency when none have actually occurred; or 
(2)  Alarm malfunction, including mechanical failure or electrical failure; or 
(3)  Alarm triggered by the property owner's negligence, including overly sensitive settings. 
Exempted from this definition are alarms activated by forces beyond the property owner's control such as those caused by extreme weather or atmospheric conditions or failure or malfunction of off-premises telephone lines. 
    Fire chief means the chief of the City of Lafayette Fire Department or the chief's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, § 1, 5-3-05) 
Sec. 46-2. - False alarm prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally cause the transmission of a false alarm to the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, § 1, 5-3-05) 
Sec. 46-3. - False alarm fee. 
(a)  A false alarm fee shall be imposed upon the property owner of the premises from which excessive false alarms emanate. 
(b)  The schedule and amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, § 1, 5-3-05) 
Sec. 46-4. - Collection of fees. 
(a)  Whenever the fire chief determines a fee for a false alarm should be imposed pursuant to this chapter, the fire chief shall, by first class mail, send a notice to the property owner where the alarm system is located, setting forth the amount of the fee due and the reason for its imposition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay the false alarm fee within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, § 1, 5-3-05) 
Sec. 46-5. - Administrative review procedures. 
    Within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice for a false alarm fee, the property owner may submit a written statement setting forth the reasons why such fee should not be imposed. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the written statement, the fire chief shall make a decision based on the statement of the property owner and all other information provided the fire chief. The property owner shall be notified in writing of the chief's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, § 1, 5-3-05) 
Sec. 46-6. - Establishment of lien. 
    If the property owner fails to pay when due any fee imposed by this chapter, the city may, in addition to any other collection remedy, certify the charge as due and unpaid and submit same to the Boulder County Treasurer to be levied against such person's property and to be collected as are delinquent taxes, plus a fifteen (15) percent administrative fee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-16, § 1, 5-3-05) 
Chapter 47 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

Sec. 47-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the City of Lafayette through the protection and preservation of the city's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied in designated historic landmarks and districts, by appropriate regulation; and the enhancement of property values, and the stabilization of historic neighborhoods within the city. 
    The intention of this chapter is to create a method to draw a reasonable balance between private property rights and the public interest in preserving the city's historic character by ensuring that demolition of, moving, or alterations to properties of historic value shall be carefully considered for the impact on the property's contribution to the city's heritage. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-2. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following words are defined as follows: 
    Alteration means any act or process that changes either: 
(1)  One or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure; or 
(2)  One or more of the physical features of a site or district. 
    City administrator means the city administrator of the city and anyone designated on his staff to administer the duties set forth in this chapter. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a certificate issued by the city showing approval of plans for construction, alteration, demolition, or relocation of structures that would affect a designated historic landmark or district. 
    Compatibility means consistent with, harmonious with, and/or enhancing the mixture of complementary architectural styles either of the architecture of an individual structure or the character of the surrounding structures. 
    Contributing structures means those structures or physical features within a site or district that help to define the historic significance of that site or district. 
    Demolition or demolish means an act or process that removes one (1) or more of the following: (The shaded area illustrates the maximum amount that may be removed without constituting demolition) 
(1)  Fifty (50) percent of the roof area, as measured in plan view; (See example) 

(2)  Fifty (50) percent or more of the exterior walls of a building as measured contiguously around the building envelop (See example); or 

(3)  Any portion of an exterior wall facing a public street, but not an alley (See example). 

    In order for a wall not to be considered a demolished wall, the wall shall meet the following minimum standards: 
A.  The wall shall retain studs or other structural elements, the exterior wall finish and fully framed and sheathed roof above that portion of remaining building to which such wall is attached; 
B.  The wall shall not be covered or otherwise concealed by a wall that is proposed to be placed in front of the retained wall; and 
Each part of the retained exterior walls shall be connected contiguously and without interruption to every other part of the retained exterior walls. 
    Work on an affected structure may not be divided into two (2) or more separate projects for the purpose of evading or attempting to evade the requirements of this definition. Any two (2) or more projects on an affected structure, undertaken within any twenty-four-consecutive month period shall be treated as a single project for the purpose of determining whether a project constitutes a demolition. 
    Designated historic landmark or historic district means a structure, site or district officially included in the city, Boulder County, State of Colorado or National Register of Historic Places. 
    Exterior architectural features means the exterior architectural features of a structure, including but not limited to the color, kind and texture of building materials, and the type, design and character of windows, doors and appurtenances. 
    Historic district means a geographically definable area that has been designated as such by the city because of its historic significance and importance to the community. An historic district will include a concentration, linkage or continuity or surface of subsurface sites, buildings, structures and/or physical features. A district is related by a pattern of either physical elements or social activities. A term "district" may include neighborhoods, mining, agricultural or commercial districts. 
    Historic landmark means a structure, site or district that has been designated as such by the city because of its historic significance and importance to the community. 
    Historic preservation board means a citizen committee appointed by the city council to make recommendations to the council on the designation of historic landmarks and historic districts and to administer the city's historic preservation program, and hereinafter referred to as the "board." The board shall perform the various functions and duties provided for it in this chapter. 
    Historic property means the cultural resources, including buildings, structures, objects, sites and districts, that are of historic significance. 
    Historic significance means having importance in the history, architecture or culture of the city or Boulder County. 
    Noncontributing structures means structures or physical features that may be within a site or district, but are not of historic significance per se; however, the relationship of these structures with the contributing structures may be important in the preservation of the site or district. 
    Nondesignated structures means structures that have not been designated as historic landmarks. 
    Overwhelming historic importance means: 
(1)  Possessing such unusual or uncommon significance that any structure's potential demolition or major alteration would diminish the character and sense of place in the city; or 
(2)  Possessing superior or outstanding examples of the architecture, social or geographic historic significance criteria outlined in the standards and criteria set forth in this chapter. The term "superior" shall mean excellence of its kind and the term "outstanding" shall mean marked by eminence and distinction. 
    Owner means the person or persons listed in the records of the Boulder County clerk and recorder or Boulder County assessor as owner of a subject property. 
    Physical features means the features of an historic landmark that help to define its historic significance. 
    Preservation means the protection, enhancement, and maintenance of historic properties. 
    Site means the scene of an activity that has an historic significance to the city. The site may or may not include structures, for example, parks, abandoned mining or agricultural areas, and archeological sites. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 2014-15, § 1, 6-3-14) 
Sec. 47-3. - Historic preservation board. 
(a)  Created. There is hereby created an historic preservation board, which shall have the principal responsibility for matters of historic preservation as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Membership and term of membership. The board shall consist of not more than seven (7) members, appointed by the city council. The board may recruit and recommend nominees to city council for appointment. Members appointed by the city council to serve on the seven-member board shall serve for a term of four (4) years. Council may, upon recommendation of the board, appoint up to two (2) alternate members, which member(s) shall be called upon to serve and vote in the absence of a regular member(s). Alternate members shall serve in such capacity for a term of four (4) years. Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term by city council appointment. The board may recommend any alternate member for appointment by council to a vacant position. In addition, one (1) member of the city council and one (1) member of the planning commission shall be designated by the council to serve as ex officio nonvoting members of the board. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The board shall: 
(1)  Adopt criteria for review of historic resources and for review of proposals to alter, demolish, or move designated resources, that are in addition to and consistent with the criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  Review resources nominated for designation as either an historic landmark or historic district and recommend that the city council designate by ordinance those resources qualifying for such designation. 
(3)  Review and determine the appropriateness of any application for alterations to a designated historic landmark or any structure in an historic district. 
(4)  Review and determine the appropriateness of any application for moving or demolishing an historic landmark. 
(5)  Provide referrals, resources, and assistance to owners of historic properties on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, including nomination to the Colorado and/or National Register of Historic Places. 
(6)  Develop and assist in public education programs including, but not limited to, walking tours, brochures, a marker program for historic properties, lectures, and conferences. 
(7)  Conduct surveys of historic areas for the purpose of defining those of historic significance, and prioritizing the importance of identified historic areas. 
(8)  Advise the city council on matters related to preserving the historic character of the city. 
(9)  Actively pursue financial assistance for preservation-related programs. 
(10)  For the purpose of variance requests pursuant to section 26-24-4 of the Code of Ordinances, review and make findings as to whether conformance with the provisions of Chapter 26 would have significant adverse impacts upon the historical character of an individual landmark or a contributing building of a historic district. Such findings shall be forwarded to the board of adjustment. 
(d)  From among its members, the board shall select a chairman and vice-chairman. 
(e)  The board shall conduct at least one (1) regular meeting each month. All board meetings shall be open to the public, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 24-6-402, C.R.S. 
(f)  The board is authorized to adopt bylaws and other administrative guidelines to govern the conduct of its meetings. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 2002-4, § 1, 4-2-02; Ord. No. 2008-09, § 2, 3-4-08; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 4, 2-1-11) 
Sec. 47-4. - Designation of historic landmarks and historic districts. 
(a)  Designation authorized. Pursuant to the procedures hereinafter set forth in this section, the city council may, by ordinance: 
(1)  Designate as an historic landmark an individual structure or other feature or an integrated group of structures and features on a single site having a special historic or architectural value. 
(2)  Designate as an historic district an area containing a number of structures on separate sites having a special historic or architectural value. 
Each such designating ordinance shall include a description of the characteristics of the historic landmark or historic district that justified designation and a description of the particular features that should be preserved, and shall include a legal description of the location and boundaries of the historic landmark site or historic district. The designating ordinance may also identify alterations that would have a significant impact upon, or be potentially detrimental to, the historic landmark or historic district. Any such designation shall be in furtherance of and in conformance with the purposes and standards of this section. The historic property included in any such designation shall be subject to the controls and standards set forth in this section, and eligible for such incentive programs as may be developed by the board. 
(b)  No historic districts shall be designated within an urban renewal area. It is the policy of the city council that historic districts not overlap or be included within any urban renewal area established by the city. Accordingly, no area located within an urban renewal area shall be designated under this chapter as an historic district. Individual sites located within an urban renewal area may be designated as historic landmarks. 
(c)  Procedures for designating historic landmarks and historic districts for preservation, board. 
(1)  Nominations. A nomination for designation may be made by the board, the city council, or by any citizen, by filing an application with the city administrator. The city administrator and at least one (1) member of the board shall then contact the owner or owners of such proposed historic landmark or historic district outlining the reasons and effects of designation as an historic property and, if possible, shall secure the consent of the owner or owners to such designation before the nomination is accepted as complete for review. Nominations for designation of an historic district must be signed by at least twenty-five (25) percent of the owners within the proposed district. Fifty-one (51) percent of the owners within the proposed district must approve the proposed designation before the city council will proceed to adopt a designating ordinance. 
(2)  Board review with owner's consent. If the owner of the proposed historic landmark site nominated for designation consents to the review, no more than sixty (60) days after the filing of the application, the board shall review the application for conformance with the established criteria for designation and with the purposes of this section. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of its review, but in no event more than sixty (60) days after the meeting date first set, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the board, the applicant, and the owner or owners other than the applicant, the board shall either approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the proposal, and if approved, shall refer the proposal with a copy of its report and recommendation to the city council. The board shall also notify the city council immediately of any decision disapproving a proposed designation initiated by the council. 
(3)  Board review without owner's consent. In the case of any proposed historic district, and in the case of a proposed historic landmark site where the owner of the site nominated for designation does not consent to the review, the board shall hold a public hearing on the proposal not more than sixty (60) days after the filing of the application. 
a.  Notice of the public hearing shall be in accordance with this Code's public notice requirements as set forth in Chapter 26, except that notice by first-class mail to property owners as specified in subsection 26-16-9(a) shall not be required. In lieu thereof, the city administrator shall mail written notices of the hearing to the owners of all the sites included in the proposed designation. In addition, in cases of nomination by fewer than all of the owners of the property, notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date to the owners of all property included in the proposed designation. Failure to send notice by mail to any such owner where the address of such owner is unknown and not a matter of public record shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed designation. 
b.  The board shall review the application for conformance of the proposed designation with the established criteria for designation and the standards of this chapter within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, but in no event more than sixty (60) days after the hearing date first set, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the board and the applicant. The board shall either approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the proposal, and if approved, shall refer the proposal with a copy of its report and recommendation to the city council. The board shall also notify the city council immediately of any decision disapproving a designation initiated by the council. 
c.  In conducting a review without the owner's consent, the board shall determine that the property has overwhelming historic importance to the entire community, in addition to determining compliance with any other criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(d)  Procedures for designating historic landmarks and historic districts for preservation, city council. 
(1)  Within thirty (30) days after the date of any referral from the board, or nomination by an interested party, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed designation. 
(2)  Notice of the public hearing shall be in accordance with this Code's public notice requirements as set forth in Chapter 26, except that notice by first-class mail to property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property in question shall not be required. In lieu thereof, the city administrator shall mail written notices of the hearing to the owners of all the sites included in the proposed designation. In addition, in cases of nomination by fewer than all of the owners of the property, notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date to the owners of all property included in the proposed designation. Failure to send notice by mail to any such owner where the address of such owner is unknown and not a matter of public record shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed designation. 
(3)  Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the public hearing, but in no event more than sixty (60) days after the hearing date first noticed, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the council, the applicant, and the owner or owners other than the applicant, the city council shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the proposed designation. 
(e)  Notice of designation. When an historic landmark or historic district has been designated by the city council as provided above, the city administrator shall promptly notify the owners of the sites included therein and shall cause a copy of the designating ordinance as describe above to be recorded with the Boulder County clerk and recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 6, 10-19-04) 
Sec. 47-5. - Revocation of designation. 
(a)  Board action. If a structure or physical feature on a designated historic landmark site was lawfully removed or demolished, the owner may apply to the board for revocation of designation. The board shall revoke an historic landmark designation if, after following the procedures prescribed by section 47-4(c), it determines that without the demolished structure or physical feature the site as a whole no longer meets the purposes and standards of this chapter and the board's review standards for designation. 
(b)  Council action final. Upon the board's decision to revoke a designation, the city administrator shall cause to be prepared an ordinance including the legal description of the affected property stating notice of the revocation, and schedule the item for city council review. Upon adoption by the city council, the ordinance shall be recorded with the Boulder County clerk and recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-6. - Appeal of disapproved proposals. 
(a)  The owners of property proposed to be designated as an historic landmark, or fifty-one (51) percent of the owners within the proposed historic district, may appeal to the city council a decision of the board disapproving a proposal by filing a notice of appeal with the council within fourteen (14) days of the board's decision. Any three (3) council members may call up for review any proposal disapproved by the board by serving written notice on the board within fourteen (14) days of the board's decision. 
(b)  Within sixty (60) days of the date of any decision of the board disapproving a proposed designation of an historic landmark or historic district that has been appealed to or called up by the city council, the council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be in accordance with this Code's public notice requirements as set forth in Chapter 26, except that notice by first-class mail to property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property in question shall not be required. In lieu thereof, the city administrator shall mail written notices of the hearing to the owners of all the sites included in the proposed designation. In addition, in cases of nomination by fewer than all of the owners of the property, notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date to the owners, of all property included in the proposed designation. Failure to send notice by mail to any such owner where the address of such owner is unknown and not a matter of public record shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed designation. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days after the hearing date prescribed above, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the city council and the applicant, the council shall adopt specific written findings and conclusions to determine whether the proposed designation meets the standards prescribed by this chapter and the board, and shall approve by ordinance, or disapprove the proposed designation. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-7. - Limitation on resubmission and reconsideration of proposed designation. 
    Whenever the board or city council disapproves a proposed designation, no person shall submit an application that is the same or substantially the same for at least six (6) months from the effective date of the final action on the original proposal. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-8. - Amendment of designation. 
    Designation of an historic landmark or historic district may be amended to add physical features, structures or sites to the landmark or district under the procedures set forth above for initial designation. Whenever a designation has been amended, the city administrator shall promptly notify the owners of the property included therein and shall record a copy of the amending ordinance with the Boulder County clerk and recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-9. - Register of locally-designated historic landmarks and historic districts. 
    The city administrator shall maintain a current record of all designated historic landmark sites and historic districts and pending designations. If the building division receives an application for a permit to carry out any new construction, alteration, removal, or demolition of a building or other physical feature on a designated landmark site or within the boundaries of a designated historic district or in an area for which designation proceedings are pending, the building division shall promptly forward such permit application to the board. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-10. - Construction on proposed landmark sites or in proposed district. 
    No person shall receive a permit to construct, alter, remove, or demolish any structure or other physical feature on a proposed historic landmark site or any proposed historic district after the date an application has been filed to initiate the designation of such historic landmark site or district. No such permit application filed after such date will be approved while proceedings are pending on such designation. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-11. - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
    No person shall carry out or permit to be carried out on a designated historic landmark site or within the boundaries of a designated historic district, or in an area for which designation proceedings are pending, any new construction, alteration, removal, or demolition of a building or other physical feature without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness for the proposed work under this section, as well as any other permits required by other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-12. - Certificate of appropriateness-Application. 
    An owner of property designated as an historic landmark or located in an historic district may apply for a certificate of appropriateness, including all information that the board determines is necessary to consider the application, including without limitation, plans and specifications showing the proposed exterior appearance, with texture, materials, and architectural design and detail, and the names and addresses of the abutting property owners. After a complete application is filed, the application shall be referred to the board for review. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-13. - Same-Board review; appeal; issuance. 
(a)  The board shall review an application for a certificate of appropriateness for new construction, alteration, removal, or demolition of a designated historic landmark or a structure or other physical feature within a designated historic district within sixty (60) days after the completed application was filed. The board shall determine whether the application meets the standards set forth in sections 47-18, 47-19 or 47-20, as the case may be, and the board's established review standards for certificates of appropriateness. Within thirty (30) days after the hearing date first set, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the board and the applicant, the board shall adopt written findings and conclusions. 
(b)  When reviewing a certificate of appropriateness involving moving or demolition of a structure or other physical feature, the board may extend the review period up to ninety (90) additional days if the board finds the original application does not meet the applicable standards set forth in section 47-19 or 47-20 and the board's review standards for certificates of appropriateness. The ninety-day extension period shall be used to encourage both the applicant and the board to explore acceptable alternative solutions to the original submittal. 
(c)  A decision of the board approving, disapproving, or suspending action on an application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be final unless appealed to or called up by the city council in the manner provided by section 47-6, except the council will consider the certificate of appropriateness rather than landmark or district designation. In cases of a call-up of a board decision suspending action on an application, the council may reduce the suspension or extend it up to one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the council decision. In cases of a call-up of a board approval of an application, the council may approve or disapprove the application. 
(d)  The city administrator shall issue a certificate of appropriateness if an application has been approved by the board or the city council. When approving an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the board or city council may impose a time limit for the applicant to apply for a building permit conforming to the certificate. 
(e)  If the board or city council disapproves an application for a certificate of appropriateness, no person may submit a subsequent application for the same or substantially same construction, alteration, removal, or demolition within six (6) months from the date of the final action upon the earlier application. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-14. - Unsafe or dangerous conditions exempted. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any measures of construction, alteration, removal, or demolition necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition of any structure, other physical feature, or parts thereof where such condition is declared unsafe or dangerous by the building official, or fire marshal, and where the proposed measures have been declared necessary by the city administrator to correct the condition, as long as only such work that is absolutely necessary to correct the condition is performed. Any temporary measures may be taken without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness, but such a certificate shall be required for permanent construction, alteration, removal, or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-15. - Property maintenance required. 
    The city council intends to preserve from deliberate or inadvertent neglect the exterior portions of designated historic landmarks and structures within historic districts and all interior portions thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration of any exterior portion. No owner, lessee, or occupant of any historic landmark shall fail to prevent significant deterioration of the exterior of the structure or physical feature beyond the condition of the structure or physical feature on the effective date of the designating ordinance. No owner, lessee, or occupant of any historic landmark or structure in an historic district shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance and other ordinances of the city regulating property maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-16. - Recognition of structures of merit. 
(a)  The board may approve a list of structures of historical or architectural merit that have not been designated as historic landmarks and are not situated in designated historic districts, to which the board may add from time to time, in order to recognize and encourage the protection, enhancement, and use of such structures. But nothing in this section shall be construed to impose any regulations or controls upon, or to provide incentives or awards to, structures of merit solely because they are included on the list. 
(b)  The board may authorize such steps as it deems desirable to recognize the merit of and to encourage the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of any structure of merit or of any designated historic landmark or any structure in a designated historic district by, without limitation, issuing certificates of recognition and authorizing plaques to be affixed to the exteriors of such structures. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-17. - Criteria for designation. 
    The board and city council shall consider the following criteria in reviewing nominations of properties for designation: 
(a)  Historic landmarks. Historic landmarks must be at least fifty (50) years old, exhibit physical integrity, and meet one (1) or more of the criteria for historical significance as described below. A historic landmark may be exempt from the age standard if it is found to be exceptionally significant using other criteria. 
(1)  Physical integrity. Physical integrity is considered to be the degree of intactness of, or presence of, historical characteristics and historical physical features, not the condition of the physical features. 
a.  All properties will be evaluated for physical integrity using the criteria below, but a property need not meet all of the following criteria to have integrity: 
1.  Shows character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the community, region, state, or nation; 
2.  Retains original design features, materials, and/or character; 
3.  Is in its original location or has the same historic context after having been moved; or 
4.  Has been accurately reconstructed or restored based on documentation. 
(2)  Historical significance. A property may be considered historically significant if it meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Architectural criteria. 
1.  Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period; 
2.  Is an example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized nationally, statewide, regionally, or locally for his or her expertise; 
3.  Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value; 
4.  Represents an innovation in construction, materials, or design; 
5.  Is a style particularly associated with Lafayette or one (1) of its neighborhoods; 
6.  Represents the built environment of a group of people in an era of history; 
7.  Demonstrates a pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one (1) of the above criteria; or 
8.  Is a significant historic remodel. 
b.  Social/historic criteria. 
1.  Is the site of a historic event that had an important effect upon the community or broader society; 
2.  Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, or social heritage of the community; or 
3.  Is associated with a notable person or the work of a notable person. 
c.  Geographic/environmental criteria. 
1.  Enhances the sense of identity of the community; or 
2.  Provides an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the community. 
d.  Informational criteria. 
1.  The site exhibits a demonstrated potential to make an important contribution to knowledge of the area's history through study of archaeological deposits, building materials, construction expertise, or other types of information. 
(b)  Historic districts. Historical significance is determined by applying criteria to the pattern(s) and unifying element(s) found within a district. Nominations will not be considered unless the application contains written approval of fifty-one (51) percent of the owners within the district boundaries. Noncontributing buildings and structures may be included within the boundaries, as long as those buildings and structures do not noticeably detract from the district's sense of time, place and historical development. Noncontributing structures will be evaluated for their magnitude of impact by considering their size, scale, design, and location. 
(1)  District boundaries will be defined by visual changes, historic documentation of different associations or patterns of development, or evidence of changes in site type or site density as established through architectural or archaeological survey or testing. 
(2)  In addition to meeting at least one (1) of the criteria outlined below, the historic district must contain structures that are at least fifty (50) years old. The district could be exempt from this age standard if the resources are found to be exceptionally significant using other criteria. 
(3)  Historic districts shall meet one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Architectural criteria. 
1.  Exemplifies specific elements of an architectural style or period; 
2.  Is an example of the work of an architect or builder who is recognized nationally, statewide, regionally, or locally for his or her expertise; 
3.  Demonstrates superior craftsmanship or high artistic value; 
4.  Represents an innovation in construction, materials, or design; 
5.  Is a style particularly associated with Lafayette or one (1) of its neighborhoods; 
6.  Represents the built environment of a group of people in an era of history; 
7.  Demonstrates a pattern or grouping of elements representing at least one (1) of the above criteria; or 
8.  Is a significant historic remodel. 
b.  Social/historic criteria. 
1.  Is the site of a historic event that had an important effect upon the community or broader society; 
2.  Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, or social heritage of the community; or 
3.  Is associated with a notable person or the work of a notable person. 
c.  Geographic/environmental criteria. 
1.  Enhances the sense of identity of the community; or 
2.  Provides an established and familiar natural setting or visual feature of the community. 
d.  Informational criteria. 
1.  The site exhibits a demonstrated potential to make an important contribution to knowledge of the area's history or prehistory through study of archaeological deposits, building materials, construction expertise, or other types of information. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 2015-45, § 1, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 47-18. - Criteria for certificate of appropriateness-New construction or alterations. 
(a)  The board shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for any proposed new construction or alteration on a designated historic landmark site or within a historic district only if the board can determine that the proposed work would not detrimentally alter, destroy or adversely affect any architectural or landscape feature that contributes to its original historic designation. The board must find that the proposed work is visually compatible with designated historic structures located on the property in terms of design, finish, material, scale, mass and height. When the subject site is an historic district, the board must also find that the proposed development is visually compatible with the development on adjacent properties within the district. 
(b)  In determining compatibility, the board shall use the definition set forth in section 47-2, and the following criteria: 
(1)  The effect upon the general historic and architectural character of the structure and property; 
(2)  The architectural style, arrangement, texture and material used on the existing and proposed structures and their relation to and compatibility with other structures; 
(3)  The size of the structure, its setbacks, location, and the appropriateness thereof, when compared to existing structures and the site; 
(4)  The compatibility of accessory structures and fences with the main structure on the site, and other structures; 
(5)  The effects of the proposed work in creating, changing, destroying, or otherwise impacting the exterior architectural features of the structure upon which such work is done; 
(6)  The condition of existing improvements and whether they are a hazard to public health and safety; 
(7)  The effects of the proposed work upon the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of the property; and 
(8)  Compliance with the United States Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for Rehabilitation." 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-19. - Same-Relocating a structure. 
    In addition to the criteria in section 47-18, the board shall use the following criteria in considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness for relocating an historic landmark, a structure on an historic landmark site, a building or structure within an historic district, a structure onto an historic landmark site, or a structure onto property in an historic district: 
(a)  For consideration of the original site, the board will review for compliance with all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Documentation showing the structure cannot be rehabilitated or reused on its original site to provide for any reasonable beneficial use of the property; 
(2)  The contribution the structure makes to its present setting; 
(3)  Whether plans are specifically defined for the site to be vacated, and have been approved by the city administrator; 
(4)  If the structure can be moved and re-sited without significant damage to its physical integrity and the applicant can show the relocation activity is the best preservation method for the character and integrity of the structure; and 
(5)  Whether a structural report submitted by a licensed structural engineer adequately demonstrates the soundness of the structure proposed for relocation. 
(b)  For consideration of the new location, the board will review for compliance with all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether the building or structure is compatible with its proposed site and adjacent properties; and if the receiving site is compatible in nature with the structure or structures proposed to be moved; 
(2)  The structure's architectural integrity and its consistency with the character of the neighborhood; 
(3)  Whether the relocation of the structure would diminish the integrity or character of the neighborhood of the receiving site; and 
(4)  If a relocation plan has been submitted and approved by the city administrator, to ensure the safe relocation, preservation and repair of the structure, site preparation and infrastructure connections as provided in applicable ordinances of the city. 
(c)  When a structure is relocated, the city may require the owner of the property to post a performance bond in an appropriate amount for the purpose of ensuring that the structure is reestablished in the new location according to the city's ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-20. - Same-Demolition of structure. 
(a)  [Approval of replacement/reuse plan.] If demolition approval of a historic landmark is granted on any basis other than that of an imminent hazard or economic hardship, a certificate of appropriateness will not be issued until a replacement/reuse plan for the property has been approved by the city administrator. 
(b)  Review criteria for total demolition. An applicant requesting a certificate of appropriateness for total demolition of a historic landmark shall provide data clearly to demonstrate that the situation meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The structure proposed for demolition is not structurally sound despite evidence of the owner's efforts properly to maintain the structure; 
(2)  The structure cannot be rehabilitated or reused on site to provide for any reasonable beneficial use of the property; 
(3)  The structure cannot be practically moved to another site in the city; and 
(4)  The applicant demonstrates that the proposal mitigates to the greatest extent possible the following: 
a.  Any impacts that occur to the visual character of the neighborhood where demolition is proposed to occur; 
b.  Any impact on the historic importance of the structure or structures located on the property and adjacent properties; and 
c.  Any impact to the architectural integrity of the structure or structures located on the property and adjacent properties. 
(c)  Review criteria for partial demolition. An applicant requesting a certificate of appropriateness for partial demolition of a historic landmark shall provide data clearly to demonstrate that the situation meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The partial demolition is required for the renovation, restoration or rehabilitation of the structure; and 
(2)  The applicant has mitigated, to the greatest extent possible, and at his own cost: 
a.  Impacts on the historic importance of the structure or structures located on the property; 
b.  Impacts on the architectural integrity of the structure or structures located on the property. 
(d)  [Archaeological sites.] In the case of archaeological sites, consideration will be given to whether information can be recovered before or as part of the demolition process. 
(e)  [Assumption of costs.] The applicant shall assume all of the costs associated with the mitigation efforts. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 2006-15, §§ 1-3, 5-2-06) 
Sec. 47-21. - Exemptions. 
    If the request to the board for a certificate of appropriateness does not conform to the applicable criteria, an applicant may request an exemption from the certificate requirements, provided that the intent and purpose of this chapter is not significantly compromised, and provided that adequate documentation is submitted to the board, either in writing or by testimony, to establish qualification for one of the following exemptions. Such documentation or testimony must be substantiated by professional opinion or thorough explanation of how the information was obtained, and at the owner's expense. 
(a)  Economic hardship. An economic hardship exemption may be granted if the applicant demonstrates, after consideration of all facts and circumstances, that he is unable to obtain a reasonable return on his investment. 
(b)  Health/safety hardship. A health and/or safety hardship exemption may be granted if the applicant shows that the application of the criteria creates a situation substantially inadequate to meet the applicant's needs because of specific health and/or safety issues, but not if the health and/or safety issues were created by the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 47-22. - Demolition of buildings or structures not designated as a historic landmark. 
(a)  All applications for permits for demolition of structures fifty (50) years old or older shall be reviewed by the historic preservation board review team. No permit for demolition shall be issued except as provided below. The historic preservation board review team shall be composed of two members or designated alternate of the historic preservation board serving one-year terms and the city administrator or designee. 
(b)  Prior to submitting an application for a demolition permit, the applicant shall meet with staff to discuss any historic resources associated with the building and property. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days from the date of the permit application, the historic preservation board review team shall review the application and make a determination as provided below. 
(d)  If the historic preservation board review team unanimously determines that the building or structure proposed to be demolished would not likely meet the criteria for designation as a historic landmark, as set forth in section 47-17, the permit application shall be approved for further processing. 
(e)  If any member of the historic preservation board review team determines possible historic significance exists and that the demolition permit application should be reviewed by the historic preservation board, a public hearing shall be scheduled within forty-five (45) days of the determination. 
(1)  The public hearing before the historic preservation board shall be noticed in accordance with section 26-16-9. 
(2)  At the public hearing the board, after considering the landmark designation criteria set forth in section 47-17, may issue a stay on the demolition permit not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of such decision. 
(3)  During the stay period the board may pursue action to preserve the building, including, but not limited to, consulting interested groups, entering into negotiations to move the building or salvage materials, or landmarking the property in accordance with this section. 
(4)  No person shall receive a permit to construct, alter, or remove any structure or other physical feature for the structure during the stay period. 
(5)  The applicant/owner may appeal the stay decision of the board to the city council. 
(6)  At the end of the stay process the demolition permit shall be approved for further processing. 
(Ord. No. 2006-15, § 4, 5-2-06; Ord. No. 2012-27, § 1, 10-2-12; Ord. No. 2017-34, § 1, 8-15-17) 
Sec. 47-23. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 1999-37, § 1, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 2006-15, § 4, 5-2-06) 
Chapter 50 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 2011-33, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, retitled Ch. 50, Community Life, to read as herein set out. 
Charter reference- Department of library authorized, § 4.13. 
Cross reference- Amusements, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Colorado Library Law, C. R. S. § 24-90-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - LIBRARY SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 2011-33, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, retitled Art. I, Library, to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 50-1. - Library board established. 
(a)  Established. There shall be and is hereby established a library board which shall have the primary responsibility as an advisory board to city council with regard to the provision of library services to the Lafayette community. 
(b)  Membership. The board shall consist of seven (7) citizens of Lafayette, who shall be appointed by the city council. A city employee appointed by the city administrator shall serve as a nonvoting staff liaison to the board. 
(c)  Term. All appointments to the board shall be for a period of three (3) years. The board may recruit and recommend nominees to city council for appointment. Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term by city council appointment as soon as possible. A member of the board shall not receive a salary or other compensation for services as a board member, but necessary traveling and subsistence expenses actually incurred may be paid from the general fund. City council may, upon recommendation of the board, appoint up to two (2) alternate members, which member(s) shall be called upon to serve and vote in the absence of a regular member(s), and the board may recommend any alternate member for appointment by council to a vacant position. Board members serve at the pleasure of city council. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The library board shall advise the city council in matters concerning the library, and the board shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Adopt bylaws, rules, and regulations for its guidance and government. 
(2)  Prepare and submit to the city council a plan for the development and maintenance of the library and as necessary, amend the plan. 
(3)  Review the library's annual budget request. 
(4)  Monitor gifts of money which shall be segregated in the accounting records of the city or property or endowments as may be granted to and accepted for library purposes and to encourage grants or gifts in support of the library. 
(5)  Adopt policies that provide for the orderly operation of the library. Such policies shall be effective upon adoption or at the time specified in the policy, unless and until city council disapproves of the policy. The library board shall promptly submit adopted policies to city council for its review. 
(6)  Review the qualifications of all final candidates for the position of library director. The library board shall have no authority over any decisions or policies involving city personnel. 
(7)  Do all other acts necessary to assist in the orderly and efficient management of the library as directed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 5, 2-1-11) 
Sec. 50-2. - Privacy of user records. 
(1)  In accordance with C.R.S. 24-90-119, as amended, except as set forth in subsection (2) of this section, the library shall not disclose any record or other information which identifies a person as having requested or obtained specific materials or services or as otherwise having used the library. 
(2)  Records may be disclosed on the following instances: 
(a)  When necessary for the reasonable operation of the library; 
(b)  Upon written consent of the user; 
(c)  Pursuant to subpoena, upon court order, or where otherwise required by law; 
(d)  To a custodial parent or legal guardian who has access to a minor's library card or its authorization number for the purpose of accessing by electronic means library records of the minor. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06) 
Sec. 50-3. - Willful retaining of books, etc.; penalty for violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to take any library property without complying with the appropriate checkout procedures, or knowingly retain any library property for thirty (30) days or more after notice in writing to return the same, or to damage any library property. Any such violation shall not be punishable by imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06) 
Chapter 55 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 10; amusements, Ch. 20; dog license, § 25-25 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 30; contractors, § 30-21 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 45; mobile homes, Ch. 60; sale of substances relating to toxic vapors, § 75-96 et seq.; zoning, App. A; home occupations, App. A, § 40 et seq. 
State Law reference- Power of city council to license and regulate businesses, C. R. S. § 31-15-501; city not to interfere with persons required by law to sell property at auction, C. R. S. § 31-15-501. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 55-1. - License ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to occupation licenses, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Secs. 55-2-55-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND COIN-OPERATED MACHINES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Inasmuch as provisions relative to licensing amusement devices and coin-operated machines, as derived from Ord. No. 434, adopted Dec. 5, 1967, and Ord. No. 748, adopted Dec. 12, 1977, and formerly set out as Ch. 1, §§ 1-1-1-6 of the 1963 Code, are deemed currently to be in full force and effect (see § 20-1 of this Code), such provisions have been included herein pursuant to the city's request, and the provisions have been designated as Art. II, §§ 55-21-55-26, by the editors, for purposes of classification. 

Sec. 55-21. - Licenses required. 
    No person, firm or corporation, except a nonprofit organization, shall own any coin-operated music or amusement device installed and used in the City of Lafayette unless such person, firm, or corporation shall be licensed hereunder by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 12-5-67; Ord. No. 748, 12-6-77) 
Sec. 55-22. - Definitions. 
    The term "coin-operated music and amusement devices" shall be deemed to include phonographic music machines and appurtenances thereto, bowlers, pinball machines, children's rides, and all other devices designed to furnish amusement which are mechanical and operated by the insertion of a coin or coins. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 12-5-67; Ord. No. 748, 12-6-77) 
Sec. 55-23. - License fee. 
    The license fee for each operator shall be as follows: 
(a)  License fees for amusement devices and coin-operated music devices shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Any proprietor as defined herein shall be subject to the payment of the above-mentioned license fees in the event that said proprietor shall own or become the owner of any device or devices that are subject to the payment of a license fee as provided herein; further the proprietor shall be subject to the above-mentioned license fees in the event that said license fees are not paid by the operator. 
(Ord. No. 434, 12-5-67; Ord. No. 748, 12-6-77; Ord. No. 939, § 1, 2-2-82; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 28, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 55-24. - Payment, when due. 
    All operators and/or proprietors shall pay the above-mentioned license fees to the city clerk of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, annually, on or before the 5th day of January of each year. Where the payment of a license fee is tendered after the expiration of any portion of any license year, the license fee shall be prorated to the date of December 31. In no case shall any portion of any license fee be transferred. 
    All operators and/or proprietors who have failed to pay the license fee for the year 1982 on or before January 5, 1982, shall pay said license fees pursuant to the terms of this section on or before March 1, 1982, for the period commencing January 1, 1982, through December 31, 1982. All operators and/or proprietors who have paid said license fees prior to January 5, 1982, shall receive a rebate from the City of Lafayette, Colorado, on said payment if the total amount paid on or before January 5, 1982, is a greater amount than as required by the terms of section 55-23. 
    The payment of a license fee for an amusement device or machine pursuant to the terms of section 55-23 and 55-24 shall constitute the payment for a license for that particular machine or any replacement machine or amusement device. 
(Ord. No. 434, 12-5-67; Ord. No. 748, 12-6-77; Ord. No. 939, § 2, 2-2-82) 
Sec. 55-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994, repealed § 55-25 in its entirety. Formerly, § 55-25 pertained to penalty for amusement devices/coin-operated machine offenses and derived from Ord. No. 434, adopted Dec. 5, 1967, and Ord. No. 748, adopted Dec. 6, 1977. 
Sec. 55-26. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this article or any application of this article to any person, firm or corporation or circumstances is held invalid or inoperative, such invalidity or inoperativeness shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article. The city council hereby declares that in these regards the provisions of this article are severable. 
(Ord. No. 434, 12-5-67; Ord. No. 748, 12-6-77) 
Secs. 55-27-55-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2009-33, adopted Jan. 5, 2010, repealed Art. III in its entirety and reenacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. III was comprised of §§ 55-31-55-45, and derived from Ord. No. 384, adopted June 2, 1964; Ord. No. 714, adopted Feb. 14, 1977; Ord. No. 887, adopted Sept. 16, 1980; Ord. No. 908, adopted March 17, 1981; Ord. No. 975, adopted April 19, 1983; Ord. No. 1984-39, adopted Dec. 4, 1984; Ord. No. 1988-15, adopted Aug. 16, 1988; and Ord. No. 2005-10, adopted March 1, 2005. 

Sec. 55-31. - Residential solicitation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon any residential premises, not having been invited by an occupant thereof for the purpose of personally contacting an occupant to solicit the immediate or future purchase or sale of goods, services or anything of value. This section shall not apply to recognized charitable, religious or political solicitations, Boulder County based youth activities, events or businesses located within the city, or those offering the regularly scheduled delivery of dairy goods and or pre-packaged food products by vehicles operating upon a fixed route. The above exception should not apply if a sign prohibiting solicitors or trespassing is posted upon the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2009-33, § 1, 1-5-10; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 1, 6-5-12) 
Sec. 55-32. - Solicitation or trespassing prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon any premises, not having been invited by an occupant, for the purpose of soliciting the immediate or future purchase or sale of goods or services or any other thing of value or to solicit a gift or donation when a sign prohibiting solicitation or trespassing is posted upon the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2009-33, § 1, 1-5-10) 
Secs. 55-33-55-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MASSAGE PARLOR LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2009-35, adopted Jan. 5, 2010, repealed Art. IV in its entirety and reenacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV was comprised of §§ 55-51-55-61, and derived from Ord. No. 753, adopted Dec. 20, 1977; Ord. No. 1987-24, adopted Jan. 5, 1988; Ord. No. 1995-2, adopted Feb. 21, 1995; and Ord. No. 2005-10, adopted March 1, 2005. 

Sec. 55-51. - Supplement to massage parlor code. 
    The city with the additions set forth in this article shall license and regulate massage parlors in accordance with the terms and conditions and procedures set forth in the Massage Parlor Code, C.R.S. Section 12-48.5-101, et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2009-35, § 1, 1-5-10) 
Sec. 55-52. - Additional requirement to issuance of a license. 
    No license to conduct a massage parlor shall be issued unless an inspection by the city determines that the establishment complies with each of the following requirements: 
(a)  Sign. A conspicuous and illuminated sign shall be posted at the establishment's main entrance identifying it as a massage parlor. 
(b)  Lighting. Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the current International Building Code, as adopted by the city, and, in addition, artificial light of not less than forty (40) watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where massage services are performed. 
(c)  Ventilation. Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the current International Building Code, as adopted by the city. 
(d)  Equipment. Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in the performance of massage services shall be provided. 
(e)  Water. Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(f)  Linen storage. Closed cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean linen. 
(g)  Bathing, dressing, locker, toilet facilities. Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one (1) tub or shower, and one (1) dressing room containing a separate securable locker shall be provided for each patron while in receipt of massage services; provided, however, that if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate massage room(s), separate dressing facilities and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. 
(h)  Physical and sanitary conditions. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathrooms, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities of the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the establishment is in operation. All toilet facilities shall be thoroughly cleaned on a daily basis. 
(i)  Towels and linens. Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(j)  Facilities and employees. A minimum of one (1) separate wash basin shall be provided in each massage parlor for the use of employees of any such establishment, which basin shall provide soap and hand sanitizer, and hot and cold running water at all times, and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. 
(k)  [Compliance.] Compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-35, § 1, 1-5-10) 
Sec. 55-53. - Hours of operation. 
    No massage parlor shall be open for business, or allow or permit the massage of any person upon the premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2009-35, § 1, 1-5-10) 
Sec. 55-54. - License fee. 
    Fees for the issuance of new licenses and renewals shall be set by resolution of city council except that new license fees shall not exceed three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) and renewals shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Ord. No. 2009-35, § 1, 1-5-10) 
Sec. 55-55. - Unlawful provisions. 
    It is unlawful for any person: 
(a)  To operate a massage parlor without holding a validly issued local license; 
(b)  To work in or upon the licensed premises of a massage parlor without obtaining and carrying a valid identity card; 
(c)  To obtain the services provided in a massage parlor by misrepresentation of age or by any other method in any place where massage is practiced when such person is under eighteen (18) years of age, unless such person is accompanied by his or her parent(s) or has a physician's prescription for massage services; 
(d)  To allow the sale, giving or procuring of any massage services to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless such person is accompanied by his or her parent(s) or has a physician's prescription for massage services; 
(e)  To permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be employed as an employee in a massage parlor. If any person who, in fact, is not eighteen (18) years of age exhibits a fraudulent proof of age, any action relying on such fraudulent proof of age shall not constitute grounds for the revocation or suspension of any license issued under this article unless the person employing such person knew or should have known that said proof of age was fraudulent; 
(f)  To fail to display at all times in a prominent place on the licensed premises a printed card with a minimum height of fourteen (14) inches and a width of eleven (11) inches with each letter a minimum of one-half (1/2) inch in height, which shall read as follows: 
  WARNING 
IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE TO BE IN OR UPON THESE PREMISES AT ANY TIME, UNLESS HE OR SHE IS ACCOMPANIED BY HIS OR HER PARENT, OR HAS A PHYSICIAN'S PRESCRIPTION FOR MASSAGE SERVICES. 
IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON TO ALLOW A PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE TO BE IN OR UPON THESE PREMISES AT ANY TIME UNLESS HE OR SHE IS ACCOMPANIED BY HIS OR HER PARENT(S) OR HAS A PHYSICIAN'S PRESCRIPTION FOR MASSAGE SERVICES. 
FINES OR IMPRISONMENT MAY BE IMPOSED BY THE MUNICIPAL COURT FOR VIOLATION OF THESE PROVISIONS. 
(g)  Licensed pursuant to this article, including any agent, manager, or employee of such person, to fail to immediately report any unlawful act or disorderly conduct or disturbance occurring upon the licensed premises to the city's police department. 
(Ord. No. 2009-35, § 1, 1-5-10) 
Secs. 55-56-55-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2003-28, adopted Aug. 5, 2003, repealed Ch. 55, Art. V, in its entirety. Former Art. V pertained to merchant guards or patrols and business or industrial guards, and derived from Ord. No. 989, adopted Aug. 16, 1983. 

Secs. 55-62-55-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GARAGE SALES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1984-15, § 1, adopted June 19, 1984, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Art. VI, §§ 55-74-55-87, to read as herein set forth. 

Sec. 55-74. - Definitions. 
    [As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
    Garage sale shall mean and include all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential zone as defined by the zoning ordinances of the city, for the purpose of disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "patio," "flea market," or "rummage" sale. 
    Personal property shall mean property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
(Ord. No. 1984-15, § 1, 6-19-84) 
Sec. 55-76. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2007-42, adopted Sept. 18, 2007, repealed § 55-76 in its entirety. Former § 55-76 pertained to the requirement of a garage sale permit and derived from Ord. No. 1984-15, adopted June 19, 1984. 
Sec. 55-77. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 2007-42, adopted Sept. 18, 2007, repealed § 55-77 in its entirety. Former § 55-77 pertained to written statement required prior to the issuance of a garage sale permit and derived from Ord. No. 1984-15, adopted June 19, 1984. 
Sec. 55-78. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 2007-42, adopted Sept. 18, 2007, repealed § 55-78 in its entirety. Former § 55-78 pertained to the garage sale permit fee and derived from Ord. No. 1984-15, adopted June 19, 1984. 
Sec. 55-79. - Garage sale conditions. 
    No household shall hold more than two (2) garage sales in any calendar year. If households conduct a joint garage sale, each participating household shall be deemed as having held a garage sale. 
(Ord. No. 1984-15, § 1, 6-19-84; Ord. No. 2007-42, § 4, 9-18-07) 
Sec. 55-80. - Hours of operation. 
    Such garage sale shall be limited in time to no more than the daylight hours of three (3) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 1984-15, § 1, 6-19-84) 
Sec. 55-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 2007-42, adopted Sept. 18, 2007, repealed § 55-81 in its entirety. Former § 55-81 pertained to exceptions and derived from Ord. No. 1984-15, adopted June 19, 1984. 
Sec. 55-82. - Display of sale property. 
    Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residential structure, in a garage, carport, common area and/or in a yard, but only in such areas. No personal property offered for sale at a garage sale shall be displayed in any public right-of-way and/or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 1984-15, § 1, 6-19-84) 
Sec. 55-83. - Advertising signs. 
    Only the following specified signs may be displayed in relation to a pending garage sale: 
(1)  Two (2) signs of not more than four (4) square feet each shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence where the garage sale is being conducted; 
(2)  No signs, including directional signs, shall be placed on traffic-control devices within the City of Lafayette; 
(3)  No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than two (2) days prior to the day such sale is to commence; 
(4)  All signs must be removed at the close of the garage sale activities or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs. 
(Ord. No. 1984-15, § 1, 6-19-84) 
Sec. 55-84. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 6 of Ord. No. 2007-42, adopted Sept. 18, 2007, repealed § 55-84 in its entirety. Former § 55-84 pertained to inspections and derived from Ord. No. 1984-15, adopted June 19, 1984. 
Sec. 55-85. - Parking. 
    The parking of all vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1984-15, § 1, 6-19-84) 
Sec. 55-86. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 7 of Ord. No. 2007-42, adopted Sept. 18, 2007, repealed § 55-86 in its entirety. Former § 55-86 pertained to the revocation and refusal of permit and derived from Ord. No. 1984-15, adopted June 19, 1984. 
Sec. 55-87. - Persons exempted from this section. 
    The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; 
(3)  Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business establishment from or at a place of business where such sale would be permitted by the zoning regulations of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, or under the protection of a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 1984-15, § 1, 6-19-84) 
Secs. 55-88-55-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 55-100. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Contract for purchase means a contract entered into between a pawnbroker and a customer pursuant to which money is advanced to the customer by the pawnbroker on the delivery of tangible personal property by the customer on the condition that the customer, for a fixed price and within a fixed period of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, has the option to cancel said contract. 
    Fixed price means the amount agreed upon to cancel a contract for purchase during the option period. Said fixed price shall not exceed: 
(a)  One-tenth of the original purchase price for each month, plus the original purchase price, on amounts of fifty dollars ($50.00) or over; or 
(b)  One-fifth of the original price for each month, plus the original purchase price, on amounts under fifty dollars ($50.00). 
    Fixed time means that period of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, as set forth in a contract for purchase, for an option to cancel said contract. 
    Option means the fixed time and the fixed price agreed upon by the customer and the pawnbroker in which a contract for purchase may be, but does not have to be, rescinded by the customer. 
    Pawnbroker means a person regularly engaged in the business of making contracts for purchase or purchase transactions in the course of his business. 
    Purchase transaction means the purchase by a pawnbroker in the course of business of tangible personal property for resale, other than newly manufactured tangible personal property which has not previously been sold at retail, when such purchase does not constitute a contract for purchase. 
    Tangible personal property means all personal property other than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness, which property is deposited with or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his business in connection with a contract for purchase or purchase transaction. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86) 
Sec. 55-101. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of a pawnbroker except as provided in and authorized by this article and without first having obtained a license from the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86) 
Sec. 55-102. - Application for license. 
    Every person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of a pawnbroker shall make application for a license to the city clerk which application shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the person, firm or corporation desiring the license; 
(2)  The trade name, if any, of the business; 
(3)  The location where the business is to be conducted; 
(4)  A statement that the zoning laws permit a pawnbroker business at the proposed location; 
(5)  If the applicant is an individual or partnership, the name of the individual or the name of each partner, the date of birth of the individual or each partner, the home address of the individual or each partner; 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the state under which laws the corporation is organized, the date of incorporation, the name, home address and date of birth of each corporate officer, the name, home address and date of birth of each corporate director, and the name, home address, date of birth of each stockholder and percentage of stock owned by him; 
(7)  A list of all convictions and pleas of no contest for any criminal offense, except traffic offenses, of any of the above-named persons; 
(8)  A set of fingerprints of any of the above-named persons; 
(9)  An affidavit stating that the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86) 
Sec. 55-103. - Bond and insurance. 
    Prior to the issuance of any license required by this article, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a bond in the favor of the City of Lafayette, Colorado, in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) executed by the applicant as principal and at least one (1) surety bond. The bond shall be conditioned upon the applicant fully complying with all provisions of this article and the statutes of Colorado regulating and concerning pawnbrokers. Further, prior to any license required by this article being issued, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to conduct business in the State of Colorado which insurance shall be in an amount of not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and which insurance shall insure the tangible personal property of any customer deposited with a pawnbroker pursuant to a contract for purchase against damage, loss or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86) 
Sec. 55-104. - Fee. 
    Every person or entity transacting business under this article shall pay to the city the following fees: 
(1)  A licensing fee in an amount as set by resolution of city council for a license issued under this article for one (1) year or any portion thereof which fee shall be payable at the time of the submission of an application for such license; and 
(2)  A transaction fee in the amount of one dollar ($1.00) for every contract for purchase, purchase transaction or sale entered into during the preceding calendar month which fee shall be payable to the city treasurer on or before the twentieth day of each month. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86; Ord. No. 1997-35, § 1, 12-16-97; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 31, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 55-105. - Issuance, expiration and renewal. 
(a)  Every person, firm or corporation who has complied with the provisions of this article shall be granted a license to conduct the business of a pawnbroker by the city council which license shall expire on December 31st of the year of issuance. An application for renewal of an existing license shall be made to the city clerk not less than forty-five (45) days prior to December 31st of the year of expiration. Any applicant seeking the renewal of an existing license shall meet all of the requirements of this article concerning the issuance of a new license. 
(b)  The licenses provided pursuant to this article shall specify the date of issuance, the date of expiration, the name of the licensee, and the location of the premises where the business of a pawnbroker is to be conducted. Such license shall be conspicuously placed at all times in the place thereby licensed. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86) 
Sec. 55-106. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
    No license provided by the article shall be issued or held by: 
(1)  Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership, association or company, any of whose officers or any of whose members are not of good moral character. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86) 
Sec. 55-107. - Transfer of license. 
    A license issued pursuant to this article shall entitle the licensee to conduct a pawnbroker business at the place designated on the license, and the license shall not be transferrable from one person, firm or corporation to another, but may be transferred from one place of business to another place of business with the consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86) 
Sec. 55-108. - Denial, suspension, revocation. 
    No license shall be issued to any applicant and no license shall be renewed if the applicant does not meet the requirements set forth in this article. The city council of Lafayette, Colorado, has the power, on its own motion or on complaint, after public hearing at which time the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard, to suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this article for any violation by the licensee or by any of the agents, servants or employees of such licensee of the provisions of this article or any of the statutes of the State of Colorado concerning pawnbrokers. Notice of suspension or revocation, as well as any notice of such hearing, shall be given by mailing the same in writing to the licensee at the address contained in such license. No suspension of any license shall be for a period longer than six (6) months. If any license is suspended or revoked, no part of the fees paid therefor shall be returned to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86) 
Sec. 55-109. - Required acts of pawnbrokers. 
(a)  A pawnbroker shall keep a numerical register in which he shall record the following information: The name, address and date of birth of the customer, and his driver's license number or other identification number from any other form of identification which is allowed for the sale of valuable articles pursuant to Section 18-16-103, C.R.S., or for the sale of secondhand property pursuant to Section 18-13-114, C.R.S.; the date, time and place of the contract for purchase or purchase transaction; and an accurate and detailed account and description of each item of tangible property including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying marks on such property. The pawnbroker shall also obtain a written declaration of the customer's ownership which shall state that the tangible personal property is totally owned by the customer, or shall have attached to such declaration a power of sale from the partial owner to the customer, how long the customer has owned the property, whether the customer or someone else found the property, and, if the property was found, the details of the finding. 
(b)  The customer shall sign his name in such register and on the declaration of ownership and shall receive a copy of the contract for purchase or a receipt of the purchase transaction. 
(c)  Such register shall be made available to the Lafayette Police Department at any reasonable time. 
(d)  The pawnbroker shall keep each register for at least three (3) years after the date of the last transaction entered in the register. 
(e)  A pawnbroker shall hold all transacted goods within his jurisdiction for a period of ten (10) days following the maturity date of the contract for purchase, during which time such goods shall be held separate and apart from any other tangible personal property and shall not be changed in form or altered in any way. 
(f)  A pawnbroker shall hold all property purchased by him through a purchase transaction for thirty (30) days following the date of purchase, during which time such property shall be held separate and apart from any other tangible personal property and shall not be changed in form or altered in any way. 
(g)  Every pawnbroker shall provide the Lafayette Police Department, on a weekly basis, with two (2) records, on a form to be approved by the Lafayette Police Department, of all tangible personal property accepted during the preceding week and one (1) copy of the customer's declaration of ownership. The form shall contain the same information required to be recorded in the pawnbroker's register pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(h)  Every pawnbroker shall comply with any order issued by the Lafayette Police Department to hold any article deposited with such pawnbroker for the purposes of further investigation by the police department. A hold order shall supersede any other provisions of this article, and no sale or other disposition may be made of any article deposited with a pawnbroker or in his custody while the hold order remains outstanding. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86) 
Sec. 55-110. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No pawnbroker shall enter into a contract for purchase or purchase transaction with any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  With respect to a contract for purchase, no pawnbroker shall permit any customer to become obligated on the same day in any way under more than one (1) contract for purchase agreement with the pawnbroker which would result in the pawnbroker obtaining a greater amount of money than would be permitted if the pawnbroker and the customer had entered into only one (1) contract for purchase covering the same tangible personal property. 
(c)  No pawnbroker shall violate the terms of any contract for purchase. 
(d)  No pawnbroker shall knowingly accept or have in his place of business any item or article of tangible personal property with an altered serial number or with no serial number whatsoever if the item or article of tangible personal property was originally manufactured with a serial number. 
(e)  No pawnbroker shall violate any of the terms contained within this article. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86) 
Sec. 55-111. - False information by customer prohibited. 
    No customer shall give any false information with respect to the information required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1986-39, § 1, 10-21-86) 
Sec. 55-112. - Delinquencies; penalties; interest. 
(a)  If a person or entity neglects or refuses to pay any fee as required under this article, the finance director shall make an estimate based upon such information as may be available, of the fees due for the period for which such person or entity is delinquent and shall add thereto a penalty equal to the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or ten (10) percent thereof and interest on such delinquent fees at the rate imposed under subsection (b) of this section plus one-half (0.5) percent per month from the date when due, not exceeding eighteen (18) percent in the aggregate. 
(b)  The monthly rate of interest on delinquent fees under subsection (a) above shall be one (1) percent. 
(c)  Promptly after making such estimate, the city finance director shall give to the delinquent person or entity written notice of such estimated fees, penalty and interest which notice must be served personally or by certified or registered mail. 
(Ord. No. 1997-35, § 2, 12-16-97) 
Secs. 55-113-55-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, ANIMAL SHOWS, AND TENT SHOWS 

Sec. 55-120. - License required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall conduct, operate or permit the conduct or operation within the city for the general public or for private club members of any carnival, circus, animal show or tent show except in accordance with the provisions of this article and without having first obtained a license as is provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1988-04, § 1, 4-19-88) 
Sec. 55-121. - Carnival defined. 
    For the purpose of this article, "carnival" means any travelling or temporary amusement show which offers one (1) or more rides such as a merry-go-round, ferris wheel, or other amusement device upon which persons are transported, and includes all exhibitions, games, entertainments, restaurants, food and beverage stands, rides and other amusements which may be located upon the premises of such amusement show. 
(Ord. No. 1988-04, § 1, 4-19-88) 
Sec. 55-122. - Application for license. 
    Before any license provided for in this article shall be issued, the applicant shall accomplish the following: 
(1)  Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of operations, file with the city clerk an application in writing containing the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant; 
b.  The kind of license applied for; 
c.  The place where the carnival, circus, animal show or tent show is to be carried on; 
d.  The period for which the license is sought; 
e.  The proposed hours of operation; 
f.  The type of supervision to be provided by the applicant; 
g.  The owner of the property upon which the business is to be carried on; 
h.  The number of persons to be employed for the operation of the business; 
i.  The zoning of the premises upon which the business is to be carried on; 
j.  The means of ingress and egress to the proposed business; 
k.  The names, addresses, and employment histories of all persons to be employed for the operation of the business; 
l.  A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any manager or employee of the business; 
1.  Has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, excluding all non-alcohol-related traffic violations, 
2.  The nature of the offense(s), and 
3.  The punishment(s) or penalt(y)(ies) assessed therefor. 
(2)  The applicant shall remit to the finance director a nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by resolution of city council. 
(3)  The applicant shall deposit with the finance director a cash deposit in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or a bond in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for the benefit of the sureties with a corporate surety authorized by the laws of the State of Colorado to act as a surety and approved by the office of the city attorney which cash deposit or bond shall be returned to the applicant upon written notification from the planning department and premises owner indicating that the area occupied by the licensed activity within the city has been removed, and further that all other requirements of this Code and any other applicable city ordinances have been complied with. 
(4)  The applicant shall furnish to the city clerk proof of insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Colorado with a provision for minimum liability insurance coverage in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per incident. 
(5)  The applicant shall furnish evidence of ownership of the property upon which the operation is to be conducted or written consent of the owner of the property in question to conduct the operation or business. 
(Ord. No. 1988-04, § 1, 4-19-88; Ord. No. 1993-26, § 1, 7-20-93; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 32, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 13, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 55-123. - Site inspection required prior to issuance of license. 
    In addition to any other requirements of this article for the issuance of a license for the conduct of a carnival, circus, animal show or tent show, the planning department in conjunction with the city building inspector and the city fire department shall have the authority to inspect the area proposed to be occupied by the applicant for the activities to be licensed. The inspection, if made, may include review of the following and compliance and/or correction as necessary: 
(1)  Sufficient number of portable, chemical, sanitary facilities for each sex on the site at date of set-up or verified arrangements for use of on-site facilities; 
(2)  All fuel storage containers in accordance with the standards of the Lafayette Fire Department; 
(3)  Sufficient number of portable fire extinguishers to insure adequate fire protection during the operation of the licensed activities in accordance with the Lafayette Fire Department; 
(4)  Existence of portable electric cords supplying power to all concessions and amusement rides with emergency shutdown switches within arm's reach of each respective operator; electrical service must meet National Electric Code standards; 
(5)  Existence of electrical junction and splicing boxes adequate to protect against electrical hazards as determined by the electrical inspector of the city in accordance with approved electrical inspection standards; 
(6)  All concession units shall have and maintain: 
a.  Flame-proofing of all tenting and bunting; 
b.  Spectator accessibility; 
c.  Fire extinguisher adequate for fire protection of the specific concession unit; 
(7)  Interior travelways for the public shall maintain: 
a.  Flat bundling of portable electric cords; 
b.  Railing protection clearance for the public from moving machinery, equipment and any restricted area; 
(8)  Compressed gas bottles shall be securely chained to a support in an upright position whether in full or empty condition; 
(9)  A horizontal distance of seven (7) feet shall be maintained between cages for animals or any animal restraints and spectator railings; 
(10)  A sufficient quantity of trash receptacles shall be located throughout the site of the licensed activities; 
(11)  Adequate ingress and egress shall be maintained to the site for emergency equipment; public parking shall not be allowed within the perimeter of the carnival area as established by the city planning department; 
(12)  Adequate parking as determined by the city planning department shall be provided for patrons of the licensed activity; 
(13)  If there is a restaurant, food service or keeping of animals on the premises, the district health department shall approve the facilities for the activity to ensure the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1988-04, § 1, 4-19-88; Ord. No. 1993-26, § 2, 7-20-93; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 13, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 55-123.1. - Continued site inspections authorized. 
    During such time as the carnival, circus, animal show or tent show is operating within the city, the planning department, the city building inspector and the city fire department shall have the continuing authority to inspect the area occupied by the applicant, to ensure continued compliance with all of the requirements of this article. Such continued inspections may occur at any reasonable time during the duration of the license, and need not be preceded by notice to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1993-26, § 3, 7-20-93; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 13, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 55-124. - Duration of license. 
    Any license granted pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of not more than five (5) days. 
(Ord. No. 1988-04, § 1, 4-19-88) 
Sec. 55-125. - Hours of operation. 
    Any business licensed pursuant to this article shall not commence operations prior to 10:00 a.m. and shall not operate after 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1988-04, § 1, 4-19-88) 
Sec. 55-126. - Zoning restrictions. 
    A license provided for pursuant to the terms of this article shall be issued for the conduct of a carnival, circus, animal show or tent show only upon property zoned C-1 (Regional Business) or B-1 (Community Business). 
(Ord. No. 1988-04, § 1, 4-19-88) 
Sec. 55-127. - Further investigation required prior to issuance of license. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application, the same shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to be made of each and every statement contained in said application and shall cause to be made such further investigation of the business and moral character of the managers and employees of the business as he deems necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  If as a result of such investigation the chief of police finds that any statement on the application is false, or that the business or moral character of any manager or employee is unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the said application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application has been disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation the business and moral characters of the managers and employees are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, and the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant for carrying on the business applied for, provided that the applicant has complied with all other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1993-26, § 3, 7-20-93) 
Sec. 55-128. - Appeal of denial of license. 
    Any person aggrieved by the action of the city clerk in the denial of an application for a license as provided for in this article shall have the right to appeal to the city administrator. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city administrator, within five (5) days after such denial, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city administrator or his designee shall conduct any hearing and/or review of the denial of the license, and his decision shall be final. The city administrator may promulgate rules and regulations or procedures to govern any such hearing and/or review. 
(Ord. No. 1993-26, § 3, 7-20-93) 
Sec. 55-129. - Revocation of licenses. 
    The city clerk may revoke any license issued under the provisions of this article after giving the licensee a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The clerk may suspend or revoke a license upon a finding of any of the following facts: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the license; 
(2)  Conducting of the licensed business contrary to the conditions of that license or the requirements of this article; 
(3)  Conducting of the licensed business in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1993-26, § 3, 7-20-93) 
Secs. 55-130-55-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DEFAULT BEVERAGES OFFERED WITH CHILDREN'S MEALS 

Sec. 55-175. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Children's meal means a combination of food items, or food items and a beverage, sold together at a single price, primarily intended for consumption by children 
    Default beverage means the beverage automatically included, or offered, as part of the children's meal, absent a specific request by the purchaser of the children's meal for an alternative beverage. 
    Restaurant means a food establishment that serves food to customers for consumption on or off premises, including fast food and full service dining establishments. It includes, but is it not limited to, drive-through or walk-up counters, coffee shops, cafes, pizza parlors, and dine-in establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-40, § 1, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 55-176. - Default beverages in children's meals. 
(a)  After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, a restaurant that sells a children's meal that includes a beverage shall make the default beverage offered with the children's meal one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Water, sparkling water, or flavored water, with no added natural or artificial sweeteners; 
(2)  Milk or non-dairy milk alternatives with no added natural or artificial sweeteners. 
(b)  Nothing in this article prohibits a restaurant's ability to sell, or a customer's ability to purchase, a substitute or alternative beverage instead of the default beverage offered with a children's meal, if requested by the purchaser of the children's meal. 
(c)  All restaurants shall complete an initial self-certification certifying whether they offer children's meals and if so, certifying that they comply with the provisions of this section. Subsequently, restaurants that sell children's meals shall complete an annual self-certification, certifying that they comply with the provisions of this section, as may be modified from time to time at the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-40, § 1, 10-17-17) 
Sec. 55-177. - Construction. 
    This article shall be construed so as to not conflict with applicable federal or state laws, rules, or regulations. Nothing in this article authorizes any city agency to impose any duties or obligations in conflict with limitations on municipal authority established by federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-40, § 1, 10-17-17) 
Secs. 55-178-55-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - LICENSES FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 55-200. - Definitions. 
    Certain words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 26-15.5-2. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-201. - Sexually oriented business license required. 
(a)  No sexually oriented business license shall be issued for any sexually oriented business located within any zone district other than the M1 industrial zone. 
(b)  No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without first having obtained a valid type A or type B sexually oriented business license issued by the city. 
(1)  A type A sexually oriented business license shall be required for sexually oriented businesses where alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors, as defined by the Colorado Liquor Code and/or fermented malt beverages, as defined by the Colorado Beer Code, are allowed pursuant to a valid license issued under Chapter 10 of the City of Lafayette Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  A type B sexually oriented business license shall be required for all sexually oriented businesses where alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors, as defined by the Colorado Liquor Code and/or fermented malt beverages, as defined by the Colorado Beer Code, are not allowed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business when said person knows or reasonably should know that: 
(1)  The business does not have a sexually oriented business license; 
(2)  The business has a sexually oriented business license which is under suspension; 
(3)  The business has a sexually oriented business license which has been revoked; 
(4)  The business has a sexually oriented business license which has expired. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-202. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual fee for a sexually oriented business shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(b)  The annual manager's fee shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(c)  An applicant for either a type A or type B sexually oriented business license shall, at the time of filing an application, pay a nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 33, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 55-203. - Application for sexually oriented business license. 
(a)  The licensing officer is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, and suspending sexually oriented business licenses for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. 
(b)  The planning director or designee is responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a sexually oriented business license application has been submitted complies with all locational requirements of section 26-15.5-12. 
(c)  The police chief or designee is responsible for providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time periods set forth in section 55-206(c)(1)i. 
(d)  The building official or designee is responsible for inspecting a proposed sexually oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable building codes and ordinances. 
(e)  Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the licensing officer an original and two (2) copies of a sworn sexually oriented business license application on the standard application form supplied by the licensing officer. 
(f)  The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name and any aliases, and submit satisfactory proof that he or she is twenty-one (21) years of age or older in the case of a type A sexually oriented business license or eighteen (18) years of age or older in the case of a type B sexually oriented business license. 
(2)  If the applicant is a legal entity, the application shall state its complete name, the date and place of its organization, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of the state in which it is organized, and if it is organized under the laws of a state other than Colorado, that it is registered to do business in Colorado, the names and capacity of all officers, directors, managers, and principal owners, and the name of the registered agent and the address of the registered agent for service of process, if any. 
(3)  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the sexually oriented business' fictitious name must be stated. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsections (f)(1) or (2) have been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in section 55-206(c)(1)i., and if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction. 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsections (f)(1) or (2) has had a previous license under this or other sexually oriented business ordinance from another city, town or county denied, suspended, or revoked and, if so, the name of the city, town or county where the license was previously denied, suspended or revoked, and the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation. 
(6)  Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (f)(1) or (2) has been a partner in a partnership or a principal owner of a corporation or other legal entity whose license has previously been denied, suspended, or revoked and, if so, the name of the city, town or county where the license was previously denied, suspended or revoked, and the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(7)  Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to subsections (f)(1) or (2) holds any other licenses under this section or other sexually oriented business ordinance from another city, town or county and, if so, the name of such city, town or county, and names and locations of such other licensed businesses. 
(8)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s). 
(9)  Proof of the applicant's right to possession of the premises wherein the sexually oriented business will be conducted. 
(10)  The applicant's mailing address and residential address. 
(11)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The licensing officer may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not be altered since it was prepared. If the sexually oriented business has or will have a peep booth or booths subject to the provisions of section 26-15.5-20, the sketch shall show the locations and dimensions of any manager's stations and demonstrate that there is an unobstructed view from at least one of the manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access, excluding restrooms. The floor plan shall designate those rooms or other areas of the premises where patrons are not permitted and shall also designate the use of each room or other area of the premises. 
(12)  A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to an initial application by a Colorado registered land surveyor depicting: (i) the property lines and the structures of the property to be certified; and (ii) the location of the property lines of any church, school, dwelling or residentially zoned area within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the property to be certified; and (iii) the location of the property lines and structures of any other sexually oriented business within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence or pending at the time an application is submitted. 
(13)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a sexually oriented business license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each principal owner of the applicant must sign the application for a sexually oriented business license as applicant. 
(g)  In the event that the licensing officer determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he or she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten (10) days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a sexually oriented business license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application. 
(h)  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 33, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 55-204. - Duty to supplement application. 
(a)  Applicants for a sexually oriented business license under section 55-203 shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement any application information required by that section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. 
(b)  The failure to comply with said continuing duty to supplement an application within thirty (30) days from the date of such change shall be grounds for suspension of a sexually oriented business license. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-205. - Investigation and application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business license properly filed with the licensing officer and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the licensing officer shall immediately stamp the application as received and send copies of the application to the planning director, the building official and the police chief. The planning director, the building official and the police chief, or their respective designees shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application, and the proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with his or her responsibilities under this section. Investigations shall be completed within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the licensing officer. At the conclusion of their investigations, the planning director and the building official shall indicate on the copy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and in the event of disapproval, state the reasons therefor. The police chief shall only be required to provide the information specified in section 55-203(c), and shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications. 
(b)  The planning director and the building official may disapprove an application if he or she finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be or is in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation, or other law in effect in the city. After their investigations and review, the planning director, the building official and the police chief shall immediately return the copy of the application to the licensing officer. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 55-206. - Issuance of sexually oriented business license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall grant or deny an application for a sexually oriented business license within thirty (30) days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the thirty (30) days, the applicant shall be licensed to begin operating the business for which the sexually oriented business license is sought, unless and until the licensing officer notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reason(s) for that denial. 
(b)  Grant of application for sexually oriented business license. 
(1)  The licensing officer shall grant the sexually oriented business license unless one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection (c) below is present. 
(2)  The sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be easily read at any time. 
(c)  Denial of application for sexually oriented business license. 
(1)  The licensing officer shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
a.  An applicant is under twenty-one (21) years of age in the case of an application for a type A sexually oriented business license or under eighteen (18) years of age in the case of an application for a type B sexually oriented business license. 
b.  An applicant is overdue on his or her payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
c.  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this section for the issuance of the sexually oriented business license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form and has refused to provide corrected information. 
d.  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have been disapproved by an inspecting agency pursuant to the provisions of section 55-205(b). 
e.  The application or sexually oriented business license fees have not been paid. 
f.  An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this section. 
g.  The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance, or court order. 
h.  The applicant has a sexually oriented business license under this section which has been suspended or revoked within the previous twelve (12) months. 
i.  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act or acts for which: 
1.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date or release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant. An applicant who has been convicted of a specified criminal act or acts may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required above has elapsed. 
(2)  If the licensing officer denies the application, he or she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reason(s) for the denial. A copy of such denial shall be forwarded to the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-207. - Expiration of sexually oriented business license. 
(a)  Each sexually oriented business license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 55-203 (for renewals, filing of original survey shall be sufficient) of this section. Application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  If, subsequent to denial of renewal the licensing officers finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the sexually oriented business license has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a sexually oriented business license if no more than ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-208. - Suspension of sexually oriented business license. 
(a)  The licensing officer may suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) days if he or she determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; or 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this section; or 
(3)  Knowingly allowed repeated disturbances of public peace to occur within the licensed establishment or upon the premises of the licensed establishment involving patrons, employees, or the licensee; or 
(4)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning code, ordinance, or regulation whether federal, state, or local, said determination being based on investigation by the department, division, or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such a statute, code, ordinance, or regulation violation, the licensing officer shall promptly notify the licensee of the violation and shall allow the licensee a twenty (20) day period in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the twenty (20) day period, the licensing officer shall forthwith suspend the sexually oriented business license and shall notify the licensee of the suspension; or 
(5)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation provisions in section 26-15.5-21; or 
(6)  Transferred a sexually oriented business license contrary to section 55-211. In the event of such suspension, the licensing officer shall forthwith notify the original licensee and the transferee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable section of 55-211 has been satisfied. 
(b)  The suspension shall remain in effect until and including the last day in the licensing officer's order and the violation of the statute, code, ordinance, or regulation in question has been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-209. - Revocation of sexually oriented business license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business license upon determining that: 
(1)  A cause of suspension in section 55-208 of this section occurred and the sexually oriented business license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months; or 
(2)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant's opportunity for obtaining a sexually oriented business license; or 
(3)  A licensee, manager or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances (as defined in Part 3 of Article 22 of Title 12, C.R.S.) on the premises; or 
(4)  A licensee, manager or an employee has knowingly allowed acts of prostitution or negotiations for acts of prostitution on the premises; or 
(5)  A licensee, manager or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's sexually oriented business license was suspended; or 
(6)  A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time period set forth in section 55-206(c)(1)i. has not elapsed; or 
(7)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the sexually oriented business license; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city or state for any taxes or fees; or 
(9)  A licensee, manager or an employee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises; or 
(10)  The licensee has operated more than one sexually oriented business within the same building, structure, or portion thereof. 
(b)  When the licensing officer revokes a sexually oriented business license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-210. - Suspension or revocation hearing. 
(a)  A licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the licensing officer if the city seeks to suspend or revoke his or her sexually oriented business license based on a violation of this article. The business may continue to operate during the hearing process. 
(b)  When there is probable cause to believe that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, the city attorney may file a written complaint with the licensing officer setting forth the circumstances of the alleged violation. 
(c)  The licensing officer shall provide a copy of the complaint to the licensee, together with notice to appear before the licensing officer for the purpose of a hearing on a specified date to show cause why the licensee's sexually oriented business license should not be suspended or revoked. 
(d)  At the hearing, the licensing officer shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the police department or other enforcement officers, the owner, occupant, lessee, or other party in interest, or any other witness shall offer which is relevant to the violation alleged in the complaint. The licensing officer shall make findings of fact from the statements and evidence offered as to whether the violation occurred in or near the licensed establishment. If the licensing officer determines that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, he or she shall issue an order suspending or revoking the sexually oriented business license within thirty (30) days after the hearing is concluded based on the findings of fact. A copy of the order shall be mailed to or served on the licensee at the address on the license. 
(e)  The order of the licensing officer made pursuant to subsection (d) above shall be a final decision and may be appealed to the municipal court in accordance with its judicial appeals procedure. Failure of a licensee to timely appeal said order constitutes a waiver by him or her of any right he or she may otherwise have to contest the suspension or revocation of the sexually oriented business license. 
(f)  The licensing officer shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and when necessary grant continuances. Subpoenas may be issued to require the presence of persons and production of papers, books, and records necessary to the determination of any hearing which the licensing officer conducts. It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any subpoena issued by the licensing officer. A subpoena shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued by the district court of the State of Colorado. 
(g)  All hearings held before the licensing officer regarding suspension or revocation of a sexually oriented business license issued under this ordinance shall be recorded stenographically or by electronic recording device. Any person requesting a transcript of such record shall post a deposit in the amount required by the licensing officer, and shall pay all costs of preparing such record. 
(h)  In the event of suspension, revocation, or cessation of business, no portion of the sexually oriented business license fee shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 3, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 55-211. - Transfer of sexually oriented business license. 
(a)  A licensee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a sexually oriented business license at any place other than the address designated in the application for sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  A licensee shall not transfer his or her sexually oriented business license to another person unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements: 
(1)  Obtains an amendment to the sexually oriented business license from the licensing officer which provides that he or she is now the licensee, which amendment may be obtained only if he or she has completed and properly filed an application with the licensing officer setting forth the information called for under section 55-203 in the application; and 
(2)  Pays a transfer fee of twenty (20) percent of the annual sexually oriented business license fee. 
(c)  No sexually oriented business license may be transferred when the licensing officer has notified the licensee that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the licensee. 
(d)  Any attempt to transfer a sexually oriented business license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Secs. 55-212-55-220. - Reserved. 
Sec. 55-221. - Manager's license required; change of manager; inactive status. 
(a)  A manager or designee shall be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at all times during operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to work as a manager of a sexually oriented business without first obtaining a manager's license for such premises. 
(b)  In the event a manager ceases to be employed at the premises listed in his or her application, the manager shall immediately report such change to the licensing officer but in no event shall such change be reported later than ten days after cessation of employment. 
(c)  Provided a manager has complied with the requirements of subsection (b), his or her license shall remain in inactive status until it expires or is reactivated. A manager who is re-employed at the premises listed in the manager's license, may reactivate his or her license provided the licensing officer determines he or she still meets the requirements of section 55-222. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-222. - Application for manager's license. 
(a)  A manager shall submit an application for a manager's license for each sexually oriented business the manager proposes to manage on a form to be provided by the licensing officer. The application shall contain the applicant's name, address, date of birth, telephone number, address, the name and address of the sexually oriented business that manager proposes to manage and the information required in section 55-203(f)(4). 
(b)  The police department shall conduct an investigation of the applicant to determine if the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in section 55-205(c)(1)i. 
(c)  The licensing officer shall grant the application within ten (10) days of its filing unless: 
(1)  The applicant is under the age of twenty-one (21) in the case of a type A sexually oriented business license or under the age of eighteen (18) in the case of a type B sexually oriented business license; 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide the information required by this section; 
(3)  The license fee has not been paid; 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act within the times set forth in section 55-205(c)(1)i. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-223. - Expiration of manager's license. 
(a)  Each manager's license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 55-222. Application for renewal of a manager's license shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the manager's license. 
(b)  If, subsequent to denial of renewal the licensing officers finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the manager's license has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a manager's license if no more than ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-224. - Suspension of manager's license. 
(a)  The licensing officer may suspend a manager's license for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days if he or she determines that the manager has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; or 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; or 
(3)  Knowingly allowed repeated disturbances of public peace to occur within the licensed establishment or upon the premises of the licensed establishment involving patrons, employees, or the licensee; or 
(4)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation provisions in section 26-15.5-21. 
(b)  The suspension shall remain in effect until and including the last day in the licensing officer's order and the violation of the statute, code, ordinance, or regulation in question has been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-225. - Revocation of manager's license. 
(a)  The licensing officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business license upon determining that: 
(1)  A cause of suspension in section 55-224 of this section occurred and the sexually oriented business license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months; or 
(2)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant's opportunity for obtaining a manager's license; or 
(3)  The manager knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances (as defined in Part 3 of Article 22 of Title 12, C.R.S.) on the premises; or 
(4)  The manager knowingly allowed acts of prostitution or negotiations for acts of prostitution on the premises; or 
(5)  The manager knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the sexually oriented business license was suspended; or 
(6)  The manager has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time period set forth in section 55-206(c)(1)i. has not elapsed; or 
(7)  The manager has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises; or 
(8)  The manager has knowingly allowed more than one sexually oriented business to be operated within the same building, structure, or portion thereof. 
(b)  When the licensing officer revokes a manager's license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee shall not be issued a manager's license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-226. - Suspension or revocation hearing. 
(a)  A manager shall be entitled to a hearing before the licensing officer if the city seeks to suspend or revoke the manager's license based on a violation of this article. The manager may continue to manage a sexually oriented business during the hearing process. 
(b)  When there is probable cause to believe that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, the city attorney may file a written complaint with the licensing officer setting forth the circumstances of the alleged violation. 
(c)  The licensing officer shall provide a copy of the complaint to the licensee, together with notice to appear before the licensing officer for the purpose of a hearing on a specified date to show cause why the licensee's license should not be suspended or revoked. 
(d)  At the hearing, the licensing officer shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the police department or other enforcement officers, the owner, employer, occupant, lessee, or other party in interest, or any other witness shall offer which is relevant to the violation alleged in the complaint. The licensing officer shall make findings of fact from the statements and evidence offered as to whether the violation occurred in or near the licensed establishment. If the licensing officer determines that a cause for suspension or revocation exists, he or she shall issue an order suspending or revoking the manager's license within thirty (30) days after the hearing is concluded based on the findings of fact. A copy of the order shall be mailed to or served on the licensee at the address on the license. 
(e)  The order of the licensing officer made pursuant to subsection (d) above, shall be a final decision and may be appealed to the municipal court in accordance with its judicial appeals procedure. Failure of a licensee to timely appeal said order constitutes a waiver by him or her of any right he or she may otherwise have to contest the suspension or revocation of the manager's license. 
(f)  The licensing officer shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, and when necessary grant continuances. Subpoenas may be issued to require the presence of persons and production of papers, books, and records necessary to the determination of any hearing which the licensing officer conducts. It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any subpoena issued by the licensing officer. A subpoena shall be served in the same manner as a subpoena issued by the district court of the State of Colorado. 
(g)  All hearings held before the licensing officer regarding suspension or revocation of a manager's license issued under this ordinance shall be recorded stenographically or by electronic recording device. Any person requesting a transcript of such record shall post a deposit in the amount required by the licensing officer, and shall pay all costs of preparing such record. 
(h)  In the event of suspension, revocation, or cessation of business, no portion of the manager's license fee shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 4, 11-16-04) 
Secs. 55-227-55-229. - Reserved. 
Sec. 55-230. - Notice. 
    Any notice required by this article shall be deemed sufficient if it is deposited in first class mail, postage pre-paid, to the address on the application and shall be effective upon mailing. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99) 
Sec. 55-231. - Judicial review. 
    After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of a license, such act shall be a final decision. Therefore, the applicant or licensee may seek judicial review of such administrative actions pursuant to the municipal court's rules of judicial appeal. The court shall promptly review such administrative action. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 5, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 55-232. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee or manager shall permit representatives of the licensing officer, building official, the planning director, the police department, the county health department and the fire department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, applicant, licensee, or manager who operates a sexually oriented business or his or her agent to refuse to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 1999-10, § 6, 4-20-99; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 14, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Chapter 56 - MARIJUANA 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 56-1-56-232. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 2014-05, adopted Mar. 4, 2014, repealed and reenacted art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II pertained to licensing regulations, consisted of §§ 56-233-56-246, and derived from Ord. No. 2011-10, adopted Apr. 5, 2011; and Ord. No. 2011-25, adopted June 20, 2011. 

Sec. 56-233. - Legislative intent and authority. 
(a)  Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution establishes an affirmative defense from criminal prosecution by the state for certain persons who use or provide medical marijuana to treat debilitating conditions and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, C.R.S. § 12-43.3-101, et seq., authorizes a system of state and local licensing for businesses engaged in the cultivation, testing, manufacturing, and retail sale of medical marijuana (collectively "medical marijuana establishments"), which allows localities to prohibit licensing of medical marijuana establishments and to impose distance and size restrictions upon such establishments along with other requirements to ensure control of the premises and ease of enforcement. 
(b)  The authority of the city to regulate medical marijuana establishments is further set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, Article 43.3, Title 12, C.R.S., Colorado Medical Marijuana Program (C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106), and Part 3, Article 23, Title 31, C.R.S., (municipal zoning powers), § 31-15-103, C.R.S., and § 31-15-401, C.R.S., (municipal police powers), § 31-15-501, C.R.S. (municipal authority regulate businesses), Article XX, Section 6 of the Colorado Constitution, and the powers contained in the city's home rule charter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14) 
Sec. 56-234. - Relationship to other laws. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this article incorporates the requirements and procedures set forth in the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and its rules. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and the provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, including its rules or any other applicable state or local law, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14) 
Sec. 56-235. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words and phrases shall mean as follows unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, ("Medical Marijuana Code") shall mean Section 1, Title 12, Article 43.3, Colorado Revised Statutes, and its rules (1 CCR 212-1) as both may be amended from time to time. 
    Commercial zoning districts shall mean the commercial and business zone districts as defined in section 26-10 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances (T1, B1 and C1), including amendments thereof, as well as property whose use is regulated by a planned unit development plan that includes any of those zone districts as the underlying zone district. 
    Industrial hygienist means an individual who has obtained a baccalaureate or graduate degree in industrial hygiene, biology, chemistry, engineering, physics or a closely-related physical or biological science from an accredited college or university and who meets the skills, ability, and competence to perform the tasks required by the state pursuant to 1 CCR 212-1, as same may be amended and supplemented from time to time. 
    Industrial zoning districts shall mean the "industrial (M1)" as defined in section 26-11 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances, including amendments thereof, as well as property whose use is regulated by a planned unit development plan that includes only "industrial (M1)"as the underlying zone district. A planned unit development plan that allows any commercial zoning district(s) in addition to industrial (M1) as an underlying zone district, shall not qualify as an industrial zoning district for the purposes of this article. 
    Medical marijuana means marijuana that is grown and sold pursuant to this article and the Medical Marijuana Code for a purpose authorized by Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution. 
    Medical marijuana establishment means a licensed medical marijuana center, medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer, optional premises cultivation operation, or medical marijuana testing facility. 
    Medical marijuana center means a person licensed by both the state and city to operate a business that sells medical marijuana to registered patients, primary caregivers, licensed medical marijuana centers, and medical marijuana-infused product manufacturers. 
    Medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer means a person licensed by both the state and city to operate a business that produces medical marijuana-infused products for sale to medical marijuana centers. 
    Medical marijuana testing facility means a public or private laboratory licensed and certified to conduct research and analyze medical marijuana, medical marijuana-infused products, and medical marijuana concentrate for contaminants and potency. 
    Optional premises cultivation operation means the premises specified by a medical marijuana center licensee to be used to cultivate medical marijuana for a purpose authorized by the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and Section 14 of Article XVIII of the State Constitution. 
    School means a public, kindergarten or school through twelfth grade (K-12), college, or university. 
(b)  In addition to the definitions set forth herein, the terms used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution and the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and its rules. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-16, § 1, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 2016-30, § 1, 9-20-16) 
Sec. 56-236. - License/bond requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a medical marijuana establishment without obtaining a license to operate such business in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The license requirement set forth in this article shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by any other federal, state, or local law, rule, or regulations, including, by way of example, the Medical Marijuana Code, its rules, and any applicable local zoning or building code. 
(c)  All medical marijuana establishments which sell at retail, in addition to being required to obtain a city sales tax license, must as a condition of licensing, procure, maintain, and file with the city's finance department evidence of a good and sufficient bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with a corporate surety duly licensed to do business in the State of Colorado, approved as to form by the city and conditioned upon the applicant's reporting and payment of all city sales and use taxes required by law. 
(d)  A separate license shall be required for each specific business or business entity and for each geographical location. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14) 
Sec. 56-237. - Application. 
(a)  Prior to submitting an application for a local license, an applicant must obtain an approved zoning verification form from the city's planning department which, based upon an applicant's submittal of an area map drawn to scale, demonstrates that the proposed medical marijuana establishment is in compliance with the location restrictions set forth in section 56-241. Applicants shall submit the approved zoning verification form to the city clerk along with the completed State Marijuana Enforcement Division forms, together with all supplemental information required by the city. 
(b)  The applicant shall also provide the following information to the city, which information shall be required for the applicant, and as applicable, the manager of the medical marijuana establishment, and all persons having any financial interest in the medical marijuana establishment that is the subject of the application; to the extent that any of the following information has been included with the applicant's state license application the local licensing authority may rely upon the information without requiring re-submittal of the same materials for the local license application. 
(1)  Proof of insurance of workers' compensation insurance and public liability insurance, which at a minimum meets the current maximum liability amounts for injury to any single person, or for any injury to two (2) or more persons in any such occurrence, as set forth in the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act (C.R.S. § 24-10-114), as same may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  An operating plan for the proposed medical marijuana establishment, including the following information: 
a.  A description of the products and services to be provided by the medical marijuana establishment. 
b.  A dimensional floor plan, drawn to scale, clearly labeled, and showing: 
1.  The layout of the structure and the floor plan in which the medical marijuana establishment is to be located; 
2.  The principal uses of the floor area depicted on the floor plan, including, but not limited to, the areas where the public will be permitted, and all private, cultivation, storage, retailing, testing, and restricted areas where medical marijuana will be located; 
3.  Areas where any services other than the distribution of medical marijuana are proposed to occur in the premises; and 
(3)  The city shall require each medical marijuana establishment applicant to obtain and submit a report from an industrial hygienist to verify that the establishment's facility and its processes and procedures, which include, but are not limited to, the sale, storage, testing, processing, extraction, washing, heating, cultivation, and packaging of marijuana, are in compliance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations and adequately designed and operated to protect the establishment, its employees, customers, the general public, and adjacent properties. 
(4)  A plan for disposal of any medical marijuana or medical marijuana-infused product that is not sold in a manner that protects any portion thereof from being possessed or ingested by any person or animal. 
(5)  A plan for ventilation of the medical marijuana establishment that fully describes the ventilation systems that will ensure the odor of marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the exterior of the medical marijuana establishment or at any adjoining property. For medical marijuana establishments that cultivate marijuana, such plan shall also include all ventilation systems used to control the environment for the marijuana plants and describe how such systems operate in conjunction with the systems preventing any odor leaving the premises. For medical marijuana establishments that produce marijuana-infused products, such plan shall also include all ventilation systems used to mitigate noxious gases or other fumes used or created as part of the production process. 
(6)  Fingerprints and personal background information for all owners, and financiers employed by or under contract to provide services to the medical marijuana establishment, directly or as a member, partner, or officer of a corporation, partnership, association, or company. 
(c)  All applications must include all documents and information required by the Medical Marijuana Code, including its rules and any information that the city deems reasonably necessary for the investigation and review of the application. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application, the city clerk shall notify all affected departments of the city to determine whether the application is in full compliance with all state and local laws, rules, and regulations. The city clerk, upon review of all applicable information, shall prepare a report including all applicable documents to be submitted to the local licensing authority. 
(e)  In the event the criminal history of an owner, member, manager, financier, or other person named on the application contains information regarding conviction of a crime or previous denial or revocation of any medical or retail marijuana or professional license, that person may include with the license application any information regarding such conviction, denial, or revocation. Such information may include, but is not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, character references, and educational achievements, especially documentation pertaining to the period of time between the applicant's last criminal conviction and the date of the application. 
(f)  Any application or renewal for a medical marijuana establishment license shall include, as applicable, payment of a nonrefundable application or renewal fee and payment of an annual operating fee. If a license is not granted, the operating fee is refundable in full. All such fees shall be established by resolution of city council. 
(g)  A license issued pursuant to this article does not eliminate the need for the licensee to obtain other required permits or licenses related to the operation of the medical marijuana establishment, including, without limitation, any State of Colorado license or any sales tax license, business registration, development approvals, or building permits required by the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-16, §§ 2-4, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 2016-30, § 2, 9-20-16; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 2-19-2019) 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 or Ord. No. 2015-16, adopted April 21, 2015, repealed § 56-237, which pertained to screening and response to state licensing application and derived from Ord. No. 2014-05, adopted March 4, 2014. Said Ord. No. 2015-16 also directed the renumbering of the remaining sections of this article. 
Sec. 56-238. - Local licensing authority. 
(a)  The city administrator shall serve as the local licensing authority and have and exercise all powers expressly granted and necessarily implied by the Medical Marijuana Code, its rules, and as set forth in this article to regulate medical marijuana establishments within the city. The local licensing authority shall be responsible for all local duties and responsibilities regarding the issuance, renewal, suspension, revocation, transfer of ownership, and change of location of a medical marijuana establishment. 
(b)  The local licensing authority shall have the power to promulgate rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to implement and administer the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complete application from the city clerk, the local licensing authority shall review all applicable documentation, as well as any other facts pertinent to the license or qualifications of the licensee and issue a decision as to whether to grant, deny upon a finding of "good cause," or conditionally approve such application within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of same from the city clerk. The decision shall be in writing and state the reasons for the decision with a copy to be sent to the applicant at the establishment's address provided on the application. 
(1)  The local licensing authority shall have the authority to deny any application that does not meet the requirements of the Medical Marijuana Code, its rules, this article, and any other applicable state or local law, rule, or regulation. The local licensing authority shall also have the authority to deny any application that contains any false, misleading, or incomplete information. Denial of an application for a license shall not be subject to administrative review but only to review by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  A local license, which shall only be applicable to a specifically identified business at a fixed location within an enclosed and secure premises, and shall not be issued until the building in which the establishment's business is to be conducted has passed all applicable inspections and is ready for occupancy with such furniture, fixtures, and equipment in place as are necessary to comply with any applicable provisions of this Code or any state law, rule, or regulation. 
(d)  The local licensing authority may, after notice and hearing, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a license for "good cause." The local licensing authority is authorized to adopt rules and procedures governing the conduct of such hearings. No portion of any application or operating fees previously paid shall be refunded in the event of any suspension or revocation of a license. 
(e)  Good cause, for the purpose of denying, refusing to renew, suspending, or revoking a license or exercising other discretionary authority granted the local licensing authority shall mean: 
(1)  The applicant or licensee has violated, does not meet, or has failed to comply with any of the terms, requirements, conditions, or provisions of this article, the Medical Marijuana Code, its rules, or any applicable state or local law, rule, or regulation; 
(2)  The local licensing authority has determined that the applicant or licensee's character, record, or reputation is not satisfactory after consideration of factors which include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  The applicant or licensee has knowingly submitted a false application(s), made willful misrepresentations, or knowingly committed fraudulent acts; 
b.  The applicant or licensee has a criminal history of crimes of moral turpitude, which may include, for example, but not be limited to, murder, burglary, robbery, arson, kidnapping, sexual assault, and illegal drugs or narcotics convictions; 
c.  The applicant or licensee has had any previous retail or medical marijuana license denied or revoked as a result of violations of law, rule, or regulation or a finding of bad moral character by any licensing authority; 
d.  The applicant or licensee has been found to be currently delinquent in the payment of any state or local taxes; 
e.  The applicant or licensee has an established pattern of multiple statutory violations which resulted in the revocation or denial of any other professional license, leading to the finding of bad moral character by any licensing authority; 
f.  The licensed premises have been operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, safety, or welfare. Evidence to support such a finding, may include, but not be limited to, a continuing pattern of disorderly conduct or drug related criminal conduct upon or in the immediate vicinity of the premises, continuing pattern of criminal conduct directly related to or arising from the operation of the medical marijuana establishment, or an ongoing nuisance condition emanating from or caused by the medical marijuana establishment. 
g.  When making a determination as to character, record, and reputation, the licensing authority shall also consider evidence of rehabilitation. Such evidence may include, but not be limited to, evidence of no criminal record information, educational achievements, financial solvency, community standing, lack of additional arrests or convictions, or the lack of parole or probation violations since the date of last conviction. 
(3)  The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with any special terms or conditions of a license, including those terms and conditions that were established at the time of issuance of the license and those imposed as a result of any renewal or suspension proceedings held subsequent to the date of issuance of the license; or 
(4)  The licensed premises has been operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, welfare, or safety of the immediate neighborhood in which the licensed establishment is located. Evidence to support such a finding can include, without limitation, a continuing pattern of disorderly conduct, or a continuing pattern of drug-related criminal conduct within the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-16, § 2, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 2016-30, § 3, 9-20-16) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following section § 56-237. 
Sec. 56-239. - Issuance of license; duration, renewal. 
(a)  Each license shall show the name of the licensee, the physical address for which the license is issued, and the type of medical marijuana establishment for which it is issued. The license, along with the city sales tax license and the current contact information for the owner(s), shall be displayed continuously in a conspicuous location at the physical address indicated on the license. 
(b)  Each license issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only as provided in this article. All renewals of a license shall be for no more than one (1) year. The local licensing authority shall act on renewal applications in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code and its rules. The timely filing of a renewal application shall extend the current license until a decision is made on the renewal. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (b), a licensee whose license has been expired for not more than ninety (90) days may file a late renewal application upon the payment of a non-refundable late application fee to the local licensing authority in the amount established by resolution of city council. A licensee who files a late renewal application and pays the requisite fee may be subject to compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules and regulations continue to operate until a decision is made on the renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-16, §§ 2, 5, 4-21-15) 
Sec. 56-240. - Annual operating and administrative fees. 
    In addition to the application, renewal, late renewal and annual operating fee, the city shall impose administrative fees for services, which include the transfer of ownership, background investigations, change of business manager, employee application, modification of premises, change of location, application modification, license modification, change of corporate structure, change of financier, zoning verification, duplicate license, temporary permit, change of trade name, change of class of license and lottery application, with all such fees to be established by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-16, §§ 2, 5, 4-21-15) 
Sec. 56-241. - Location, co-location, operational restrictions and requirements, medical marijuana establishments. 
(a)  Commercial zoning districts restrictions. Medical marijuana centers are allowed only in commercial zoning districts and only upon obtaining the land use approvals as are otherwise necessary for such use; and further provided that no medical marijuana center may be located within: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) feet of the right-of-way of Public Road north of South Boulder Road; or 
(2)  Five hundred (500) feet of the right-of-way of East Simpson Street, east of Public Road to 500-501 East Simpson Street; or 
(3)  Five hundred (500) feet of the right-of-way of 120th Street and 119th Street, north of Emma Street to Highway 7; or 
(4)  Eight hundred (800) feet of the right-of-way of Highway 287 and Highway 7; or 
(5)  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of any city residential subdivision, residentially zoned property, or property with residential as a principal use; or 
(6)  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of any licensed commercial day care; or 
(7)  Five hundred (500) feet of the nearest portion of the footprint of any medical marijuana center or any retail marijuana store, except that any applicant seeking to co-locate a center and a store, shall be exempt from this requirement as to the center and store set forth in the application; or 
(8)  One thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any school or hospital. 
(9)  The maximum aggregate number of retail marijuana stores and medical marijuana centers within the city shall not exceed three (3). For the purposes of this section a retail marijuana store and a retail marijuana center co-located in accordance with subsection 56-241(g) shall be counted as one (1) store/center. 
(b)  Industrial zoning district restrictions. Medical marijuana-infused product manufacturers and optional premises cultivation facilities are allowed only in the industrial zoning district, and only upon obtaining the land use approvals as are otherwise necessary for such use; and further provided that no such uses may be located within: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of a licensed commercial day care; or 
(2)  Eight hundred (800) feet of the right-of-way of Highway 287; or 
(3)  One thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any school or hospital; or 
(4)  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of any city residential subdivision, residentially zoned property, or property with residential as a principal use; and 
(5)  There may be no more than twelve (12) total physical (independent) locations containing any mix of licensed retail marijuana product manufacturers, licensed medical marijuana-infused product manufacturers, licensed retail marijuana cultivation facilities, or licensed medical marijuana optional premises cultivation operations within the industrial zoning district category. The term "total physical (independent) locations" as used in this subsection includes not only separate buildings, but also separate individual tenant spaces located within the same building and under the same roof, except that medical and retail cultivation and product manufacturers under common ownership, which share the same tenant space ("premises"), shall be deemed one (1) physical (independent) location. 
(6)  The licensed premises of a medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer, including any such establishment, which is co-located with a retail marijuana product manufacturer and the licensed premises of a medical marijuana optional premises cultivation facility, including any such establishment which is co-located with a retail marijuana cultivation facility shall not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(7)  Medical marijuana testing facilities are permitted only in the industrial zoning district; however, no such use may be located within: 
a.  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of a licensed commercial day care; or 
b.  Eight hundred (800) feet of the right-of-way of Highway 287; or 
c.  One thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any school or hospital; or 
d.  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of any city residential subdivision, residentially zoned property or property with residential as a principal use. 
(c)  Computing of distances. The distances set forth in this section are to be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property line, right-of-way boundary, or portion of the footprint of the land uses as described herein to the nearest portion of the footprint of the medical marijuana establishment. 
(d)  Grandfathering provisions pertaining to location. The distance restrictions set forth in this section shall not affect the renewal of a license once granted or apply to a license in effect and actively doing business before the construction of, or the opening of, a residential subdivision, residentially zoned property, property with residential as a principal use, licensed commercial day care, school, or hospital. 
(e)  Size limitations. The licensed premises of a medical marijuana center including any center co-located with a retail marijuana store shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(f)  Residential location prohibited. No medical marijuana establishment shall be located within any building which contains a residence or within any dwelling or residential zoning district. 
(g)  Co-location restrictions. Retail marijuana stores and medical marijuana centers may be under common ownership in the same location and share the same licensed premises subject to the following: 
(1)  A licensed medical marijuana center that permits admittance of patients under twenty-one (21) years of age may also hold a retail marijuana store license and operate a dual marijuana business operation on the same licensed premises. In such case, the retail marijuana store licensee must post signage that clearly conveys that persons under twenty-one (21) years of age may not enter the area which contains the retail marijuana store. Under these circumstances, and upon approval of the local and state licensing authorities, the medical marijuana center and the retail marijuana store may share a common foyer but must have separate entrances and exits, and medical marijuana and retail marijuana goods and products must be separately displayed and sold. Record keeping for the business operations of both must enable the local and state licensing authorities to clearly distinguish the inventories and business transactions of medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products from retail marijuana and retail marijuana products. 
(2)  A licensed medical marijuana center that prohibits admission of patients under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age may also hold a retail marijuana store license and operate a dual marijuana business operation on the licensed premises. In such cases, the medical marijuana center must post signage that clearly conveys that persons under twenty-one (21) years of age may not enter the establishment. Under these circumstances and upon approval of the local and state licensing authorities the medical marijuana center and retail marijuana store may share the same entrances and exits. Medical marijuana and retail marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products and retail marijuana products must be displayed separately on the same sale floor. Record keeping for the business operations of both must enable the state and local licensing authority to clearly distinguish the inventories and business transactions of medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products from retail marijuana and retail marijuana product. 
(3)  Co-located licensed operations must be operated in accordance with both the Medical and Retail Marijuana Code and their rules. 
(h)  Business conducted within building. Any and all cultivation, production, distribution, possession, storage, testing, display, sales, or other distribution of medical marijuana shall occur only within the restricted area of a medical marijuana establishment and shall not be visible from the exterior of the establishment. 
(i)  Manager registration requirements. Each medical marijuana establishment licensee shall manage or have a manager and shall register the manager with the state and the local licensing authority. Whenever a person ceases to be a registered manager of a medical marijuana establishment, the medical marijuana establishment licensee shall notify the licensing authorities within five (5) days and shall designate a new registered manager within thirty (30) days. Either the state or the local licensing authority may refuse to accept any person as a registered manager unless the person is satisfactory to the respective licensing authorities as to character, record, and reputation. In determining a registered manager's character, record, and reputation, the state or local licensing authority may have access to criminal history record information furnished by a criminal justice agency subject to any restrictions imposed by such agency. 
(j)  Hours of operation. A medical marijuana center shall be closed to the public, and no sale, or other distribution of marijuana shall occur upon the premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m., thru and including 8:00 a.m. 
(k)  Use of pesticides. No pesticides or insecticides that are prohibited by applicable law for fertilization or production of edible produce shall be used on any marijuana cultivated, produced, or distributed by a medical marijuana establishment. A medical marijuana establishment shall comply with all applicable laws regarding use of pesticides. 
(l)  Ventilation required. A medical marijuana establishment shall be ventilated to ensure the odor of marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the exterior of the medical marijuana establishment or at any adjoining property. 
(m)  Wastewater requirements. All medical marijuana establishments shall be operated in such a manner as to not permit, allow, or cause to be discharged any substance or material prohibited by the city into or upon any watercourse or city reclamation conduit, facility, or plant. 
(n)  Off-premises storage of medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products prohibited. No medical marijuana establishment may store medical marijuana or medical marijuana-infused products in any off-premises storage facility located within the city. 
(o)  Reporting requirements. A medical marijuana establishment shall report to the local licensing authority each of the following events within the time specified. If no time is specified, the report shall be provided within seventy-two (72) hours of the event. 
(1)  Transfer or change of financial interest, business manager, or financier in the license to the city at least thirty (30) days before the transfer or change. 
(2)  Taxable transactions and sales and use tax reports to the city monthly. 
(3)  A violation of any law by any licensee or applicant of a medical marijuana business. 
(4)  Each licensee shall post and keep at all times visible to the public, in a conspicuous place on the premises, a sign to be furnished by the city clerk's office, which sign shall be in the following form: "WARNING: THE LAFAYETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT MUST BE NOTIFIED IMMEDIATELY OF ALL UNLAWFUL ACTS AND DISTURBANCES IN THIS ESTABLISHMENT." Licensees shall immediately report to the police department any unlawful act, conduct, or disturbance committed upon the premises. 
(p)  Respond to inquiry. The owner or manager of a medical marijuana establishment is required to respond by phone or email within twenty-four (24) hours of contact by a city official concerning its medical marijuana establishment at the phone number or email address provided to the city as the contact for the business. Each twenty-four-hour period during which an owner or manager does not respond to the city official shall be considered a separate violation. 
(q)  Signs and advertising. 
(1)  Medical marijuana centers are prohibited from using the terms "pharmacy," "pharmacist," "pharmaceutical," "RX," or any other similar variation of such terms as their corporate, business, or "doing business as" name, so as to prevent a reasonable person from concluding such business is involved in the practice of pharmacy, as regulated by Pharmaceuticals and Pharmacists, C.R.S. Article 22 of Chapter 12. Additionally no medical marijuana center may use any of the above terms or any similar variation thereof in any of its signs, placards, promotional or advertising materials. 
(2)  Any person or premises licensed as a medical marijuana establishment shall comply with all city ordinances regulating signs and advertising. In addition, no licensed medical marijuana establishment shall use any advertising material that is misleading, deceptive, false, or that, as evidenced either by the content of the advertising material or the medium or the manner in which the advertising is disseminated, is designed to appeal to persons under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (3), it shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this article or any other person to advertise any medical marijuana or medical marijuana-infused product anywhere in the city where the advertisement is visible to members of the public from any street, sidewalk, park, or other public place, including advertising utilizing any of the following media: any billboard or other outdoor general advertising device as defined by the zoning code; any sign mounted on a vehicle, any hand-held or other portable sign; or any handbill, leaflet, or flier directly handed to any person in a public place, left upon a motor vehicle, or posted upon any public or private property without the consent of the property owner. The prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply to: 
a.  Any sign located on the same zone lot as a medical marijuana center which exists solely for the purpose of identifying the location of the medical marijuana center and which otherwise complies with the city's zoning requirements and any other applicable city laws and regulations; or 
b.  Any advertisement contained within a newspaper, magazine, or other periodical of general circulation within the city; or 
c.  Advertising which is purely incidental to sponsorship of a charitable event by a medical marijuana establishment. 
(4)  For purposes of this subsection (q), the terms "advertise," "advertising," or "advertisement," mean the act of drawing the public's attention to a medical marijuana establishment in order to promote the sale of medical marijuana goods or infused products by the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-16, §§ 2, 7, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 2016-11, § 1, 4-5-16; Ord. No. 2016-30, § 4, 9-20-16; Ord. No. 2017-27, § 1, 7-18-17; Ord. No. 2018-10, § 1, 3-20-18) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-237. 
Sec. 56-242. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 5 of Ord. No. 2016-30, adopted Sept. 20, 2016, repealed § 56-242 which pertained to limitations on medical marijuana-infused products manufacturer and medical marijuana optional premises cultivation facility, and derived from Ord. No. 2014-05, adopted Mar. 4, 2014; and Ord. No. 2015-16, adopted Apr. 21, 2015. 
Sec. 56-243. - Inspection of books, records, and licensed premises. 
(a)  Each licensee shall keep a complete set of all records necessary to show fully the business transactions of the licensee, all of which shall be open at all times during business hours for the inspection and examination by the local licensing authority, its duly authorized representatives, and the city police department for the purposes of investigating and determining compliance with the provisions of this article and any other applicable state and local laws or regulations. The local licensing authority may require any licensee to furnish such information as it considers necessary for the proper administration of this article. It may also require an audit to be made of the books of accounts and records on such occasions as it may consider necessary by an auditor to be selected by the local licensing authority, who shall likewise have access to all books and records of the licensee. 
(b)  The licensed premises, including any places of storage where medical marijuana or medical marijuana-infused products are stored, manufactured, packaged, cultivated, processed, displayed, sold, or dispensed, shall be subject to inspection by the local licensing authority, its duly authorized representatives, and the city police department during all business hours and other times of apparent activity, for the purpose of inspection or investigation. For examination of any inventory or books and records required to be kept by the licensees, access shall be required during business hours. Where any part of the licensed premises consists of a locked area, upon demand to the licensee, by the local licensing authority or any other authorized city personnel, such area shall be made available for inspection without delay. 
(c)  Each licensee shall retain all books and records necessary to show fully the business transactions of the licensee for a period of the current tax year and the three (3) immediately prior tax years. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-16, § 2, 4-21-15) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-237. 
Sec. 56-244. - Unlawful acts of licensees and persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to: 
(1)  Violate or fail to comply with any provision, term, condition, or requirement of the Medical Marijuana Code, including its rules. 
(2)  Allow marijuana or marijuana-infused products to be consumed upon its licensed premises. 
(3)  Use advertising material that is misleading, deceptive, false, or that is designed to appeal to persons under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(4)  Sell medical marijuana or marijuana-infused products to a person under eighteen (18) years of age or to any person who does not present a valid state medical marijuana registry card at the time of purchase. 
(5)  Refuse to allow inspection of a medical marijuana establishment upon request of an authorized city employee. Any licensee, owner, business manager, operator of a medical marijuana establishment, or owner of the property where a medical marijuana establishment is located may be charged with this violation. 
(6)  Advertise or publish materials or display signs that are in violation of this article. 
(7)  Violate any provision of this article or any condition of an approval granted pursuant to this article, or any law, rule, or regulation applicable to the use of medical marijuana or the operation of a medical marijuana establishment. 
(8)  Distribute medical marijuana or any medical marijuana-infused product within a medical marijuana center to any person who shows visible signs of intoxication from alcohol, marijuana, or other drugs. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any form of business or commerce involving the cultivation, processing, manufacturing, storage, sale, distribution, or consumption of marijuana other than those forms of business and commerce that are expressly permitted by Section 14 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, the Medical Marijuana Code, Retail Marijuana Code, Medical Marijuana Program (C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106), this article, and residential cultivation, section 76-31 of the Code, which permit only medical marijuana optional premises cultivation facilities, medical marijuana-infused products manufacturers, medical marijuana centers, co-located marijuana establishments, and primary care-giver home occupations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-16, § 2, 4-21-15) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-237. 
Sec. 56-245. - No city liability; indemnification. 
(a)  By accepting a license issued pursuant to this article, the licensee waives and releases the city, its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees, attorneys, agents, and authorized volunteers from any liability for injuries, damages, or liabilities of any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of the owners, operators, employees, clients, or customers of the medical marijuana establishment for a violation of state or federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(b)  By accepting a license issued pursuant to this article, all licensees, jointly and severally, if more than one (1), agree to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees, attorneys, agents, authorized volunteers, insurers, and self-insurance pool against all liability, claims, and demands on account of any injury, loss, or damage, including, without limitation, claims arising from bodily injury, personal injury, sickness, disease, death, property loss or damage, or any other loss of any kind whatsoever arising out of or are in any manner connected with the operation of the medical marijuana establishment that is the subject of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-16, § 2, 4-21-15) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-237. 
Sec. 56-246. - Other laws remain applicable. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided herein, to the extent the state adopts any additional or stricter law, rule, or regulation, governing the sale, transportation, manufacture, cultivation, processing, packaging, displaying, or distribution of medical marijuana or medical marijuana-infused products, the additional or stricter regulation shall control the operation of any medical marijuana establishment in the city. Compliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be deemed an additional requirement for issuance or denial of any license or operation of any establishment under this article, and noncompliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be grounds for non-renewal, revocation, or suspension of any license issued hereunder. 
(b)  Any licensee may be required to demonstrate, upon demand by the local licensing authority, its authorized representative, or law enforcement officers, that the source and quantity of any marijuana grown upon the licensed premises are in full compliance with any applicable state law or regulation. 
(c)  If the state or federal government prohibits the sale, transportation, manufacture, cultivation, processing, packaging, testing, or distribution of marijuana through medical marijuana establishments, any license issued hereunder shall be deemed immediately revoked by operation of law, with no ground for appeal or other redress available, on behalf of the licensee. 
(d)  The issuance of any license pursuant to this article shall not be deemed to create an exception, defense, or immunity to any person in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have for the transportation, packaging, manufacturing, cultivation, possession, sale, distribution, testing, or use of marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-16, § 2, 4-21-15) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-237. 
Secs. 56-247-56-259. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RETAIL MARIJUANA 

Sec. 56-260. - Legislative intent and authority. 
(a)  Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution ("Amendment 64") authorizes a system of state licensing for businesses engaged in the cultivation, testing, manufacturing, and retail sale of marijuana (collectively "retail marijuana establishments"). Subsection 16(5)(f) of Article XVIII allows localities to prohibit state licensing of marijuana establishments and to regulate the time, place, and manner in which such establishments may operate and to limit the total number of such establishments. 
(b)  The authority of the city to regulate retail marijuana establishments is further set forth in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, Article 43.4, Title 12, C.R.S., and Part 3, Article 23, Title 31, C.R.S., (municipal zoning powers), § 31-15-103, C.R.S., and § 31-15-401, C.R.S., (municipal police powers), § 31-15-501, C.R.S. (municipal authority regulate businesses), Article XX of the Colorado Constitution, and the powers contained in the city's home rule charter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14) 
Sec. 56-261. - Relationship to other laws. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this article incorporates the requirements and procedures set forth in the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code and its rules and regulations. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and the provisions of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code, including its rules, or any other applicable state or local law, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14) 
Sec. 56-262. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words and phrases shall mean as follows unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Colorado Retail Marijuana Code ("Retail Marijuana Code") shall mean Title 12, Article 43.4, Colorado Revised Statutes ("C.R.S."), as the same may be amended from time to time. 
    Commercial zoning districts shall mean the commercial and business zone districts as defined in section 26-10 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances (T1, B1 and C1), including amendments thereof, as well as property whose use is regulated by a planned unit development plan that includes any of those zone districts as the underlying zone district. 
    Industrial hygienist means an individual who has obtained a baccalaureate or graduate degree in industrial hygiene, biology, chemistry, engineering, physics or a closely-related physical or biological science from an accredited college or university and who meets the skills, ability, and competence to perform the tasks required by the state pursuant to 1 CCR 212-1, as same may be amended and supplemented from time to time. 
    Industrial zoning districts shall mean the "industrial (M1)" as defined in section 26-11 of the Lafayette Code of Ordinances, including amendments thereof, as well as property whose use is regulated by a planned unit development plan that includes only "industrial (M1)" as the underlying zone district. A planned unit development plan that allows any commercial zoning district(s) in addition to industrial (M1) as an underlying zone district, shall not qualify as an industrial zoning district for the purposes of this article. 
    Retail marijuana means marijuana that is cultivated, manufactured, distributed, or sold by a licensed retail marijuana establishment. 
    Retail marijuana code rules ("rules") shall mean the permanent rules pertaining to the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code adopted by the Colorado Department of Revenue, Marijuana Enforcement Division, 1 C.C.R. 212-2, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
    Retail marijuana cultivation facility means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare, and package marijuana and sell marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to retail marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other retail marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
    Retail marijuana establishment means a retail marijuana store, a retail marijuana cultivation facility, a retail marijuana products manufacturer or a retail marijuana testing facility. 
    Retail marijuana products means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and tinctures, that are produced at a retail marijuana products manufacturing facility. 
    Retail marijuana products manufacturing facility means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana, manufacture, prepare, and package retail marijuana products, and sell marijuana and retail marijuana products to other marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
    Retail marijuana store means an entity licensed to purchase marijuana from marijuana cultivation facilities and marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana product manufacturing facilities and sell marijuana and marijuana products to consumers. 
    Marijuana testing facility means an entity licensed to analyze and certify the safety and potency of marijuana. 
    School means a public kindergarten or school through twelfth grade (K-12), college, or university. 
(b)  In addition to the definitions set forth herein, the terms used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Article XVIII, Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution, the Retail Marijuana Code, including its rules. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-17, § 1, 4-21-15) 
Sec. 56-263. - License/bond requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a retail marijuana establishment without obtaining a license to operate such business in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The license requirement set forth in this article shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting requirements imposed by any other federal, state, or local law, rules, or regulations, including, by way of example, the Retail Marijuana Code, its rules, and any applicable local zoning or building code. 
(c)  All retail marijuana establishments which sell at retail, in addition to being required to obtain a city sales tax license, must as a condition of licensing, procure, maintain, and file with the city's finance department evidence of a good and sufficient bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with a corporate surety duly licensed to do business in the State of Colorado, approved as to form by the city and conditioned upon the applicant's reporting and payment of all city sales and use taxes required by law. 
(d)  A separate license shall be required for each specific business or business entity and for each geographical location. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 4-21-15) 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 2015-17, adopted April 21, 2015, repealed § 56-263, Transition, which derived from Ord. No. 2014-04, adopted March 4, 2014. Said ordinance also directed §§ 56-264-56-295 to be renumbered as §§ 56-263-56-294. 
Sec. 56-264. - Screening and response to state licensing applications. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application from the state licensing authority for a retail marijuana license, the city clerk shall: 
(1)  Initially determine, in consultation with the planning department, whether or not the proposed location complies with all zoning and land use laws of the city and all restrictions on locations and types of retail marijuana establishments permitted within the city as set forth in this article. If the city clerk makes an initial determination that the proposed license would be in violation of any zoning or land use laws or other restriction set forth in the Code, the city clerk shall notify the state licensing authority in writing, that the application is disapproved by the city. The failure of the city clerk to make such a determination upon the initial review of a state license application shall not preclude the local licensing authority from later determining that the proposed license is in violation of any zoning or land use law or other restriction set forth in the code, and disapprove the issuance of a local license on this basis. 
(2)  For any application that is not disapproved, as provided in subsection (1) above, the city clerk shall notify the state licensing authority in writing that the city's further consideration of the application is subject to completion of the local licensing process described in this article, after which the city clerk will notify the state licensing authority in writing of whether or not the retail marijuana license proposed in the application has or has not been approved by the local licensing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-263. 
Sec. 56-265. - Application. 
(a)  Prior to submitting an application for a local license, an applicant must obtain an approved zoning verification form from the city's planning department which, based upon an applicant's submittal of an area map drawn to scale, demonstrates that the proposed retail marijuana establishment is in compliance with the location restrictions set forth in section 56-269. Applicants shall submit the approved zoning verification form to the city clerk along with completed State Marijuana Enforcement Division forms, together with all supplemental information required by the city. 
(b)  The applicant shall also provide the following information to the city, which information shall be required for the applicant and as applicable, the proposed manager of the retail marijuana establishment, and all persons having any financial interest in the retail marijuana establishment. To the extent that any of the following information has been included with the applicant's state license application, the local licensing authority may rely upon the information without requiring re-submittal of the same materials for the local license application. 
(1)  Proof of insurance of workers' compensation insurance and public liability insurance, which at a minimum meets the current maximum liability amounts for injury to any single person, or for any injury to two (2) or more persons in any such occurrence, as set forth in the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act (C.R.S. § 24-10-114), as same may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  An operating plan for the proposed retail marijuana establishment, including the following information: 
a.  A description of the products and services to be provided by the retail marijuana establishment. 
b.  A dimensional floor plan, drawn to scale, clearly labeled, and showing: 
1.  The layout of the structure and the floor plan in which the retail marijuana establishment is to be located; 
2.  The principal uses of the floor area depicted on the floor plan, including, but not limited to, the areas where the public will be permitted and all private, cultivation, storage, retail, testing, and restricted areas where retail marijuana will be located; 
3.  Areas where any services other than the distribution of retail marijuana are proposed to occur in the premises; and 
4.  If applicable, the separation of areas open to persons who are underage from those areas open to persons eligible to purchase retail marijuana. 
(3)  The city shall require each retail marijuana establishment applicant to obtain and submit a report from an industrial hygienist to verify that the establishment's facility and its processes and procedures, which include but are not limited to, the sale, storage, processing, extraction, washing, heating, cultivation, packaging, and testing of marijuana, are in compliance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations and adequately designed and operated in a manner which protects the establishment, its employees, customers, the general public, and adjacent properties. 
(4)  A plan for disposal of any retail marijuana or retail marijuana product that is not sold in a manner that protects any portion thereof from being possessed or ingested by any person or animal. 
(5)  A plan for ventilation of the retail marijuana establishment that fully describes the ventilation systems that will ensure the odor of marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the exterior of the retail marijuana establishment or at any adjoining property. For retail marijuana establishments that cultivate marijuana, such plan shall also include all ventilation systems used to control the environment for the marijuana plants and describe how such systems operate in conjunction with the systems preventing any odor leaving the premises. For retail marijuana establishments that produce marijuana products, such plan shall also include all ventilation systems used to mitigate noxious gases or other fumes used or created as part of the production process. 
(6)  Fingerprints and personal background information for all owners, managers, and financiers employed by or under contract to provide services to the retail marijuana establishment, directly or as a member, partner, or officer of a corporation, partnership, association, or company. 
(7)  All applications must include all documents and information required by the Retail Marijuana Code, including its rules and any information that the city deems reasonably necessary for the investigation and review of the application. 
(8)  Upon receipt of an application, the city clerk shall notify all affected departments of the city to determine whether the application is in full compliance with all state and local laws, rules, and regulations. The city clerk, upon review of all applicable information, shall prepare a report including all applicable documents to be submitted to the local licensing authority. 
(9)  In the event the criminal history of an owner, member, manager, financier, or other person named on the application contains information regarding conviction of a crime or previous denial or revocation of any medical or retail marijuana or professional license, that person may include with the license application any information regarding such conviction, denial, or revocation. Such information may include, but is not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, character references, and educational achievements, especially documentation pertaining to the period of time between the applicant's last criminal conviction and the date of the application. 
(10)  Any application or renewal for a retail marijuana establishment license shall include, as applicable, payment of a nonrefundable application or renewal fee and payment of an annual operating fee. If a license is not granted, the operating fee is refundable in full. All such fees shall be established by resolution of city council. 
(11)  A license issued pursuant to this article does not eliminate the need for the licensee to obtain other required permits or licenses related to the operation of the retail marijuana establishment, including, without limitation, any State of Colorado license or any sales tax license, business registration, development approvals, or building permits required by the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 2, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-17, §§ 2, 3, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 2-19-2019) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-263. 
Sec. 56-266. - Local licensing authority. 
(a)  The city administrator shall serve as the local licensing authority and have and exercise all powers expressly granted and necessarily implied by the Retail Marijuana Code, its rules, and as set forth in this article to regulate retail marijuana establishments within the city. The local licensing authority shall be responsible for all local duties and responsibilities regarding the issuance, renewal, suspension, revocation, transfer of ownership, and change of location of a retail marijuana establishment. 
(b)  The local licensing authority shall have the power to promulgate rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to implement and administer the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complete application from the city clerk, the local licensing authority shall review all applicable documentation, as well as any other facts pertinent to the license or qualifications of the licensee, and issue a decision as to whether to grant, deny upon a finding of "good cause," or conditionally approve such application within fifteen (15) business days of receipt of same from the city clerk. The decision shall be in writing and state the reasons for the decision with a copy to be sent to the applicant at the establishment's address provided in the application. 
(1)  The local licensing authority shall have the authority to deny any application that does not meet the requirements of the Retail Marijuana Code, its rules, this article, and any other applicable state or local law, rule, or regulation. The local licensing authority shall also have the authority to deny any application that contains any false, misleading, or incomplete information. Denial of an application for a license shall not be subject to administrative review but only to review by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  A local license, which shall only be applicable to a specifically identified business at a fixed location within an enclosed and secure premises, shall not be issued until a state license has been granted and the building in which the establishment's business is to be conducted has passed all applicable inspections and is ready for occupancy with such furniture, fixtures, and equipment in place as are necessary to comply with any applicable provisions of the code or any state law, rule, or regulation. 
(d)  The local licensing authority may, after notice and hearing, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a license for "good cause." The local licensing authority is authorized to adopt rules and procedures governing the conduct of such hearings. No portion of any application or operating fees previously paid shall be refunded in the event of any suspension or revocation of a license. 
(e)  Good cause, for the purpose of denying, refusing to renew, suspending or revoking a license, or exercising other discretionary authority granted the local licensing authority, shall mean: 
(1)  The applicant or licensee has violated, does not meet, or has failed to comply with any of the terms, requirements, conditions, or provisions of this article, the Retail Marijuana Code, its rules, or any applicable state or local law, rule, or regulation; 
(2)  The local licensing authority has determined that the applicant or licensee's character, record, or reputation is not satisfactory after consideration of factors, which include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  The applicant or licensee has knowingly submitted false application(s), made willful misrepresentations, or knowingly committed fraudulent acts; 
b.  The applicant or licensee has a criminal history of crimes of moral turpitude, which may include, for example, but not be limited to, murder, burglary, robbery, arson, kidnapping, sexual assault, and illegal drugs or narcotics convictions; 
c.  The applicant or licensee has had any previous retail or medical marijuana license denied or revoked as a result of violations of law, rule, or regulation, or a finding of bad moral character by any licensing authority; 
d.  The applicant or licensee has been found to be currently delinquent in the payment of any state or local taxes; 
e.  The applicant or licensee has an established pattern of multiple statutory violations which resulted in the revocation or denial of any other professional license, leading to the finding of bad moral character by any licensing authority; 
f.  The licensed premises has been operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, safety, or welfare. Evidence to support such a finding, may include, but not be limited to, a continuing pattern of disorderly conduct or drug related criminal conduct upon or in the immediate vicinity of the premises, continuing pattern of criminal conduct directly related to or arising from the operation of the retail marijuana establishment, or an ongoing nuisance condition emanating from or caused by the retail marijuana establishment. 
g.  When making a determination as to character, record, and reputation, the licensing authority shall also consider evidence of rehabilitation. Such evidence may include, but not be limited to, evidence of no criminal record information, educational achievements, financial solvency, community standing, lack of additional arrests or convictions, or the lack of parole or probation violations since the date of last conviction. 
(3)  The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with any special terms or conditions of a license, including those terms and conditions that were established at the time of issuance of the license and those imposed as a result of any renewal or suspension proceedings held subsequent to the date of issuance of the license; or 
(4)  The licensed premises has been operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, welfare, or safety of the immediate neighborhood in which the licensed establishment is located. Evidence to support such a finding can include, without limitation, a continuing pattern of disorderly conduct or continuing pattern of drug-related criminal conduct within the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 4-21-15) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-263. 
Sec. 56-267. - Issuance of license; duration, renewal. 
(a)  Each license shall show the name of the licensee, the physical address for which the license is issued, and the type of retail marijuana establishment for which it is issued. The license, along with the city sales tax license and the current contact information for the owner(s), shall be displayed continuously in a conspicuous location at the physical address indicated on the license. 
(b)  Each license issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only as provided in this article. All renewals of a license shall be for no more than one (1) year. The local licensing authority shall act on renewal applications in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code and its rules. The timely filing of a renewal application shall extend the current license until a decision is made on the renewal. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (b), a licensee whose license has been expired for not more than ninety (90) days may file a late renewal application upon the payment of a nonrefundable late application fee to the local licensing authority in the amount established by resolution of city council. A licensee who files a late renewal application and pays the requisite fee may, subject to compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and regulations continue to operate until a decision is made on the renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-17, §§ 2, 5, 4-21-15) 
Sec. 56-268. - Annual operating and administrative fees. 
    In addition to application, renewal, late renewal, and an annual operating fee, the city shall impose administrative fees for services, which include the transfer of ownership, background investigations, change of business manager, employee application, modification of premises, change of location, application modification, license modification, change of corporate structure, change of financier, conversion from medical marijuana establishment to retail marijuana establishment, zoning verification, duplicate license, temporary permit, change of trade name, change of class of license and lottery application, with all such fees to be established by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-17, §§ 2, 6, 4-21-15) 
Sec. 56-269. - Location, co-location, operational restrictions and requirements, retail marijuana establishments. 
(a)  Commercial zoning district restrictions. Retail marijuana stores are allowed only in commercial zoning districts and only upon obtaining the land use approvals as are otherwise necessary for such use; and further provided that no retail marijuana store may be located within: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) feet of the right-of-way of Public Road north of South Boulder Road; or 
(2)  Five hundred (500) feet of the right-of-way of East Simpson Street, east of Public Road to 500-501 East Simpson Street; or 
(3)  Five hundred (500) feet of the right-of-way of 120th Street and 119th Street, north of Emma Street to Highway 7; or 
(4)  Eight hundred (800) feet of the right-of-way of Highway 287 and Highway 7; or 
(5)  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of any city residential subdivision, residentially zoned property, or property with residential as a principal use; or 
(6)  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of any licensed commercial day care; or 
(7)  Five hundred (500) feet of the nearest portion of the footprint of any medical marijuana center or any retail marijuana store, except that any applicant seeking to co-locate a center and a store, shall be exempt from this requirement as to the center and store set forth in the application; or 
(8)  One thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any school or hospital. 
(9)  The maximum aggregate number of retail marijuana stores and medical marijuana centers within the city shall not exceed three (3). For the purposes of this section a retail marijuana store and a medical marijuana center co-located in accordance with section 56-269(h) shall be counted as one (1) store/center. 
(b)  Industrial zoning district restrictions. Retail marijuana product manufacturers and cultivation facilities are allowed only in the industrial zoning district, and only upon obtaining the land use approvals as are otherwise necessary for such use; and further provided that no such uses may be located within: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of a licensed commercial day care; or 
(2)  Eight hundred (800) feet of the right-of-way of Highway 287; or 
(3)  One thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any school or hospital; or 
(4)  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of any city residential subdivision, residentially zoned property, or property with residential as a principal use; and 
(5)  There may be no more than twelve (12) total physical (independent) locations containing any mix of licensed retail marijuana product manufacturers, licensed medical marijuana-infused product manufacturers, licensed retail marijuana cultivation facilities, or licensed medical marijuana optional premises cultivation operations within the industrial zoning district category. The term "total physical (independent) location" as used in this subsection includes not only separate building but also separate individual tenant spaces located within the same building and under the same roof, except that medical and retail cultivation and product manufacturers under common ownership, which share the same tenant space ("premises") shall be deemed one (1) physical (independent) location; and 
(6)  The licensed premises of a retail marijuana product manufacturer, including any such establishment, which is co-located with a medical marijuana-infused product manufacturer and the licensed premises of a retail marijuana cultivation facility, including any such establishment which is co-located with a medical marijuana optional premises cultivation operation shall not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(c)  Distance restrictions. Retail marijuana testing facilities are permitted only in the industrial zoning district; however, no such use may be located within: 
(1)  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of a licensed commercial day care; or 
(2)  Eight hundred (800) feet of the right-of-way of Highway 287; or 
(3)  One thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any school or hospital; or 
(4)  Five hundred (500) feet of the property line of any city residential subdivision, residentially zoned property, or property with residential as a principal use; and 
(d)  Computing of distances. The distances set forth in this section are to be computed by direct measurement from the nearest property line, right-of-way boundary, or portion of the footprint of the land uses set forth herein to the nearest portion of the footprint of the retail marijuana establishment. 
(e)  [Grandfathing provisions pertaining to location.] The distance restrictions set forth in this section shall not affect the renewal of a license once granted or apply to a license in effect and actively doing business before the construction of, or the opening of, a residential subdivision, residentially zoned property, property with residential as a principal use, licensed commercial day care, school, or hospital. 
(f)  [Size limitations.] The licensed premises of a retail marijuana store, including any store co-located with a medical marijuana center shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(g)  Residential location prohibited. No retail marijuana establishment shall be located within any building which contains a residence or within any dwelling or residential zoning district. 
(h)  Co-location restrictions. Retail marijuana establishments and medical marijuana establishments may be under common ownership in the same location and share the same licensed premises, subject to the following: 
(1)  A licensed medical marijuana center that permits admittance of patients under twenty-one (21) years of age may also hold a retail marijuana store license and operate a dual marijuana business operation on the same licensed premises. In such case, the retail marijuana store licensee must post signage that clearly conveys that persons under twenty-one (21) years of age may not enter the area which contains the retail marijuana store. Under these circumstances, and upon approval of the local and state licensing authorities, the medical marijuana center and the retail marijuana store may share a common foyer but must have separate entrances and exits, and medical marijuana and retail marijuana goods and products must be separately displayed and sold. Record keeping for the business operations of both must enable the local and state licensing authorities to clearly distinguish the inventories and business transactions of medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products from retail marijuana and retail marijuana products. 
(2)  A licensed medical marijuana center that prohibits admission of patients under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age may also hold a retail marijuana store license and operate a dual marijuana business operation on the licensed premises. In such cases, the medical marijuana center must post signage that clearly conveys that persons under twenty-one (21) years of age may not enter the establishment. Under these circumstances and upon approval of the local and state licensing authorities the medical marijuana center and retail marijuana store may share the same entrances and exits. Medical marijuana and retail marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products and retail marijuana products must be displayed separately on the same sale floor. Record keeping for the business operations of both must enable the state and local licensing authority to clearly distinguish the inventories and business transactions of medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products from retail marijuana and retail marijuana product. 
(3)  Co-located licensed operations must be operated in accordance with both the Medical and Retail Marijuana Code and their rules. 
(i)  Business conducted within building. Any and all cultivation, production, distribution, possession, storage, display, sales, or other distribution of marijuana shall occur only within the restricted area of a retail marijuana establishment and shall not be visible from the exterior of the establishment. 
(j)  Manager registration requirements. The manager of a retail marijuana establishment shall register with the state and the local licensing authority. Whenever a person ceases to be a registered manager of a retail marijuana establishment, the retail marijuana licensee shall notify the licensing authorities within five (5) days and shall designate a new registered manager within thirty (30) days. Either the state or the local licensing authority may refuse to accept any person as a registered manager unless the person is satisfactory to the respective licensing authorities as to character, record, and reputation. In determining a registered manager's character, record, and reputation, the state or local licensing authority may have access to criminal history record information furnished by a criminal justice agency subject to any restrictions imposed by such agency. 
(k)  Hours of operation. A retail marijuana store shall be closed to the public, and no sale or other distribution of marijuana shall occur upon the premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m., thru and including 8:00 a.m. 
(l)  Use of pesticides. No pesticides or insecticides that are prohibited by applicable law for fertilization or production of edible produce shall be used on any marijuana cultivated, produced, or distributed by a retail marijuana establishment. A retail marijuana establishment shall comply with all applicable laws regarding use of pesticides. 
(m)  Ventilation required. A retail marijuana establishment shall be ventilated to ensure the odor of marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a normal sense of smell at the exterior of the retail marijuana establishment or at any adjoining property. 
(n)  Wastewater requirements. All retail marijuana establishments shall be operated in such a manner as to not permit, allow, or cause to be discharged any substance or material prohibited by the city into or upon any watercourse or city reclamation conduit, facility, or plant. 
(o)  Off-premises storage of retail marijuana and retail marijuana product prohibited. No retail marijuana establishment may store retail marijuana or any retail marijuana product in any off-premises storage facility located within the city. 
(p)  Reporting requirements. A retail marijuana establishment shall report to the local licensing authority each of the following events within the time specified. If no time is specified, the report shall be provided within seventy-two (72) hours of the event. 
(1)  Transfer or change of financial interest, business manager, or financier in the license to the city at least thirty (30) days before the transfer or change. 
(2)  Taxable transactions and sales and use tax reports to the city monthly. 
(3)  A violation of any law by any licensee or applicant of a retail marijuana business. 
(4)  Each licensee shall post and keep at all times visible to the public, in a conspicuous place on the premises, a sign to be furnished by the city clerk's office, which sign shall be in the following form: "WARNING: THE LAFAYETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT MUST BE NOTIFIED IMMEDIATELY OF ALL UNLAWFUL ACTS AND DISTURBANCES IN THIS ESTABLISHMENT." Licensees' shall immediately report to the police department any unlawful act, conduct, or disturbance committed upon the premises. 
(q)  Respond to inquiry. The owner or manager of a retail marijuana establishment is required to respond by phone or email within twenty-four (24) hours of contact by a city official concerning its retail marijuana establishment at the phone number or email address provided to the city as the contact for the business. Each twenty-four-hour period during which an owner or manager does not respond to the city official shall be considered a separate violation. 
(r)  Signs and advertising. 
(1)  Any person or premises licensed as a retail marijuana establishment shall comply with all city ordinances regulating signs and advertising. In addition, no licensed retail marijuana establishment shall use any advertising material that is misleading, deceptive, false, or that, as evidenced either by the content of the advertising material or the medium or the manner in which the advertising is disseminated, is designed to appeal to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection (2), it shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this article or any other person to advertise any retail marijuana or retail marijuana product anywhere in the city where the advertisement is visible to members of the public from any street, sidewalk, park, or other public place, including advertising utilizing any of the following media: any billboard or other outdoor general advertising device as defined by the zoning code; any sign mounted on a vehicle, any hand-held or other portable sign; or any handbill, leaflet or flier directly handed to any person in a public place, left upon a motor vehicle, or posted upon any public or private property without the consent of the property owner. The prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply to: 
a.  Any sign located on the same zone lot as a retail marijuana store which exists solely for the purpose of identifying the location of the retail marijuana store and which otherwise complies with the city's zoning requirements and any other applicable city laws and regulations; or 
b.  Any advertisement contained within a newspaper, magazine, or other periodical of general circulation within the city; or 
c.  Advertising which is purely incidental to sponsorship of a charitable event by a retail marijuana establishment. 
(3)  For purposes of this subsection(s), the terms "advertise," "advertising," or "advertisement," mean the act of drawing the public's attention to a retail marijuana establishment in order to promote the sale of retail marijuana goods or products by the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-17, §§ 2, 7, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 2016-11, § 2, 4-5-16; Ord. No. 2017-27, § 2, 7-18-17; Ord. No. 2018-10, § 2, 3-20-18) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-263. 
Sec. 56-270. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 2016-31, adopted Sept. 20, 2016, repealed § 56-270, which pertained to limitations on retail marijuana products manufacturer and retail marijuana cultivation facility, and derived from Ord. No. 2014-04, adopted Mar. 4, 2014. 
Sec. 56-271. - Inspection of books, records, and licensed premises. 
(a)  Each licensee shall keep a complete set of all records necessary to show fully the business transactions of the licensee, all of which shall be open at all times during business hours for the inspection and examination by the local licensing authority, its duly authorized representatives, and the city police department for the purposes of investigating and determining compliance with the provisions of this article and any other applicable state and local laws or regulations. The local licensing authority may require any licensee to furnish such information as it considers necessary for the proper administration of this article. It may also require an audit to be made of the books of accounts and records on such occasions as it may consider necessary by an auditor to be selected by the local licensing authority, who shall likewise have access to all books and records of the licensee. 
(b)  The licensed premises, including any places of storage where retail marijuana or retail marijuana products are stored, manufactured, packaged, cultivated, processed, displayed, sold, or dispensed, shall be subject to inspection by the local licensing authority, its duly authorized representatives, and the city police department during all business hours and other times of apparent activity, for the purpose of inspection or investigation. For examination of any inventory or books and records required to be kept by the licensees, access shall be required during business hours. Where any part of the licensed premises consists of a locked area, upon demand to the licensee by the local licensing authority or any other authorized city personnel, such area shall be made available for inspection without delay. 
(c)  Each licensee shall retain all books and records necessary to show fully the business transactions of the licensee for a period of the current tax year and the three (3) immediately prior tax years. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 4-21-15) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-263. 
Sec. 56-272. - Unlawful acts of licensees and persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to: 
(1)  Violate or fail to comply with any provision, term, condition, or requirement of the Retail Marijuana Code, including its rules. 
(2)  Allow marijuana or marijuana products to be consumed upon its licensed premises. 
(3)  Use advertising material that is misleading, deceptive, false, or designed to appeal to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(4)  Sell retail marijuana or retail marijuana products to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age or to a person who does not present a government-issued identification at the time of purchase. 
(5)  Refuse to allow inspection of a retail marijuana establishment upon request of an authorized city employee. Any licensee, owner, business manager, operator of a retail marijuana establishment, or owner of the property where a retail marijuana establishment is located may be charged with violation of this requirement. 
(6)  Advertise or publish materials or display signs that are in violation of this article. 
(7)  Violate any provision of this article or any condition of an approval granted pursuant to this article, or any law, rule, or regulation applicable to the use of retail marijuana or the operation of a retail marijuana establishment. 
(8)  Distribute marijuana or retail marijuana product within a retail marijuana store to any person who shows visible signs of intoxication from alcohol, marijuana, or other drugs. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any form of business or commerce involving the cultivation, processing, manufacturing, storage, sale, distribution, testing, or consumption of marijuana other than those forms of business and commerce that are expressly permitted by Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution, the Retail Marijuana Code, Medical Marijuana Code, and this article, which permit only retail marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturers, retail marijuana testing facilities, retail marijuana stores, and co-located marijuana establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 4-21-15) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-263. 
Sec. 56-273. - No city liability; indemnification. 
(a)  By accepting a license issued pursuant to this article, the licensee waives and releases the city, its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees, attorneys, agents, and authorized volunteers from any liability for injuries, damages, or liabilities of any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of the owners, operators, employees, clients, or customers of the retail marijuana establishment for a violation of state or federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(b)  By accepting a license issued pursuant to this article, all licensees, jointly and severally, if more than one (1), agree to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees, attorneys, agents, authorized volunteers, insurers, and self-insurance pool, against all liability, claims, and demands on account of any injury, loss, or damage, including, without limitation, claims arising from bodily injury, personal injury, sickness, disease, death, property loss or damage, or any other loss of any kind whatsoever arising out of or in any manner connected with the operation of the retail marijuana establishment that is the subject of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 4-21-15) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-263. 
Sec. 56-274. - Other laws remain applicable. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided herein, to the extent the state adopts any additional or stricter law, rule, or regulation, governing the sale, transportation, manufacture, cultivation, processing, packaging, displaying, testing, or distribution of retail marijuana or retail marijuana products, the additional or stricter regulation shall control the operation of any retail marijuana establishment in the city. Compliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be deemed an additional requirement for issuance or denial of any license or operation of any establishment under this article, and noncompliance with any applicable state law or regulation shall be grounds for non-renewal, revocation, or suspension of any license issued hereunder. 
(b)  Any licensee may be required to demonstrate, upon demand by the local licensing authority, its authorized representative, or by law enforcement officers, that the source and quantity of any marijuana grown upon the licensed premises are in full compliance with any applicable state law or regulation. 
(c)  If the state or federal government prohibits the sale, transportation, manufacture, cultivation, processing, packaging, testing, or distribution of marijuana through retail marijuana establishments, any license issued hereunder shall be deemed immediately revoked by operation of law, with no ground for appeal, or other redress available, on behalf of the licensee. 
(d)  The issuance of any license pursuant to this article shall not be deemed to create an exception, defense, or immunity to any person in regard to any potential criminal liability the person may have for the transportation, packaging, manufacturing, cultivation, possession, sale, distribution, testing, or use of marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, 3-4-14; Ord. No. 2015-17, § 2, 4-21-15) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following § 56-263. 
Chapter 65 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal court, Ch. XV. 
Cross reference- Disposal of impounded dogs, § 25-110; nuisances, Ch. 70; offenses, Ch. 75. 
State Law reference- Constitutional authority as to local court, Art. XX, § 6, Colo. Const.; municipal courts, C. R. S. § 13-10-101 et seq.; effect of charter or ordinance, C. R. S. § 13-10-103. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 65-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Municipal court. The term "municipal court" shall mean the Lafayette Municipal Court. 
    Municipal judge. The term "municipal judge" shall mean the judge(s) of the Lafayette Municipal Court. 
(Code 1963, § 21-1; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 1, 8-2-88) 
Sec. 65-2. - Court created. 
    A municipal court in and for the city is hereby created and established. 
(Code 1963, § 21-2) 
Charter reference- Creation of municipal court, § 15.1. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, C. R. S. § 13-10-104. 
Sec. 65-3. - Jurisdiction and powers of court. 
    The municipal court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction to hear, try and determine all causes arising under the charter and ordinances of the city, with full power to carry the same into effect and to punish violations thereof by the imposition of such fines and penalties as in such ordinances provided; it shall have power to compel attendance of witnesses and to punish for contempt of such court, and shall have all powers incident to a court of record in relation to same. There shall be no change of venue from the municipal court. 
(Code 1963, § 21-11; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 2, 8-2-88) 
Charter reference- Jurisdiction of municipal court, § 15.1; penalty for violations, § 15.2. 
State Law reference- Jurisdiction of municipal court, C. R. S. § 13-10-104.; appearance of witnesses, C. R. S. § 13-10-111; fines and penalties, C. R. S. § 13-10-113. 
Sec. 65-4. - Qualifications of judges. 
    Every municipal judge shall be a resident and qualified elector of the state, shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age at the time of assumption of the duties of office, and shall be licensed to practice law in the State of Colorado. 
(Code 1963, § 21-8; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 3, 8-2-88; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 17, 6-6-06) 
Charter reference- Qualifications of municipal judge, § 15.1. 
State Law reference- Qualifications of municipal judges, C. R. S. § 13-10-106. 
Sec. 65-5. - Appointment and term of presiding judge. 
    The municipal court shall be presided over by a presiding municipal judge, appointed by the city council for a term of two (2) years, and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1963, § 21-3) 
Charter reference- Appointment of judge, § 15.1. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 13-10-105. 
Sec. 65-6. - Additional judges. 
    The city council may appoint additional municipal judges from time to time as may be needed to transact the business of the court or to preside in case of temporary absence, sickness, disqualification or other inability of the presiding municipal judge to act. 
(Code 1963, § 21-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 13-10-105. 
Sec. 65-7. - Salaries of judges. 
    The annual salary of the municipal judge shall be set by the city council by ordinance, and payable as other salaries to municipal officers. 
(Code 1963, § 21-10) 
Charter reference- Salary of municipal judge, C. R. S. § 15.1. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 13-10-107. 
Sec. 65-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1988-14, § 4, adopted Aug. 2, 1988, repealed § 6-58 which pertained to oath of judges. Such section was derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-8. 
Sec. 65-9. - General authority of city administrator. 
    The city administrator shall be the head of the municipal court system and shall supervise and direct its operation. 
(Code 1963, § 21-4; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 18, 6-6-06) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to appoint a presiding municipal judge, C. R. S. § 13-10-105. 
Sec. 65-10. - Rules. 
    The presiding municipal judge shall have full power and authority to make and adopt rules and regulations for conducting the business of the municipal court. Such rules and regulations shall be reduced to writing and shall be consistent with any rules of procedure adopted by the Colorado supreme court. 
(Code 1963, § 21-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 13-10-112. 
Sec. 65-11. - Removal of judges. 
    Any municipal judge may be removed by the city council for cause if: 
(1)  He is found guilty of a felony or any other crime involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  He has a disability which interferes with the performance of his duties, and which is or is likely to become of a permanent character; 
(3)  He has willfully or persistently failed to perform his duties; 
(4)  He is habitually intemperate; or 
(5)  The city required the judge, at the time of appointment, to be a resident of the city, or the county, and he subsequently becomes a nonresident of the city or the county during his term of office. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 13-10-105. 
Secs. 65-12-65-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION OF COURT 

Sec. 65-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Formerly, § 65-26 pertained to duties of the municipal judge as derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-14. Such section was repealed by Ord. No. 1988-14, § 5, adopted Aug. 2, 1988. 
Sec. 65-27. - Oaths and affirmations. 
    The municipal judge shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations in all municipal matters in the municipal court. 
(Code 1963, § 21-15) 
State Law reference- Administration of oaths by municipal judge, C. R. S. § 31-4-401. 
Sec. 65-28. - Fees, fines and penalties. 
    The municipal judge or the clerk of the court shall pay over to the city treasurer all fines, costs and penalties received. 
(Code 1963, § 21-13; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 6, 8-2-88) 
State Law reference- Fines and costs, C. R. S. § 13-10-115. 
Sec. 65-29. - Docket. 
    The municipal judge or the clerk of the court shall prepare and keep a docket for the court. 
(Code 1963, § 21-12; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 7, 8-2-88) 
Sec. 65-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1988-14, § 7, adopted Aug. 2, 1988, repealed § 65-30, register of actions, derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-12. 
Sec. 65-31. - Municipal court of record, created. 
    A municipal court of record shall be and is hereby established for the City of Lafayette, Colorado. There shall be a verbatim record made of the proceedings and evidence at all arraignments and trials in the municipal court by either electrical devices or stenographic means. The cost of the preparation of transcripts of the record made in the municipal court shall be as provided for in Title 13, Article 10 of the Colorado Revised Statutes 1973. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 1-18-83) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 966, § 1, adopted Jan. 18, 1983, did not specifically amend the Code, but has been included herein as § 65-31 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 65-32-65-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROCEDURE 

Sec. 65-46. - Regular trial and hearing sessions. 
    There shall be regular sessions of the municipal court for the trial of cases, and the municipal judge shall hear and determine complaints for the violation of any city ordinance where there is probable cause to believe that an offense has been committed. 
(Code 1963, § 21-37) 
Sec. 65-47. - Special sessions. 
    It shall be lawful for the municipal judge to hold a special session of court at any time, including Sundays and night court, if in the discretion of a judge of the municipal court a special session is deemed advisable. 
(Code 1963, § 21-38) 
Sec. 65-48. - Publicity of cases-Generally. 
    Except as provided in the following section, all cases in the municipal court shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1963, § 21-41) 
Sec. 65-49. - Same-Limitations. 
    Where in the municipal court the type of offense charged and the nature of the case are such that it would be to the best interests of the witnesses or defendant or defendants to exclude all persons not directly connected with the case, the municipal judge may order that the court be cleared of all persons not directly connected with the case. Decisions under this section shall be solely in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Code 1963, § 21-42) 
Secs. 65-50, 65-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1988-14, §§ 9, 10, adopted Aug. 2, 1988, repealed §§ 65-50, 65-51. Prior to repeal, such sections were derived from the 1963 Code, §§ 21-39, 21-40 and pertained to separate hearings for traffic cases and priority of such cases when separate session not held. 
Sec. 65-52. - Sufficiency of section references in processes. 
    In municipal court actions it shall be sufficient to charge a violation of the ordinances of the city in any summons or complaint by reference to the section providing for such violation without specifically referring to the subsection under the section violated. 
(Code 1963, § 21-24) 
Sec. 65-53. - Style of action. 
    An action for a violation of any ordinance of the city shall be brought in the name of the city as plaintiff against the person who is alleged to have violated the ordinance as defendant. 
(Code 1963, § 21-17) 
Sec. 65-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1988-14, § 11, adopted Aug. 2, 1988, repealed § 65-54, how action commenced, derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-16. 
Sec. 65-55. - Issuance and service of summons. 
(a)  Commissioned members of the police department are authorized to issue a summons or summons and complaint for any violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city, requiring the person named as the defendant in such summons or summons and complaint to appear in the municipal court. 
(b)  The following officers and employees of the city are hereby authorized to issue and serve a summons or summons and complaint, so long as the violation relates to that portion of the Code or other ordinance of the city for which the officer or city employee is delegated the responsibility to enforce: 
(1)  All code enforcement officers; 
(2)  The fire chief and fire marshal; 
(3)  The chief building official and building inspector. 
(c)  The summons or summons and complaint shall contain a date and time certain to answer the charges of such violation. 
(d)  For purposes of this article, all officers and employees of the city listed in sections 65-55(a) and (b) are deemed to be peace officers. 
(e)  Upon the filing of a verified complaint by a person not a peace officer or a member of the personnel of the municipal court acting in his official capacity, and it appearing to the city attorney or the city prosecutor that there is probable cause to believe that a violation has been committed and that the defendant named in the complaint committed it, the clerk of the municipal court shall issue a summons or a summons and complaint to the defendant named in the complaint. 
(Code 1963, § 21-23; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 12, 8-2-88; Ord. No. 1991-17, § 1, 9-2-91) 
State Law reference- Commencement of actions in municipal court, C. R. S. § 1 13-10-111. 
Sec. 65-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 65-56, derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-19, provided for the signing of a complaint and summons, and was repealed by Ord. No. 1988-14, § 13, adopted Aug. 2, 1988. 
Sec. 65-57. - Verification of complaint. 
    Each municipal court complaint shall be verified by the complainant unless he is a peace officer or member of the personnel of the court acting in his official capacity. 
(Code 1963, § 21-20; Ord. No. 1991-17, § 2, 9-2-91) 
Secs. 65-58, 65-59. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1988-14, §§ 14, 15, adopted Aug. 2, 1988, repealed §§ 65-58 and 65-59. Prior to repeal § 65-58 pertained to the contents of a complaint and summons as derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-18; and § 65-59 pertained to the contents of a warrant as derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-21. 
Sec. 65-60. - Consolidating allegations of offenses in process. 
    In any municipal court process, each act or series of related acts committed by the same person, constituting a violation or violations of one or more sections of the municipal ordinances, may be consolidated, for the purposes of filing a complaint, issuing and serving summons and subpoenas, trial and appeal, but the judge shall impose a separate fine or penalty, which may include a requirement to perform community service, for each offense of which the defendant is convicted. 
(Code 1963, § 21-23; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 1, 6-20-95) 
Secs. 65-61-65-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Secs. 16-18 of Ord. No. 1988-14, adopted Aug. 2, 1988, repealed §§ 65-61-65-63. Prior to repeal § 65-61 pertained to contents of subpoenas as derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-22; § 65-62 pertained to service of subpoenas or summons as derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-26; and § 65-63 pertained to objection to form of process as derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-28. 
Sec. 65-64. - Failure to appear. 
    Any person who shall fail to appear in response to any summons or subpoena served on him shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1963, § 21-27) 
Sec. 65-65. - Right of defendant to give bond. 
    Every person arrested for a violation of a municipal ordinance shall have the right to be taken before the municipal judge and give a good and sufficient bond for his appearance to answer for the offenses charged; such bond to be in the form and the amount to be determined by the judge. 
(Code 1963, § 21-29; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 19, 8-2-88) 
State Law reference- Authority of city council to authorize the acceptance of bail bonds, C. R. S. § 31-15-401; bail generally, C. R. S. § 16-4-101 et seq. 
Sec. 65-66. - Forfeiture of bond-Generally. 
    In case any defendant in any case before the municipal court shall fail to appear according to the terms, requirements and conditions of his bond for appearance, or appearing shall depart the court without leave, the bond shall automatically be forfeited. 
(Code 1963, § 21-31) 
Secs. 65-67-65-69. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1988-14, §§ 20-22, adopted Aug. 2, 1988, repealed §§ 65-67-65-69 which pertained to forfeiture of bond to be paid by surety and application and order for return of forfeited amount as derived from the 1963 Code, §§ 21-32, 21-33, and 21-34. 
Sec. 65-70. - Action to enforce. 
    Failure of surety for a defendant in a municipal court action to satisfy a bond forfeiture shall result in proceedings being instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name and on behalf of the city for recovery of the penalty in such bond name. 
(Code 1963, § 21-35) 
State Law reference- Enforcement of bond, C. R. S. § 16-4-110. 
Sec. 65-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Former § 65-71, action by surety to recover penalty, derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-36, was repealed by Ord. No. 1988-14, § 23, adopted Aug. 2, 1988. 
Sec. 65-72. - Default by defendant. 
    When any defendant, duly summoned or admitted to bail, fails to appear at the time his case is made returnable or set for trial, the municipal judge may issue an order for the arrest of the defendant. 
(Code 1963, § 21-30; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 24, 8-2-88) 
Sec. 65-73. - Continuances authorized, generally. 
    A person who is duly summoned, who cannot be tried on account of the absence of witnesses or for any other good and sufficient cause, may request in open court a continuance of his case. The municipal judge may continue a matter upon terms set by the municipal judge. Additional continuances in municipal court actions may be granted upon application of the defendant or his attorney. 
(Code 1963, § 21-44) 
Sec. 65-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 25 of Ord. No. 1988-14, adopted Aug. 2, 1988, repealed § 65-72, limitations of continuances as derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-45. 
Sec. 65-75. - Persons on bond, continuances. 
    Where a person on appearance in a municipal court case is on bond and a continuance is requested, the municipal judge shall have the power to continue the bond for the period of the continuance. 
(Code 1963, § 21-46) 
Sec. 65-76. - Right of city, continuances. 
    Nothing contained in sections 65-73-65-75 of this article shall affect the right of the city or the city attorney to request a continuance. 
(Code 1963, § 21-47) 
Sec. 65-77. - Court to explain rights to defendants. 
    At the beginning of each municipal court session, the municipal judge shall explain to defendants their rights in municipal court. This may be done by distributing written instructions to each defendant. 
(Code 1963, § 21-43; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 26, 8-2-88) 
Sec. 65-78. - Witness fees. 
    Every subpoenaed witness, except an officer or employee of the city, shall be entitled to a witness fee in an amount as required by Colorado Revised Statute, section 13-33-103(2), as amended. If any defendant is found guilty, the aforementioned witness fees for subpoenaed witnesses appearing in the case shall be added by the judge to the fine imposed against the defendant. 
(Code 1963, § 21-73; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 27, 8-2-88; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 34, 3-1-05) 
State Law reference- Fees of witnesses, C. R. S. § 13-33-102. 
Sec. 65-79. - Bond fee. 
    It shall be the duty of the municipal judge or any officer or clerk of the court designated by the municipal judge to take or process any bond from a defendant to guarantee the appearance of the defendant in any court, to tax and collect therefore a fee in an amount set by resolution of city council for each bond so taken. The bond fee so collected shall be used to defer the administrative cost of taking and processing bonds. 
(Ord. No. 1988-14, § 28, 8-2-88; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 35, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 65-80. - Fees for certain arrest warrants. 
    If any defendant charged in the municipal court fails to pay a fine, court costs or other fee imposed by the municipal court, or fails to appear before the municipal court pursuant to summons or order of court, the court shall impose a fee, set by resolution of city council, against the defendant to reimburse the city for the costs incurred in the issuance and/or execution of an arrest warrant. 
(Ord. No. 1988-14, § 29, 8-2-88; Ord. No. 2007-05, § 1, 2-20-07) 
Sec. 65-81. - Probation fees. 
    Any person appearing before the municipal court as a result of a summons and complaint charging a violation of a municipal ordinance and as a result thereof is placed on probation, given a deferred prosecution, or given a deferred judgment and sentencing by the municipal court shall, in addition to any other costs or fees imposed by the court, be assessed, in the discretion of the municipal judge, a fee in an amount set by resolution of city council for insurance coverage and administrative costs if the person is ordered to perform community service as a condition of probation. 
(Ord. No. 1988-14, § 30, 8-2-88; Ord. No. 1992-51, § 1, 12-15-92; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 2, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 36, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 65-82. - Victim services and crime prevention fees. 
    In all actions where the defendant is found guilty, pleads guilty or pleads nolo contendere (no contest), there shall be assessed against defendant, a cost of ten dollars ($10.00) which funds shall be specifically designated for victim services, such as, by example, a restorative justice program, crime prevention activities and police department youth programs. 
(Ord. No. 2004-22, § 1, 11-3-04) 
Sec. 65-83. - Community justice surcharge. 
    In all actions where the defendant is found guilty, pleads guilty, or nolo contendere (no contest), there shall be assessed against the defendant an amount of twenty-five (25) percent upon any fine imposed by the court, which funds shall be specifically designated for community justice purposes which includes, for example, security for the municipal court, police community affairs activities, police training and other police community programs. 
(Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 65-84. - Court costs fee. 
(a)  There shall be assessed a fee, in an amount set by resolution of city council, against any defendant who charged with failure to have complying motor vehicle liability insurance subsequently presents the court with proof of complying insurance which results in dismissal or acquittal of the charge and no other costs are otherwise assessed against the defendant. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to imposition of such fee that: 
(1)  Due to injury, emergency or other circumstance beyond the control of the defendant, the defendant was unable to immediately furnish the issuing officer proof of complying motor vehicle liability insurance. 
(2)  The citation containing an insurance count was not attended by an accident, or the result of a lawful traffic contact or investigation by a peace officer. 
(3)  In the event that the defendant asserts an affirmative defense the matter shall be set for a hearing before the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05, § 2, 2-20-07) 
Secs. 65-85-65-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRIAL BY JURY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Trial by jury in municipal court, C. R. S. § 13-10-114; failure to appear after jury summons, C. R. S. § 13-71-122; obstruction of public justice, C. R. S. § 18-8-101 et seq. 

Sec. 65-106. - Qualifications and exemptions of jurors. 
    Qualifications and exemptions of jurors shall be the same as provided in the Colorado Revised Statutes, 1973, Title 13, Article 71, section 13-71-101 et seq. 
(Code 1963, § 21-53) 
State Law reference- Qualifications for jury service, C. R. S. § 13-71-105; exemptions, C. R. S. § 13-71-119. 
Sec. 65-107. - Irregularities. 
    No array or panel of any jury shall be quashed, nor shall any verdict be stayed or averted, by reason of an informality or irregularity in the summoning or selecting of the jury, which in the opinion of the court is unimportant and insufficient to vitiate the return of the jury. 
(Code 1963, § 21-66) 
Sec. 65-108. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Formerly, § 65-108 pertained to challenge of jurors as derived from the 1963 Code, § 21-65. The section was repealed by Ord. No. 1988-14, § 31, adopted Aug. 2, 1988. 
Sec. 65-109. - Disqualification for opinion. 
    No person summoned as a juror shall be disqualified to serve as such by reason of a previously formed or expressed opinion with reference to the guilt or innocence of the accused; provided, however that the court shall be satisfied, from the examination of the juror or from other evidence, that he will render an impartial verdict, according to the law that the evidence submitted to the jury in the trial of such case. 
(Code 1963, § 21-67) 
Sec. 65-110. - Verdict; sentence and judgment. 
    Upon the jury's returning its verdict of guilty, the municipal judge shall proceed to fix or determine the punishment or sentence, which may include a requirement to perform community service, and to render judgment upon such verdict for the punishment or sentence so determined by him and for costs; but if the jury returns a verdict of not guilty, the municipal judge shall discharge the defendant without costs. 
(Code 1963, § 21-28; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 32, 8-2-88; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 3, 6-20-95) 
Sec. 65-111. - Costs and fees to be taxed. 
(a)  Court costs as set by resolution of city council shall be assessed against any defendant who enters a plea of guilty or no contest before the municipal court to a violation of any city code or ordinance; court costs as set by resolution of city council shall be assessed against any defendant who is found guilty after a trial in the Lafayette Municipal Court for a violation of any municipal code or ordinance. In addition to the court costs assessed under this subsection (a), court costs as set by resolution of city council for insurance coverage and administrative costs shall be assessed against any defendant who is sentenced to perform community service or is ordered to perform community service as a condition of a deferred sentence or probation. 
(b)  Court costs as set by resolution of city council shall be assessed against any defendant who is found guilty by a jury for violating any municipal ordinance or code. In addition to the court costs assessed under this subsection (b), court costs as set by resolution of city council for insurance coverage and administrative costs shall be assessed against any defendant who is sentenced to perform community service or is ordered to perform community service as a condition of probation. 
(c)  All fees paid to jurors summoned and to jurors serving on the jury shall be assessed against any defendant who is found guilty by a jury of violating any municipal ordinance or code. Each summoned juror who appears shall be paid a fee in an amount set by resolution of city council for each appearance; each summoned juror who serves on a jury shall be paid a fee in an amount set by resolution of city council per day, or any part thereof, for such jury service. 
(d)  In any prosecution for the violation of a municipal code or ordinance based upon the complaint of any person other than a police officer or other employee of the city, if the complaining witness who signed and filed the verified complaint fails or refuses to testify at the time of the trial, or where it appears to the court that there was no reasonable ground for such complaint, or that such complaint was maliciously entered, in the discretion of the court, court costs may be assessed against such complaining witness in an amount set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 388, § 2, 9-15-64; Ord. No. 1005, §§ 1, 2, 11-15-83; Ord. No. 1988-14, § 33, 8-2-88; Ord. No. 1992-35, § 1, 9-1-92; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 4, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 37, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 65-111.1. - Community service. 
    In lieu of paying cash, the municipal judge may order a fine paid through performance of community service. 
(Ord. No. 1995-11, § 5, 6-20-95) 
Sec. 65-112. - Right to trial by jury. 
(a)  Every defendant complying with the statutes of the State of Colorado and the Colorado Rules of Municipal Court Procedure who is eighteen (18) years of age or more on the date of the violation of any provision of this Code, the Charter or any ordinance of the City of Lafayette shall be entitled to a trial by a jury unless: 
(1)  The defendant is accused of violating a municipal traffic ordinance or a municipal traffic code which ordinance or code violation does not constitute a criminal offense and does not provide as a penalty the imposition of a jail sentence; or 
(2)  The defendant is accused of violating a municipal ordinance or section of the municipal charter which ordinance or section of the municipal charter is neither criminal nor punishable by imprisonment under any counterpart state statute. 
(b)  No child under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be entitled to a trial by jury for a violation of this Code, the Charter or any ordinance of the City of Lafayette for which imprisonment in jail is not a possible penalty; except that such a child is entitled to a trial by jury for any offense which would be a class 1 misdemeanor under a state counterpart statute. 
(Ord. No. 1988-14, § 34, 8-2-88; Ord. No. 1994-5, § 1, 4-19-94) 
Sec. 65-113. - Judicial appeals procedure. 
(a)  Review shall be before the municipal court if it is alleged that any municipal authority, board, commission, city council (municipal body) or officer exercising quasi-judicial functions has exceeded its jurisdiction or abused its discretion, and there is no plain, speedy and adequate remedy otherwise provided by the charter or ordinance: 
(1)  Review shall be limited to a determination of whether the municipal body or officer has exceeded its jurisdiction or abused its discretion, based on the evidence in the record before the municipal body or officer. 
(2)  Review pursuant to this section shall be commenced by the filing of a verified complaint. The complaint shall be accompanied by a motion and proposed order requiring certification of the record of the hearing before the municipal body or officer. The court shall order the municipal body or officer to file with the municipal court on a specified date, the record or such portion or transcript thereof as is identified in the order, together with a certificate of authenticity. The date for filing the record shall be after the date upon which an answer to the complaint must be filed. To the extent not otherwise specified herein, the complaint, answer, motions or other responsive pleadings shall be filed and served in accordance with the municipal court rules of procedure. 
(3)  Within twenty (20) days after the date of receipt of an order requiring certification of a record, the municipal body or officer may file with the municipal court a statement designating portions of the record not in the order which it desires to place before the court. The cost of preparing the record shall be advanced by the plaintiff, except that the court may, pursuant to motion of the plaintiff, order the municipal body or officer to advance payment for the costs of preparing such portion of the record designated by the municipal body or officer as the court shall determine is not essential to a complete understanding of the controversy. If the municipal body or officer fails to comply with such order, the portions for which it has been ordered to advance payment shall be omitted from the record. Any party may move to correct the record at any time. 
(4)  The proceedings before or decision of the body or officer may be stayed, pursuant to municipal court rules of procedure. 
(5)  Where claims other than claims under this rule are properly joined in the action, the court shall determine the manner and timing of proceeding with respect to all such claims. 
(6)  The municipal body or officer required to certify a record shall give written notice to all parties, simultaneously with filing, of the date of filing the record with the municipal court. The plaintiff shall then file, and serve on all parties, an opening brief within forty (40) days after the date on which the record was filed. The municipal body or officer shall file and serve an answer brief within thirty (30) days after service of the plaintiff's brief, and the plaintiff may file and serve a reply within fifteen (15) days after service of the answer brief. 
(7)  The court may accelerate or continue any action which, in the discretion of the court, requires acceleration or continuance. 
(8)  In the event the court determines that the governmental body or officer has failed to make findings of fact or conclusions of law necessary for a review of its action, the court may remand for the making of such findings of fact or conclusions of law. 
(b)  Where an ordinance provides for review of the acts of any municipal body or officer, relief therein provided may be available under this rule. If no time within which review may be sought is provided by any ordinance, a complaint seeking review under this ordinance shall be filed in the municipal court not later than thirty (30) days after the final decision of the municipal body or officer. This time requirement is jurisdictional and failure to comply with same shall preclude the municipal court from having and exercising jurisdiction over the matter. A timely complaint may be amended at any time with leave of the court, for good cause shown, to add, dismiss or substitute parties, and such amendment shall relate back to the date of filing of the original complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2004-21, § 1, 11-16-04) 
Chapter 70 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2008-31, adopted Oct. 7, 2008, repealed and reenacted Ch. 70 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 70 pertained to the same subject matter, was comprised of §§ 70-1-70-4, 70-10-70-19, and derived from Ord. No. 486, adopted Sept. 1, 1970; Ord. No. 1997-34, adopted Dec. 16, 1997; Ord. No. 2001-47, adopted Jan. 15, 2002; and Ord. No. 2004-21, adopted Nov. 16, 2004. 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 25; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 45; removal of weeds, etc., § 30-241 et seq.; offenses, Ch. 75; solid waste, Ch. 100. 
State Law reference- Power of city council to define, abate and fine for nuisances, C. R. S. § 31-15-401; abatement of public nuisances generally, C. R. S. § 16-13-301 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT 

Sec. 70-1. - Nuisance abatement, legislative purpose. 
    City council declares that the determination and abatement of local nuisances for the protection of the public's health, safety and welfare is a matter of local concern and therefore subject to the valid exercise of the city's police powers. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-2. - Definitions. 
    As used within this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meaning except where otherwise specified: 
(a)  City administrator means the city administrator or the administrator's authorized designee. 
(b)  Code compliance specialist means any employee of the city designated or authorized by the city administrator or the administrator's designee to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Community service officer means any officer(s) or employee(s) of the city designated or authorized by the chief of police or by the chief's authorized representative to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Garbage means and includes any human-made or human-used waste which, if deposited within the city other than in a garbage receptacle, tends to create a danger to public health, safety or welfare or to impair the environment of the city. Garbage includes by illustration only any litter, trash, refuse, confetti, debris, rubbish, excrement, urine, offal composed of animal matter or vegetable matter or both, or any noxious or offensive matter including but not limited to grass clippings, leaves, cut weeds, newspaper, magazine, glass, metal, plastic or paper container, hide, feathers, brick, cinderblock, concrete, sand, gravel, stone, glass or other used construction materials, ashes, cigarettes, cigars and food or food products. Garbage also includes rubbish as defined in section 100-1 of the Code. 
(e)  Junk means any new, used or secondhand materials of any kind which is not presently being used, including but not limited to: scrap metal and alloys, bones, rags, cloth, clothing, paper, rubber pieces, rope, tinfoil, tires, bottles, tools, fixtures, utensils, lumber, boxes, crates, pipe or pipe fittings, furniture, bed mattresses or box springs, water heaters, refrigerators, freezers, and all other appliances, machinery, and motor vehicles or the parts thereof or therefrom, including tires and wheels, any apparatuses or contrivances, and any building material, boards or other lumber, cement blocks, bricks, brickbats or other secondhand building material. Objects or materials shall be considered junk if they are so worn, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable for their customary manner or purpose. 
(f)  Nuisance means a thing, act, failure to act, occupation, activity, condition or use of any building, land, substance or property which: 
(1)  The continuous use or condition of which presents a substantial danger or hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the community; or 
(2)  The continuous use or condition of which violates any ordinances of this city; or 
(3)  Shall otherwise constitute or be known or declared a nuisance by virtue of common law, state statutes or the ordinances of the city; or 
(4)  Pollutes or contaminates any surface or subsurface waters; or 
(5)  Any activity, operation or condition which, after being ordered abated, corrected or discontinued by a lawful order of any department or officer of the city, continues to be conducted or continues to exist in violation of any statute or this Code or in violation of any regulation of the city, county, or the state. 
(g)  Occupant means and includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of a building, premises, or land, whether alone or with others. 
(h)  Public place means any place commonly or usually open to the general public or to which members of the general public may resort, or is accessible to members of the general public. By way of illustration, such public places include, but are not limited to, public ways, streets, buildings, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, shopping centers, shopping center malls, and places of business usually open to the general public. 
(i)  Refuse means liquid or solid wastes, whether combustible or non-combustible including but not limited to: paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood (except stacked wood fuel or firewood) animal carcasses or manure, tree branches, yard trimmings, dead plant material, wood, or similar substance or material, or metal, tin or aluminum cans, dirt, rock, pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, or other minerals or mineral wastes, street rubbish, including but not limited to: street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch-bag dirt, and contents of litter receptacles; provided however, that such does not include earth and waste from building construction during the period in which a valid building permit issued by the city is applicable. 
(j)  Improved property shall mean any real property upon which any building(s) is (are) located. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08; Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 2-17-09) 
Sec. 70-3. - Nuisances prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Do any act constituting a nuisance; or 
(2)  Knowingly fail to act where such failure causes or continues a nuisance; or 
(3)  Permit any activity or condition constituting a nuisance; or 
(4)  Aid or abet in the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(b)  The prohibitions of this section shall apply only to persons in a position to avoid, prevent or discontinue a nuisance. 
(c)  Any violation of any injunction or order issued by the municipal court in an action to abate a nuisance may be punished as a contempt of court or by a fine as specified in section 1-10 of this Code. Each day's (twenty-four (24) hours) failure to comply with an injunction or order to abate shall constitute a separate violation, for which an additional penalty may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-4. - Specific nuisances. 
(a)  Control of dust. It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person to own, possess or control any cleared area, construction site, parking lot, vacant lot or other site used by vehicular traffic or construction equipment, or own, possess or control any open pit, storage or stockpile area, without implementing preventative fugitive dust control measures, which may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Wetting down the dust producing area; 
(2)  Landscaping; 
(3)  Covering, shielding or enclosing; 
(4)  Paving on a temporary or permanent basis; 
(5)  Treating through the use of palliative and chemical stabilization in conformance with state guidelines. 
(b)  Litter prohibited. 
(1)  It is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for any person to throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited anywhere within the city, any junk, garbage or refuse as defined in this chapter, or hazardous material as defined by 40 C.F.R. Part 261, as such may be amended from time to time, or other offensive matter unless such is clearly marked and designated as a proper dump, facility, site or container for the deposit of junk, garbage or refuse. 
(2)  For the purposes of this subsection, garbage, junk or refuse does not include usable bicycles, and similar vehicles not powered by a motor, goods offered in a noncommercial yard sale that are stored for a period not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours, usable lawn furniture, including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, umbrellas and benches, furniture and other household goods, associated with moving into or out of any residential structure that are stored for a period not to exceed seven (7) days, landscaping materials to be installed on the same lot stored for a period of not to exceed fifteen (15) days, building materials to be used for authorized construction on the same lot as stored for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days and compost as long as such is maintained to minimize odors and not attract rodents. 
(3)  Public lands to the extent their management plan, permits for example, the accumulation of tree branches, dead plant material, leaves, dirt or rock are exempt from the requirements set forth in this subsection. 
(c)  Water supply ditch. It is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for any person to own or operate a water supply ditch where the condition of the ditch is such that it creates a health, sanitation or safety hazard upon any property within the city. 
(d)  Abandoned pools or deposits of water prohibited. Any swimming pool, pond, stream, ditch, or deposit of water which is abandoned, unattended or unfiltered, which results in such water becoming polluted or a sanitation or health hazard is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance. 
(e)  Open well, cistern or excavation. Any excavation of five (5) feet or more in depth, or any cistern or well is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance unless same are covered with a locked lid or are completely enclosed by a fence, barricade or other appropriate manner as determined by the director of public works or the director's designate. 
(f)  Unclean kennel, stable, stall, hutch, coop or manure fertilizer. 
(1)  It is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for any person to own, maintain or operate any animal enclosure in such a manner which creates unsanitary conditions or endangers the health of such animals. 
(2)  It is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for any person to use manure or other organic material on premises for fertilizing purposes if such creates unsanitary conditions or odors upon any adjoining or surrounding property offensive to a reasonable person for a period of seven (7) or more consecutive days. 
(g)  Streets and roads. 
(1)  It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person involved in the operation of a vehicle to track, scatter or deposit or cause to be tracked, scattered or deposited, any sand, gravel, rocks, mud, dirt, or any other such object upon any public street, thoroughfare or right-of-way. It is unlawful for any person causing such dropping, depositing or scattering to fail to promptly recover all such materials and return the public street, thoroughfare or right-of-way to its prior condition. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply where such vehicles are used in authorized snow removal activities or where sand or gravel is used for the purpose of securing traction in inclement weather. 
(h)  Camping on public property. Except as permitted by Chapter 26 of the Code, it shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to camp, sleep overnight, or in conjunction with such activities, place any tent, vehicle or construct any type of living quarters or structure upon any property owned by the city. 
(i)  General property standards. It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to maintain a premises in violation of the requirements of Chapter 3, General Requirements of the Housing Code [Property Maintenance Code] as set forth in Chapter 30 of the Code. 
(j)  Parking lots. It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to construct, use or permit parking lots and private drives of commercial establishments or multifamily establishments which consist of dirt, grass, weeds or gravel, or fail to maintain the lots and drives of such establishments free from potholes, pavement cracks or other deterioration, or to fail to maintain such lots' and drives' striping or signage, including, but not limited to, parking and fire lane designations in good condition and clearly legible. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-5. - Inspection of property. 
(a)  Right of entry generally. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce this chapter, or whenever a police officer, community service officer, or code compliance specialist, has reasonable cause to believe there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a nuisance, such officer or code compliance specialist shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If entry is refused, the officer or code compliance specialist shall give the responsible party, or if the responsible party cannot be located after a reasonable effort, the officer or code compliance specialist shall post upon a conspicuous place upon the premises, a written notice of intent to inspect not sooner than twenty-four (24) hours after the time specified in the notice. The notice shall state that the responsible party has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a municipal judge of the city, or by a judge of any other court having jurisdiction. 
(b)  Search warrants. A police or community service officer, or code compliance specialist, may appear before the municipal judge and upon a showing of probable cause shall obtain a search warrant entitling such officer, or code compliance specialist, to enter the building or upon the premises, using such reasonable force as may be necessary to gain entry. The officer, or code compliance specialist, applying for such warrant shall not be required to demonstrate specific knowledge of the condition of the particular structure or premises at issue in order to obtain a search warrant, but must show some factual or practical circumstances that would cause an ordinary prudent person to act. Any municipal judge of the city shall have power to issue search warrants upon a showing of probable cause of the existence of a nuisance. 
(c)  Emergencies. Whenever authorized city personnel determine that an emergency situation exists in relation to the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, a police or community service officer, or code compliance specialist, may enter into any building or upon any premises, using such reasonable force as may be necessary. An emergency situation includes any situation of imminent danger of loss of, or injury or damage to, life, limb, property or threat to public safety. It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of the building or premises to deny entry to any officer, or code compliance specialist, or to resist reasonable force used by any officer acting pursuant to this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-6. - Abatement of nuisances, notice and procedure. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specified within this chapter, in all cases where a nuisance shall be found to exist, notice of the nuisance together with a demand directing the removal or discontinuance of the nuisance, shall be served by the city upon any and all persons responsible for causing, permitting, maintaining or abating the nuisance. Service shall be upon the individual in person or by leaving a copy of the notice: 
(1)  At such person's residence, with an individual eighteen (18) years of age or older being a member of the family or cohabitant; or 
(2)  At such person's place of business with an employee of the business; 
(3)  If personal service cannot be effected, notice shall be given by posting the premises, if possible, or if not possible, by posting such notice at the City of Lafayette Municipal Building (City Hall). A copy of the notice shall also be mailed to such person's last known address. 
(4)  If service of the notice is to any person other than the property owner, or if the property is posted, a copy of the notice shall be mailed via United States mail to the owner of record. 
(b)  The notice shall advise of the nature of the nuisance and demand elimination or discontinuance thereof within seventy-two (72) hours, or such other period of time, as may be stated therein from the time of service. The notice shall also advise that if elimination or discontinuance is not so accomplished, within the stated time, the city may proceed to abate the same charging the expenses thereof to the person(s) refusing to eliminate or discontinue the nuisance and/or may proceed with civil or criminal proceedings. 
(c)  Service of the notice and demand shall be a prerequisite to the commencement of civil or criminal proceedings by the city, except for situations involving emergency abatement. The fact that the person or entity against whom legal action is initiated does not actually receive such notice shall not preclude such litigation, provided the city has acted in good faith and in a manner reasonably calculated to give notice to the owner, occupant, person having control or agent thereof. 
(d)  When a nuisance has not been voluntarily abated within the time specified in the notice and demand to abate, the city may, pursuant to the municipal court rules of procedure, bring a civil action in the municipal court to have the nuisance declared as such by the court and for an order enjoining the nuisance or authorizing its restraint, removal, termination of abatement by the owner or the person who caused the nuisance or the person who allowed the nuisance to be caused or to continue. 
(e)  The action to declare and abate a nuisance shall be brought by the city by the filing of a complaint which shall be verified or supported by an affidavit. The summons shall be issued and served in accordance with the municipal court rules of procedure. Trial shall be to the court and the city shall have the burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a nuisance exists or occurred on/or within the property identified in the complaint. 
(1)  The defendants to an action commenced under this chapter, and the person liable for and subject to the remedies may include any person owning or claiming any ownership or leasehold interest in the subject property, all tenants and occupants of the subject property, all managers and agents for any person claiming an ownership or leasehold interest in such property, any person committing, conducting, promoting, facilitating or aiding in the commission of a nuisance and anyone necessary to carry into effect the court's orders. None of these parties shall be deemed necessary or indispensable parties. Any person holding any legal or equitable interest in the property who has not been named as a party-defendant may intervene as a party-defendant. No other person may intervene. 
(2)  A notice of appearance shall be served with the summons and complaint. The appearance date shall be not less than fourteen (14) days from the date of service of the summons. The trial shall be held upon the appearance date, unless the court grants for a period not to exceed ten (10) days, a continuance for good cause shown. 
(3)  The respondent shall file a response on or before the appearance date set forth in the notice of appearance. 
(4)  Upon the date and at the time set for appearance and trial, if the respondent has filed no response and fails to appear and if the city shows that proper service was made on the respondent at least fourteen (14) days prior to the appearance date, the court may grant such orders as are requested by the city; except that, the court shall order that enforcement by the city be stayed for ten (10) days and that a copy of the court's order be mailed to the respondent's last known address. Failure to appear on any other date set for trial shall be grounds for entering a default and judgment thereon against a non-appearing party. For good cause shown, and prior to enforcement, the court may set aside an entry of default and the judgment entered thereon. 
(5)  The judgment of the municipal court may be appealed to the Boulder County District Court. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-7. - Abatement orders. 
(a)  Issuance and effect of temporary and permanent abatement orders. The issuance of temporary or permanent abatement orders under this chapter shall be governed by the municipal court rules of procedure, pertaining to temporary restraining orders, preliminary injunctions and permanent injunctions, except to the extent of any inconsistency with the provisions of this chapter, in which event the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Temporary abatement orders provided for in this chapter shall go into effect immediately when served upon the property or party against whom they are directed. Permanent abatement orders shall go into effect as determined by the court. No bond or other security shall be required of the city upon the issuance of any temporary abatement order. 
(b)  Form and scope of abatement orders. Every abatement order under this chapter shall set forth the reasons for its issuance; shall be reasonably specific in its terms; shall describe in reasonable detail the acts and conditions authorized, required or prohibited; and shall be binding upon the subject property, the parties to the action, their attorneys, agents and employees, and any other person named as a defendant in the nuisance action and served with a copy of the order. 
(c)  Substance of abatement orders. Temporary or permanent abatement orders entered under this chapter shall be narrowly tailored so as to address the particular kinds of separate violations that form the basis of the alleged nuisance. Such orders may include: 
(1)  Orders requiring any defendant to take steps to abate the nuisance; 
(2)  Orders authorizing city personnel to take reasonable steps to abate the nuisance activity and prevent it from recurring, considering the nature and extent of the violation; 
(3)  Orders prohibiting certain named individuals from entering the property; 
(4)  Orders reasonably necessary to access, maintain or safeguard the property; and/or 
(5)  Orders reasonably necessary for the purposes of abating the nuisance or preventing the nuisance from occurring or recurring; provided, however, that no such order shall require the seizure of, the forfeiture of title to, or the appointment of a special receiver to protect, possess, maintain or operate any property. 
(d)  Temporary abatement orders. 
(1)  The purpose of a temporary abatement order shall be to temporarily abate an alleged nuisance pending the outcome of the matter's judicial proceeding. A temporary abatement order may be issued by the court, even if the effect of such order is to change, rather than preserve, the status quo. 
(2)  At any hearing on a motion for a temporary abatement order, the city shall have the burden of proving that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a nuisance occurred in or on the subject property and, in the case of a temporary order granted without notice to the defendant, that such order is reasonably necessary to avoid immediate, irreparable loss, damage or injury. 
(e)  Permanent abatement orders. Where the existence of a nuisance is established in a civil action under this chapter, the court shall enter a permanent abatement order requiring the defendant to abate the nuisance and take specific steps to prevent the same and other nuisances from occurring or recurring upon the property. 
(f)  Motion to vacate or modify temporary abatement orders. 
(1)  General. At any time a temporary abatement order is in effect, any defendant or any person holding any legal or equitable interest in any property governed by such an order may file a motion to vacate or modify said order. Any motion filed under this subsection shall state specifically the factual and legal grounds upon which it is based, and only those grounds may be considered at the hearing. The court shall vacate the order if it finds by a preponderance of the evidence that there are no reasonable grounds to believe that a nuisance was committed or exists in or on the property. The court may modify the order if it finds by a preponderance of the evidence that such modification will not be detrimental to the public interest and is appropriate, considering the nature and extent of the violations. 
(2)  Consolidation of hearing with other proceedings. If all parties so stipulate, the court may order the trial on the merits to be advanced and tried with the hearing on these motions. 
(g)  [Failure to comply.] It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply or refuse to abide by any of the terms and conditions of a temporary or permanent order issued by the court. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-8. - Remedies. 
(a)  The city and any defendant to an action under this chapter may, upon the court's approval, voluntarily stipulate to orders and remedies, temporary or permanent, that are different from those provided in this chapter. 
(b)  In any case in which the city prevails in a civil action initiated pursuant to this chapter, the city may recover its costs and expenses of declaring and abating the nuisance, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of litigation, such costs may be assessed against the respondent and become a lien against the subject property pursuant to the procedure set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  The remedies set forth herein are cumulative. The initiation of any action or the imposition of any penalty hereunder shall not preclude the city from instituting any other proceeding to require compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with any administrative orders and determinations made hereunder. No provision herein shall be construed to limit or abrogate the right of any person to bring a private action to abate a private nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-9. - Summary abatement. 
    Where, in the opinion of the city administrator, a nuisance exists which constitutes an immediate and serious danger to the public health, safety or welfare or, in the case of any nuisance in or upon any street or public property, such may be summarily abated without notice of any kind. The person(s) responsible for creating the nuisance shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance pursuant to the procedure set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-10. - Interference prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or prevent, or attempt to interfere with or prevent, the abatement of any nuisance by any employee or agent of the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-11. - Recovery of expenses-Lien. 
(a)  All costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating any nuisance, shall be paid by the property owner to the city clerk in full within thirty (30) days after mailing by the city clerk to the property owner, by registered or certified mail, a notice of and the assessment of such cost. Such notice shall include a statement of the work performed to abate the nuisance, the date of performance and the costs and expenses. 
(b)  Failure to pay the assessment within thirty (30) days shall cause the assessment to become a lien with penalty and interest upon the real property subject to abatement by the city. The penalty and interest shall be assessed at a rate equivalent to that which is assessed by state law upon delinquent general property taxes. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and shall, upon the city's certification and filing with Boulder County, be collected and paid to the city by the county treasurer in the same manner as delinquent general property taxes. 
(c)  If the owner desires to object to the assessment, the owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of the same to file a written objection with the city clerk. The city clerk shall then schedule the matter for hearing before the city administrator. The owner shall be given at least fourteen (14) days' written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. The decision of the city administrator shall be final. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the owner and failure to pay any assessment within fourteen (14) days of the date of the city administrator's decision shall cause the assessment to become a lien upon the real property as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
ARTICLE II. - GRASS, WEEDS, TREES, SHRUBS AND BUSHES 

Sec. 70-12. - Definitions. 
    As used within this article, the following words shall have the following meanings except as otherwise specified: 
(a)  Noxious weed means an alien plant or parts of an alien plant that have been designated a noxious weed by rule of the State of Colorado or by the noxious weed local advisory board. 
(b)  Turf grass means any of a variety or combination of varieties of perennial grasses, such as Kentucky bluegrass or rye, historically used for residential lawns. 
(c)  Weed means any undesirable plant. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-13. - Advisory board. 
    City council shall serve as the statutory noxious weed local advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-14. - Removal required; exceptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful, and shall constitute a nuisance for any person who is an owner, owner's agent, occupant, or lessee of any occupied or unoccupied lot or any parcel of land in the city, to fail to comply with the terms and conditions of any noxious weed management plan adopted by the local advisory board or to permit or maintain on any such lot or parcel of land, or on or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb line or the middle of the alley, or for ten (10) feet outside the property line if there is no curb, any accumulation, collection, presence or growth of any of the following: 
(1)  Noxious weeds, or 
(2)  Turf grass or weeds over twelve (12) inches in height. 
In order to retain certain properties owned by the city, including, but not limited to, designated city parks, open spaces, street rights-of-way, and stream beds and banks, in their natural state, the city is exempt from this requirement as said requirement relates to city-owned properties mentioned herein. 
(b)  Any unimproved private property that is immediately adjacent to exempt city property is also exempt from the above turf grass and weed height requirements; however, it is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for any person who is an owner, owner's agent, occupant or lessee of any such exempt unimproved private property, which is immediately adjacent to a public street or improved public or private property, to permit any growth of turf grass or weeds greater than twelve (12) inches in any area located within twenty (20) feet of any immediately adjacent public street and/or improved public or private property. 
(c)  Any private property owner shall be permitted at the property owner's sole cost and expense to cut or mow any area of exempt city property which is located within three (3) feet of and immediately adjacent to the owner's property. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08; Ord. No. 2009-02, § 2, 2-17-09) 
Sec. 70-15. - Removal, pruning, corner and sight line and street and sidewalk clearance. 
(a)  It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person who is an owner, owner's agent, occupant or lessee of any property, or on or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb line or the middle of the alley, or for ten (10) feet outside the property line if there is no curb, to fail to remove and/or treat trees, shrubs, bushes or other vegetation which are dead, broken, diseased, infested by insects or to fail to trim or prune any vegetation which is less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk or curb line of any adjacent roadway or which are otherwise in violation of the sight line requirements set forth in section 26-14-16 of the Code. 
    In order to retain certain properties owned by the city, including, but not limited to, designated city parks, open spaces, street rights-of-way, and stream beds and banks, in their natural state, the city is exempt from the above requirements of this subsection as said requirements relate to city-owned properties mentioned herein. 
(b)  Any unimproved private property that is immediately adjacent to exempt city property is exempt from the above requirements of subsection (a) related to the removal of trees, shrubs, bushes or other vegetation which are dead, broken, diseased, infested by insects; however, it is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for any person who is an owner, owner's agent, occupant or lessee of any such exempt unimproved private property, which is immediately adjacent to a public street or improved public or private property, to fail to remove and/or treat trees, shrubs, bushes or other vegetation which are dead, broken, diseased, infested by insects in any area located within twenty (20) feet of any immediately adjacent public street and/or improved public or private property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, damage, destroy or remove any tree, shrub, bush, or other vegetation on any city right-of-way or property unless authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08; Ord. No. 2009-02, § 3, 2-17-09) 
Sec. 70-16. - Notice of violation; removal authority and procedure; assessment lien on property. 
(a)  Any police or community service officer, or code compliance specialist, is authorized and directed to give notice to any owner, owner's agent, occupant, or lessee whose property is being kept or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article. Such notice may be personally served upon such person or, if not personally served, may be posted upon the property or deposited in the United States mail, addressed to the owner's agent, occupant, lessee, or owner of record at the address on the assessment roll of the county assessor or at such other, more recent address as may be available to the city, or with respect to notice to occupants, at the address of the property so occupied. If service or mailing of the notice is to any party other than the owner, or if the property is posted, a copy of the notice shall be mailed via United States mail to the owner of record. 
(1)  The notice shall state that, if the offending weeds and/or grasses, trees, shrubs or bushes, are not cut or eradicated (as applicable), and/or removed from such property, on or before five (5) days from the date of such notice, the removal may be done by the city and all costs of abatement, including the cost of inspection, the cost of any grading or sloping necessary to protect the public safety and all other incidental costs in connection therewith including administrative costs will be charged against the property of the responsible party in addition to any other penalty and costs or orders that may be imposed. 
(b)  If the property has not been brought into compliance with this article within five (5) days from the date of the notice, the abatement may be done by the city, either by city personnel or by private contractors. In the event of such abatement by the city, the cost, including inspection, removal of obstructions, if any, the cost of any grading or sloping necessary to protect the public safety, all other incidental costs in connection therewith, including administrative costs shall be assessed against the property of the responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-17. - Recovery of expenses-Lien. 
(a)  All costs and expenses incurred by the city in abatement shall be paid by the property owner to the city clerk in full within thirty (30) days after mailing by the city clerk to the property owner, by registered or certified mail, a notice of and the assessment of such cost. Such notice shall include a statement of the work performed to abate the nuisance, the date of performance and the costs and expenses. 
(b)  Failure to pay the assessment within thirty (30) days shall cause the assessment to become a lien with penalty and interest upon the real property subject to abatement by the city. The penalty and interest shall be assessed at a rate equivalent to that which is assessed by state law upon delinquent general property taxes. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and shall, upon the city's certification and filing with Boulder County, be collected and paid to the city by the county treasurer in the same manner as delinquent general property taxes. 
(c)  If the owner desires to object to the assessment, the owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of the same to file a written objection with the city clerk. The city clerk shall then schedule the matter for hearing before the city administrator. The owner shall be given at least fourteen (14) days' written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. The decision of the city administrator shall be final. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the owner and failure to pay any assessment within fourteen (14) days of the date of the city administrator's decision shall cause the assessment to become a lien upon the real property as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
ARTICLE III. - SNOW REMOVAL 

Sec. 70-18. - Removal of snow or ice requirements and restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person to allow snow or ice to remain on any sidewalk open to the public and abutting or adjoining the property controlled, owned or occupied by such person after twenty-four (24) hours of the last measurable snowfall or snowdrift. 
(b)  It is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for any person, without the permission of the director of public works or the director's designate, to throw, deposit, or scatter or cause to be thrown, deposited or scattered upon any public place, other than the curb line, snow or ice removed from any property. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-19. - Notice of violation; removal authority and procedure; assessment lien on property. 
(a)  Any community service officer, or code compliance specialist, is authorized and directed to give notice to any owner, owner's agent, occupant or lessee of property being kept or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article. Such notice may be personally served upon such person or, if not personally served, may be posted upon the property or deposited in the United States mail, addressed to the occupant and owner of record at the address on the assessment roll of the county assessor or at such other, more recent address as may be available to the city, or with respect to notice to occupants, at the address of the property so occupied. If service or mailing of the notice is to any party other than the owner, or if the property is posted, a copy of the notice shall be mailed via United States mail to the owner of record. 
(1)  The notice shall state that, if the offending snow or ice is not removed from such property as prescribed by this article on or before two (2) days from the date of such notice, the removal may be done by the city and all costs of abatement, including the cost of inspection and all other incidental costs in connection therewith, including administrative costs will be charged against the property, in addition to any other penalty and costs or orders that may be imposed. 
(b)  If the offending property has not been brought into compliance with this article within three (3) days from the date of the notice the abatement may be done by the city, either by city personnel or by private contractors. In the event of such abatement by the city, the cost, including inspection, all other incidental costs in connection therewith, including administrative costs shall be assessed against the offending property. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Sec. 70-20. - Recovery of expenses-Lien. 
(a)  All costs and expenses incurred by the city in abatement shall be paid by the property owner to the city clerk in full within thirty (30) days after mailing by the city clerk to the property owner, by registered or certified mail, a notice of and the assessment of such cost. Such notice shall include a statement of the work performed to abate the nuisance, the date of performance and the costs and expenses. 
(b)  Failure to pay the assessment within thirty (30) days shall cause the assessment to become a lien with penalty and interest upon the real property subject to abatement by the city. The penalty and interest shall be assessed at a rate equivalent to that which is assessed by state law upon delinquent general property taxes. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and shall, upon the city's certification and filing with Boulder County, be collected and paid to the city by the county treasurer in the same manner as delinquent general property taxes. 
(c)  If the owner desires to object to the assessment, the owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of mailing of the same to file a written objection with the city clerk. The city clerk shall then schedule the matter for hearing before the city administrator. The owner shall be given at least fourteen (14) days' written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. The decision of the city administrator shall be final. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the owner and failure to pay any assessment within fourteen (14) days of the date of the city administrator's decision shall cause the assessment to become a lien upon the real property as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-31, § 1, 10-7-08) 
Secs. 70-21-70-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MARIJUANA RESIDENTIAL CULTIVATION RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 70-30. - Legislative powers. 
    The city council hereby finds and declares that it has the power to enact this article and the regulations herein pursuant to Article XX, Section 6 and Article XVIII of Section 14, and Section 16, of the Colorado Constitution, Article XX, Section 6 of the Colorado Constitution, the Colorado Medical Marijuana Program (C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106), "Use of flammable gases in home marijuana cultivation prohibited" (C.R.S. § 9-7-113), Article 15 of Title 31 C.R.S. (exercise of municipal powers) and the city's home rule charter and code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 3-4-14) 
Sec. 70-31. - Cultivation regulations/legislative. 
(a)  The cultivation, production or possession of marijuana plants for medical use by a patient or primary caregiver as such terms are defined by Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution and the Medical Marijuana Program, C.R.S.§ 25-1.5-106 shall be allowed in residential structures subject to the requirements set forth in this article. 
(1)  The cultivation, production, or possession of medical marijuana plants must be in full compliance with all applicable provisions of Article XVIII, Section 14 of the Colorado Constitution, and the Medical Marijuana Program, C.R.S. § 25-1.5-106; and 
(2)  Any primary caregiver acting as a home occupation shall conduct such business in accordance with the requirements of home occupations (section 26-14-01 of the code) as same may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  The cultivation, production or possession of marijuana plants for personal use by persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older, as such terms are defined by Article XVIII of Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution shall be allowed in residential structures subject to full compliance with the applicable provisions of Article XVIII of Section 16 of the Colorado Constitution and the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 3-4-14) 
Sec. 70-32. - Cultivation operational regulations. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements set forth herein in section 70-31 of this article, the cultivation, production or possession of marijuana for medical use by a patient, or primary caregiver, or for recreational use by any person twenty-one (21) years of age or older shall be subject to the following conditions. 
(1)  The marijuana plants must be cultivated, produced, processed and possessed within a person's primary residence, as defined in paragraph (a)(9) herein; and 
(2)  The cultivation, production, processing and possession of marijuana plants must not be conducted in an open and public manner meaning it must not be perceptible from the exterior of the primary residence, and such activity shall not cause or create any of the following: 
a.  Unusual odors, smells, fragrances, or other olfactory stimulus detectable by any person with a normal sense of smell upon or within any adjacent unit or property; 
b.  Light pollution, glare, or brightness that unreasonably disturbs others in the use or enjoyment of their property, or constitutes a nuisance; 
c.  Undue vehicular or foot traffic, including excess parking within the residential zone; 
d.  Excessive noise. 
(3)  Marijuana plants shall not be cultivated, produced, processed or possessed in the common areas of a multi-family or attached residential development; and 
(4)  The cultivation, production, processing or possession of marijuana plants shall be limited to the following space limitations within a primary residence as follows: 
a.  For a single-family dwelling unit (group R-3 as defined by the most current international building code adopted by the city), within an enclosed locked, defined, contiguous area not to exceed twelve (12) plants and/or one hundred fifty (150) square feet within such person's primary residence; 
b.  For a multifamily dwelling unit (group R-2 as defined by the most current international building code, adopted by the city), within an enclosed locked, defined, contiguous area not to exceed twelve (12) plants and/or one hundred (100) square feet within such person's primary residence. 
(5)  Marijuana plants shall not be cultivated, produced, processed or possessed in any accessory structure; and 
(6)  The cultivation, production, processing or possession of marijuana plants shall meet the requirements of all adopted city building and life/safety codes; and 
(7)  The use of any compressed flammable gas as a solvent in the extraction of tetrahydrocannabinols or other cannabinoids in a residential setting is prohibited; and 
(8)  Marijuana cultivation lighting shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) watts total for the entire cultivation area within a dwelling. 
(9)  For purposes of this section, "primary residence" means the place that a person, by custom and practice, makes his or her principle domicile and address, and to which the person intends to return following any temporary absence, such as a vacation. Residence is evidenced by actual daily physical presence, use, and occupancy of the primary residence, and the use of the residential address for domestic purposes, such as, but not limited to, sleep, preparation of and partaking of meals, regular mail delivery, vehicle and voter registration, or credit, water and utility billing. A person shall have only one (1) primary residence. A primary residence shall not include accessory buildings. 
(10)  For purposes of this section, "enclosed locked" area means a location within the primary residence accessible only to the person growing the marijuana through one (1) or more locked doors with walls and roofing that must be constructed of solid materials. Such premises must remain secure at all times and any windows must be locked to prevent access by children, visitors or casual passersby. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 3-4-14) 
Chapter 75 - OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-13, adopted May 6, 2014, repealed articles I, II, IV, V, VI and VII in their entirety and reenacted provisions to be designated as §§ 75-100-75-163. Subsequently the city has directed for renumbering of sections as herein set out. Article III has been redesignated as chapter 76. See Code Comparative Table for amendatory history. 
Cross reference- Disturbances in alcoholic beverage establishments, § 10-6; fraudulent use of contractor's license, § 30-23; municipal court, Ch. 65; nuisances, Ch. 70; abandoned personal property other than motor vehicles, Ch. 76. 
State Law reference- Criminal Code, C. R. S. Title 18. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Secs. 75-1-75-99. - Reserved. 
Sec. 75-100. - Definitions. 
(a)  Except where such is otherwise defined within this chapter the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Colorado Criminal Code C.R.S. §§ 18-1-101 et seq., as same may be amended from time: 
(1)  Bodily injury means physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical or mental condition. 
(2)  Conceal means to place or attempt to place out of view in such manner and circumstances as to indicate intent to prevent others from seeing or discovering the presence of the thing concealed. 
(3)  Criminal negligence means when through a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise, a person fails to perceive a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or that a circumstance exists. 
(4)  Deadly weapon means any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, knife, bludgeon, or other weapon, device, instrument, material or substance, whether animate or inanimate, which in the manner it is used or intended to be used is capable of producing death or serious bodily injury. 
(5)  Emergency medical service provider means a member of a public or private emergency medical service agency, whether that person is a volunteer or receives compensation for services rendered as such emergency medical service provider. 
(6)  Intentionally or with intent . All offenses defined in this chapter in which the mental culpability requirement is expressed as "intentionally" or "with intent" are declared to be specific intent offenses. A person acts "intentionally" or "with intent" when a person's conscious objective is to cause the specific result proscribed by the ordinance defining the offense. It is immaterial to the issue of specific intent whether or not the result actually occurred. 
(7)  Knowingly or willfully . All offenses defined in this chapter in which the mental culpability requirement is expressed as "knowingly" or "willfully" are declared to be general intent crimes. A person acts "knowingly" or "willfully" with respect to conduct or to a circumstance described by an ordinance defining an offense when the person is aware that such person's conduct is of such nature or that such circumstance exits. A person acts "knowingly" or "willfully", with respect to a result of such person's conduct, when the person is aware that the person's conduct is practically certain to cause the result. 
(8)  Loiter means to be dilatory, to stand idly around, to linger, delay, or wander about, to remain, abide, or tarry in public places. 
(9)  Peace officer, police officer or law enforcement officer means as defined in C.R.S. §§ 16-2.5-101 and or 16-2.5-105, as amended. 
(10)  Public place means a place to which the public or a substantial number of the public has access, and includes, but is not limited to, highways, transportation facilities, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds, and the common areas of public and private buildings and facilities. 
(11)  Recklessly means when a person consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that a result will occur or that a circumstance exists. 
(12)  Serious bodily injury means bodily injury which involves a substantial risk of death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any part or organ of the body. 
(13)  Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or like, to transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, airplane, truck, trailer, motorcycle, motor scooter, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-100), 5-6-14) 
Secs. 75-102-75-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES-GENERAL 

Sec. 75-120. - Intent. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this chapter not to define as unlawful any conduct which is defined as a felony under the Colorado Criminal Code, as amended, or any succeeding enactment of state law, and this chapter will be so construed, notwithstanding any language contained herein which might otherwise be construed to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-101), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-121. - Affirmative defenses. 
    The affirmative defenses as set forth in the Colorado Criminal Code C.R.S. §§ 18-1-710 et seq., as amended, shall be available as affirmative defenses to prosecutions in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-102), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-122. - Attempts to commit crime. 
(a)  A person commits criminal attempt if, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for commission of an offense, the person engages in conduct constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the offense. A substantial step is any conduct, whether act, omission, or possession, which is strongly corroborative of the actor's purpose to complete the commission of the offense. Factual or legal impossibility of committing the offense is not a defense if the offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the actor believed them to be, nor is it a defense that the crime attempted was actually perpetrated by the accused. 
(b)  A person who engages in conduct intending to aid another to commit an offense commits criminal attempt if the conduct would establish the person's complicity under section 75-123 were the offense committed by the other person, even if the other is not guilty of committing or attempting the offense. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this chapter that defendant abandoned the effort to commit the crime or otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting the complete and voluntary renunciation of criminal intent. The renunciation shall not be deemed voluntary where motivated by fear of imminent discovery of or apprehension for the defendant's criminal conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-103), 5-4-14) 
Sec. 75-123. - Complicity. 
(a)  A person is legally accountable as principal for the behavior of another constituting a criminal offense if, with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense, the person, aids, abets, or advises the other person in planning or committing the offense. 
(b)  It is not a defense to a prosecution under this chapter that the other person whose behavior constitutes a criminal offense was not or could not be prosecuted for the offense. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this chapter that the defendant prevented or attempted to prevent the commission of the underlying offense, under circumstances manifesting the complete and voluntary renunciation of such person's criminal intent. The renunciation shall not be deemed voluntary where motivated by fear of imminent discovery of or apprehension for the defendant's criminal conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-104), 5-4-14) 
Sec. 75-124. - Charging inchoate offenses. 
    It shall be sufficient notice of the charging of an inchoate offense where the complaint states the name and section number of the underlying offense. A defendant shall not be acquitted or a complaint dismissed solely on the ground that the prosecution's theory of the defendant's guilt relies upon an inchoate offense which has not been expressly charged. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-105), 5-6-14) 
Secs. 75-125-75-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 

Sec. 75-140. - Assault. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit assault. A person commits assault by: 
(1)  Knowingly or recklessly causing bodily injury to another person or with criminal negligence causing bodily injury to another person by means of a deadly weapon; or 
(2)  With intent to harass, annoy, threaten, or alarm another person whom the actor knows or reasonably should know to be a peace officer, a firefighter, an emergency medical care provider, or an emergency medical service provider, causes such person to come into contact with blood, seminal fluid, urine, feces, saliva, mucus, vomit, or toxic, caustic, or hazardous material by any means, including throwing, tossing, or expelling the fluid or material. 
(b)  "Emergency medical care provider" means a doctor, intern, nurse, nurse's aide, physician's assistant, ambulance attendant or operator, air ambulance pilot, paramedic, or any other member of a hospital or health care facility staff or security force who is involved in providing emergency medical care at a hospital or health care facility, or in an air ambulance or ambulance as defined in C.R.S. § 25-3.5-103(1) and (1.5). 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-106), 5-6-14; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 1, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 75-141. - Menacing; without deadly weapon. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly place or attempt to place another person in fear of imminent serious bodily injury by any threat or physical action; provided, however, that if such is with the use of a deadly weapon, then this section shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-107), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-142. - Reckless endangerment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly engage in conduct that creates substantial risk of serious bodily injury to another person. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-108), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-143. - Harassment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit harassment. A person commits harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm another person, he or she: 
(1)  Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches or subjects a person to physical contact; 
(2)  In a public place directs obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to or at another person; 
(3)  Follows a person in or about a public place; 
(4)  Initiates communication with a person, anonymously or otherwise by telephone, telephone network, data network, text message, instant message, computer, computer network, or computer system in a manner intended to harass or threaten bodily injury or property damage, or makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal by telephone, or computer, computer network, or computer system that is obscene; 
(5)  Makes a telephone call or causes a telephone to ring repeatedly, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate conversation; 
(6)  Makes repeated communications at inconvenient hours that invade the privacy of another and interfere in the use and enjoyment of another's home or private residence or other private property; or 
(7)  Repeatedly insults, taunts, challenges or makes communications in offensively coarse language to another in a manner likely to provoke a violent or disorderly response. 
(b)  Any act prohibited by subsections (4) and (5) of this section may be deemed to have occurred or to have been committed at the place at which the telephone call, electronic mail, or other electronic communication was either made or received. 
(c)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the term "obscene" means a patently offensive description of ultimate sexual acts or solicitation to commit ultimate sexual acts, whether or not said ultimate sexual acts are normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including masturbation, cunnilingus, fellatio, analingus, or excretory functions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-109), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-144. - False imprisonment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly confine or detain another without the other's consent and without proper legal authority. This section shall not apply to a peace officer acting in good faith within the scope of his or her duties or where the person uses force or threat of force to confine or detain a person or where a person confines or detains a person for twelve (12) hours or longer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-110), 5-6-14) 
Secs. 75-145-75-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 75-160. - Theft. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit theft. A person commits theft when such person knowingly obtains, retains or exercises control over anything of value of another without authorization or by threat or deception; or receives, loans money by pawn or pledge on, or disposes of anything of value or belonging to another that he or she knows or believes to have been stolen, and: 
(1)  Intends to deprive the other person permanently of the use or benefit of the thing of value; 
(2)  Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the thing of value in such a manner as to deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefits; 
(3)  Uses, conceals, or abandons the thing of value intending that such use, concealment, or abandonment will deprive the other person permanently of its use or benefit; or 
(4)  Demands any consideration to which he or she is not legally entitled as a condition of restoring the thing of value to the other person; or 
(5)  Knowingly retains the thing of value more than seventy-two (72) hours after the agreed-upon time for return in any lease or hire agreement. 
(b)  This section shall not apply when the aggregate value of the items taken in any one (1) criminal episode exceeds the maximum dollar amount for a class 1 misdemeanor as set forth in C.R.S. § 18-4-401(2)(e), as amended, nor where the item taken is a motor vehicle, trade secret or credit device. Further, this section shall not apply where the theft is committed by fraudulent use of a credit device. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-111), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-161. - Shoplifting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit the crime of shoplifting. A person commits the crime of shoplifting when such person knowingly takes possession of any un-purchased goods, wares, or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or mercantile establishment, with the intention of converting such goods, wares or merchandise to his or her own use, without paying the purchase price thereof. 
(b)  If any person willfully conceals un-purchased goods, wares, or merchandise owned or held by and offered or displayed for sale by any store or any other mercantile establishment, whether the concealment is on his or her self or otherwise and whether on or off the premises of said store or mercantile establishment, such concealment constitutes prima facie evidence that the person intended to commit the crime of shoplifting. 
(c)  If any person triggers an alarm or a theft detection device as defined in C.R.S. § 18-4-417(2), as amended, or conceals upon his or her person or otherwise carries away any un-purchased goods, wares, or merchandise held or owned by any store or mercantile establishment, the merchant or any employee thereof or any peace officer, acting in good faith and upon probable cause based upon reasonable grounds therefor, may detain and question such person, in a reasonable manner for the purpose of ascertaining whether the person has committed theft. Such questioning of a person by a merchant, merchant's employee, or peace or police officer does not render the merchant, merchant's employee, or peace officer civilly or criminally liable for slander, false arrest, false imprisonment, malicious prosecution, or unlawful detention. 
(d)  This section shall not apply where the value of the un-purchased goods, wares or merchandise exceeds the maximum dollar amount for a class 1 misdemeanor as set forth in C.R.S. § 18-4-401(2)(e), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-112), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-161.5. - Theft detection devices prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly manufacture, distribute, or sell a theft detection shielding device or a theft detection deactivating device with the knowledge that some person intends to use the device in the commission of an offense involving theft. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a theft detection shielding device or a theft detection deactivating device with the intent to use the device possessed, or with the knowledge that some person intends to use the device possessed, in the commission of an offense involving theft. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly deactivate or remove a theft detection device or any component thereof in any store or mercantile establishment without authorization prior to purchase. 
(d)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Theft detection deactivating device" means any tool, instrument, mechanism, or other article adapted, designed, engineered, used, or operated to inactivate, incapacitate, or remove a theft detection device without authorization. "Theft detection deactivating device" includes, but is not limited to, jumper wires, wire cutters, and electronic article surveillance removal devices. 
(2)  "Theft detection device" means an electronic or magnetic mechanism, machine, apparatus, tag, or article designed and operated for the purpose of detecting the unauthorized removal of merchandise from a store or mercantile establishment. 
(3)  "Theft detection shielding device" means any tool, instrument, mechanism, or article adapted, designed, engineered, used, or operated to avoid detection by a theft detection device during the commission of an offense involving theft. "Theft detection shielding device" includes, but is not limited to, foil-lined or otherwise modified clothing, bags, purses, or containers capable of and for the sole purpose of avoiding detection devices. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, § 2(75-112.5), 2-2-16) 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 2016-02, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, enacted provisions to be designated as § 75-112.5. In order to maintain the categorical standards of this Code, said new provisions have been redesignated as 75-161.5. 
Sec. 75-162. - Criminal mischief. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly damage the real or personal property of one (1) or more other persons, including property owned by the person jointly with another person, or property owned by the person in which another person has a possessory or proprietary interest. 
(b)  This section shall not apply where the aggregate damage to the real or personal property exceeds the maximum dollar amount for a class 1 misdemeanor, as set forth in C.R.S. § 18-4-501, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-113), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-163. - Tampering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with the property of another with the intent to cause injury, inconvenience, or annoyance to that person or to another or for any person to knowingly make an unauthorized connection with property of a utility. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section "tamper" means to interfere with something improperly, to meddle with, or to make unwarranted alterations in its condition. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-114), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-164. - Joyriding. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and constitute joyriding for any person to drive or take any motor vehicle without the consent of the owner or lawful possessor thereof, with the intent of temporarily depriving the owner or possessor of the use of the same, or temporarily making use thereof. 
(b)  If the person who in the course of so driving or taking the motor vehicle does one (1) or more of the following, joyriding has not occurred: 
(1)  Retains possession or control of the motor vehicle for more than twenty-four (24) hours; 
(2)  Attempts to alter or disguise or alters or disguises the appearance of the motor vehicle; 
(3)  Attempts to alter or remove or alters or removes the vehicle identification number; 
(4)  Uses the motor vehicle in the commission of a crime other than a traffic offense; 
(5)  Causes five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more property damage in the exercise or control of the motor vehicle; 
(6)  Causes bodily injury to another person while he is in the exercise or control of the motor vehicle; 
(7)  Removes the motor vehicle from this state for a period of time in excess of twelve (12) hours; or 
(8)  Unlawfully attaches or otherwise displays in or upon the motor vehicle license plates other than those officially issued for the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-115), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-165. - Trespass. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person without legal authority to enter or remain in or upon any premises. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-116), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-166. - Fires prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly start or maintain a fire or cause an explosion on his or her own property or that of another, including any property owned, leased or controlled by the city, such as any park, trail, golf course, athletic field, recreation area, open space, or streets or rights-of-way where such fire places another in danger of death or serious bodily injury or places any building or occupied structure in danger of damage or destruction. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, erect, build or construct a fireplace, stove or other fire container on any property owned, leased or controlled by the city, including but not limited to any park, trail, golf course, athletic field, recreation area, open space, or streets or rights-of-way except as authorized by the city. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Building means any structure which has the capacity to contain and is designed for the shelter of persons, animals, or property, and includes a trailer or other vehicle or place adapted for overnight accommodations of persons or animals, or for carrying on of business therein, whether or not a person or animal is actually present: 
(2)  Occupied structure means any area, place, facility or enclosure which, for particular purposes, may be used by persons or animals upon occasion, whether or not included within the definition of building set forth in this section, and which in fact is occupied by a person or animal and known by the defendant to be occupied at the time of the offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-117), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-167. - Graffiti prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings as ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Graffiti shall mean any marking, symbol, slogan, logo, wording, phrase, name or other extraneous painting, drawing, scratching, etching, inscribing or writing by use of paint, spray, markers, ink, glass cutting or etching tool or cream, or other method applied to public or private property without the consent of the owner, and which is not commercial or political advertising. 
    Minor shall mean any person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Prohibited graffiti material shall mean any can of spray paint, spray paint nozzle, broad-tipped marker pen, paint pen, glass-cutting tool, or glass-etching tool or cream which goods are further defined herein as: 
(1)  Broad-tipped marker pen means a felt-tip marker, or similar implement containing a fluid which is not water-soluble with a tip that exceeds one-quarter ( 1/4; ) inch in width. 
(2)  Paint pens means a tube, marker, or other pen-like instrument with a tip of one-quarter (1/4) inch in diameter or less that contains paint or a similar fluid and an internal paint agitator. 
(3)  Spray paint means any aerosol container that is made or adapted for the purpose of applying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. 
(4)  Spray paint nozzle means a nozzle designed to deliver a spray of paint of a particular width or flow from a can of spray paint. 
(b)  Unlawful placement upon property. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any graffiti upon any public or private property. 
(c)  Possession prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any minor, except a minor under the direct supervision of the minor's parent, legal guardian, school teacher, or a law enforcement officer in the performance of such person's duty, to purchase, procure, or possess, or attempt to purchase, procure, or possess, any prohibited graffiti material. 
(2)  It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this subsection that the minor possessing the material was: 
a.  Within the minor's home; 
b.  In the course of the minor's employment; or 
c.  Upon real property with permission from the owner, occupant, or person having lawful control of such property, which person may also lawfully possess such materials. 
(d)  Sale prohibited to minor. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent, legal guardian, school teacher, or law enforcement officer in the performance of such person's duty, to sell, exchange, give, deliver, loan, or otherwise furnish or cause to permit to be sold, exchanged, given, delivered, loaned or otherwise furnished any prohibited graffiti material to any minor unless the minor is accompanied by the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
(2)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the employer has adopted and enforces a written policy against selling prohibited graffiti materials to minors, has informed its employees of the applicable laws regarding the sale of prohibited graffiti materials to minors, requires that employees verify the age of customers who desire to purchase prohibited graffiti materials and has established and imposes sanctions upon its employees for noncompliance. 
(e)  Signs required. It shall be unlawful for any person who sells or offers to sell any prohibited graffiti material to fail to display a warning sign. Such warning sign shall be displayed in a prominent place within the premises at all times and shall have a minimum height of fourteen (14) inches and a width of eleven (11) inches, with lettering of at least one-half (1/2) inch in height and shall read as follows: 
WARNING 
IT IS ILLEGAL TO SELL TO ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE ANY SPRAY PAINT, SPRAY PAINT NOZZLE, BROAD-TIPPED MARKER PEN, PAINT PEN, GLASS-CUTTING TOOL, OR GLASS-ETCHING TOOL OR INSTRUMENT UNLESS SUCH PERSON IS ACCOMPANIED BY THEIR PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN. 
(f)  Display and storage. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, conducts, operates, or manages a business where prohibited graffiti materials are sold or who sells or offers for sale any prohibited graffiti material to store or display, or cause to be stored or displayed prohibited graffiti material in an area that is accessible to the public without employee assistance. This subsection shall not be construed to preclude or prohibit the storage or display of prohibited graffiti material in an area viewable by the public so long as such items are not accessible to the public without employee assistance. 
(g)  Contributing to unlawful possession. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer in the performance of his/her duty, to knowingly allow a minor to possess prohibited graffiti materials upon any public or private real property. 
(2)  It shall be an affirmative defense to charges under this subsection that the minor possessing the material was: 
a.  Within the minor's home; 
b.  In the course of the minor's employment; or 
c.  Upon real property with permission from the owner, occupant, or person having lawful control of such property, which person may also lawfully possess such materials. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or any person having lawful possession of any property to fail to remove or eradicate graffiti from such property within fourteen (14) days of defacement of such property by graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-118), 5-6-14) 
Secs. 75-168-75-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY AND DISRUPTION OF COMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 75-180. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit disorderly conduct. A person commits disorderly conduct when a person intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly: 
(1)  Makes a coarse and obviously offensive utterance, gesture, or display in a public place and the utterance, gesture, or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(2)  Makes unreasonable noise in a public place or near a private residence that the person has no right to occupy; 
(3)  Fights with another in a public place except in an amateur or professional contest of athletic skill; 
(4)  Not being a peace officer, discharges a firearm in a public place except when engaged in lawful target practice or hunting; or 
(5)  Not being a peace officer, displays a deadly weapon, displays any article used or fashioned in a manner to cause a person to reasonably believe that the object is a deadly weapon, or represents verbally or otherwise that he or she is armed with a deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (a)(1) of this section that the person had significant provocation for his or her abusive or threatening conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-119), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-181. - Obstructing highway or other passageway. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to obstruct a highway or other passageway. A person commits the crime of obstruction of a highway or other passageway, when any person: 
(1)  If without legal privilege, to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly: obstruct a highway, street, roadway, sidewalk, railway, transit way, waterway, building entrance, elevator, escalator, aisle, stairway, or hallway to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access or any other place used for the passage or conveyance of persons or vehicles, whether the obstruction arises from defendant's acts alone or from his or her acts and the acts of others: or 
(2)  Disobeys a reasonable request or order to move issued by a person the individual knows to be a peace officer, firefighter or person with authority to control the use of the premises to prevent obstruction of a highway or passageway. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "obstruct" or "obstruction" means to render impassable, or to render passage unreasonably inconvenient or hazardous. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-120), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-182. - Camping prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person to camp upon public property without the express written consent of an authorized official of the entity having ownership, management, or control of such property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a nuisance for any person to camp upon private property without the consent of the property owner or authorized agent. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section "camp" means to reside or dwell temporarily with shelter. The term shelter includes, but is not limited to, a tent, tarpaulin, lean-to, sleeping bag, bedroll, blankets or any other form of protection from the elements other than clothing. The term "reside or dwell" includes, but is not limited to, activities such as eating, sleeping or the storage of personal property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-121), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-183. - Loitering. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter with the intent to violate any provision of this chapter, or the Colorado Criminal Code. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter with intent to interfere with or disrupt a school program or with intent to interfere with or endanger school children in a school building or on school grounds or within one hundred (100) feet of school grounds when persons under the age of eighteen (18) years are present in the building or on the grounds, where such person does not have any reason or relationship involving custody for, or responsibility for any student or any other specific, legitimate reason for being present at such location, and has been asked to leave by a school administrator or his or her representative or by a peace officer. 
(b)  Reasonable grounds; duty of peace officer. 
(1)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether reasonable grounds for belief have arisen that such person is loitering is the fact that such person: 
a.  Takes flight upon appearance of a peace officer; 
b.  Refuses to identify him or herself; 
c.  Manifestly endeavors to conceal him or herself or any object; 
d.  Not being duly authorized security personnel or a peace officer, systematically checks the means to access to buildings or vehicles in the immediate area; or 
e.  Maintains a continuous presence in close proximity to a place where a reasonable peace officer would conclude that such person's activity manifests a high probability of activity or intention to engage in activity in violation of this chapter, or any criminal provision of the Colorado Criminal Code. 
(2)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impractical, a peace officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm otherwise warranted, or explain any circumstances giving rise to reasonable grounds for belief that such person is loitering by requesting him or her to: 
a.  Identify him or herself; and 
b.  Explain his or her presence and conduct. 
(c)  Standard for conviction. No person shall be convicted of an offense under subsection (a) of this section if the peace officer did not comply with subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section, or if at trial, that the explanation of presence and conduct given by the defendant was determined truthful by the trier of fact, and, under the circumstances, would have dispelled the reasonableness of the peace officer's belief that the defendant was engaging in unlawful activity or would have disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-122), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-184. - Curfew. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor (person under the age of eighteen (18) years) to loiter or remain upon any public street, alley or other public place after the time of 11:00 p.m. or prior to the time of 5:00 a.m.; provided, however, that on Friday and Saturday the prohibited hours shall be from 12:00 midnight to 5:00 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person twenty-one (21) years of age or older having care and custody of such minor to allow such minor to loiter or remain upon any public street, alley or other public place after the time of 11:00 p.m. or prior to the time of 5:00 a.m.; provided, however, that on Friday and Saturday the prohibited hours shall be from 12:00 midnight to 5:00 a.m. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offenses described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section that the minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; 
(2)  Is traveling to or from a place of employment or engaged in lawful employment without a detour or otherwise stopping; 
(3)  Is attending or traveling to or from a supervised activity sponsored by a school, civic, religious or other recognized public organization; 
(4)  Involved in the exercise of First Amendment rights protected by the United States and/or state constitutions; 
(5)  Engaged in interstate travel; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's parents' or legal guardian's residence; 
(7)  Involved in an emergency situation. For the purposes of this section, the term "emergency" shall mean those situations where life or property is in imminent danger and the prompt summoning of aid or escape is essential; or 
(8)  Married or had the disabilities of being a minor lawfully removed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-123), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-185. - Hindering transportation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder transportation. A person commits the offense of hindering transportation when such person knowingly and without lawful authority forcibly stops and hinders the operation of any vehicle used in providing transportation services of any kind to the public or to any person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-124), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-186. - Throwing dangerous missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, or recklessly throw, shoot or project any stone, arrow, pellet, dart, ball bearing, or other object at or against any person, animal, building, structure, personal property or fixture or vehicle of another, except that the provisions of this section shall not apply to persons throwing, projecting, or shooting any other object at any animal in order to protect his or her person or property or the person or property of another from physical injury, or for recreational purposes in such a manner that no unreasonable risk of harm is presented to any person, or to the real or personal property of any person. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-125), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-187. - Obstruction of telephone service. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct telephone service. A person commits obstruction of telephone service if the person knowingly prevents, obstructs, or delays, by any means whatsoever, the sending, transmission, conveyance, or delivery in this state of any message, communication, or report by or through any telephone line, wire, cable, or cellular service or other facility or any cordless, wireless, electronic, mechanical or other device. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-126), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-188. - Computer offenses. 
(a)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  Authorization means the express consent of a person which may include an employee's job description to use said person's computer, computer network, computer program, computer software, computer system, property, or services as those terms are defined in this section. 
(2)  Computer means an electronic, magnetic, optical, electromagnetic, or other data processing device which performs logical, arithmetic, memory, or storage functions by the manipulations of electronic, magnetic, radio wave, or light wave impulses, and includes all input, output, processing, storage, software, or communication facilities which are connected or related to or operating in conjunction with such a device. 
(3)  Computer network means the interconnection of communication lines (including microwave or other means of electronic communication) with a computer through remote terminals, or a complex consisting of two (2) or more interconnected computers. 
(4)  Computer program means a series of instructions or statements, in a form acceptable to a computer, which permits the functioning of a computer system in a manner designed to provide appropriate products from such computer system. 
(5)  Computer software means computer programs, procedures, and associated documentation concerned with the operation of a computer system. 
(6)  Computer system means a set of related, connected or unconnected, computer equipment, devices, and software. 
(6.3)  Damage includes, but is not limited to, any impairment to the integrity of availability of information, data, computer program, computer software, or services on or via a computer, computer network, or computer system or part thereof. 
(6.7)  Exceed authorized access means to access a computer with authorization and to use such access to obtain or alter information, data, computer program, or computer software that the person is not entitled to so obtain or alter. 
(7)  Financial instrument means any check, draft, money order, certificate of deposit, letter of credit, bill of exchange, credit card, debit card, or marketable security. 
(8)  Property includes, but is not limited to, financial instruments, information, including electronically produced data, and computer software and programs in either machine or human readable form, and any other tangible or intangible item of value. 
(9)  Services includes, but is not limited to, computer time, data processing, and storage functions. 
(10)  To use means to instruct, communicate with, store data in, retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer, computer system, or computer network. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit computer crime. A person commits computer crime if the person knowingly: 
(1)  Accesses a computer, computer network, or computer system or any part thereof without authorization; exceeds authorized access to a computer, computer network, or computer system or any part thereof; or uses a computer, computer network, or computer system or any part thereof without authorization or in excess of authorized access; or 
(2)  Accesses any computer, computer network, or computer system, or any part thereof for the purpose of devising or executing any scheme or artifice to defraud; or 
(3)  Accesses any computer, computer network, or computer system, or any part thereof to obtain, by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises, money; property; services; passwords or similar information through which a computer, computer network, or computer system or any part thereof may be accessed; or other thing of value; or 
(4)  Accesses any computer, computer network, or computer system, or any part thereof to commit theft; or 
(5)  Without authorization or in excess of authorized access alters, damages, interrupts, or causes the interruption or impairment of the proper functioning of, or causes any damage to, any computer, computer network, computer system, computer software, program, application, documentation, or data contained in such computer, computer network, or computer system or any part thereof; or 
(6)  Causes the transmission of a computer program, software, information, code, data, or command by means of a computer, computer network, or computer system or any part thereof with the intent to cause damage to or to cause the interruption or impairment of the proper functioning of or that actually causes damage to or the interruption or impairment of the proper functioning of any computer, computer network, computer system, or part thereof; or 
(7)  Uses or causes to be used a software application that runs automated tasks over the internet to access a computer, computer network, or computer system, or any part thereof, that circumvents or disables any electronic queues, waiting periods, or other technological measure intended by the seller to limit the number of event tickets that may be purchased by any single person in an on-line event ticket sale as defined in C.R.S. § 6-1-720. 
(c)  This section shall not apply where the loss, damage, value of services, or thing of value taken or cost of restoration or repair in any one (1) criminal episode exceeds the maximum dollar amount for a class one misdemeanor as set forth in C.R.S. § 18-4-401(2)(e), as amended. 
(1)  If computer crime is committed to obtain event tickets, each ticket purchased shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Paragraph (7) of subsection (b) of this section shall not prohibit the resale of tickets in a secondary market by a person other than the event sponsor or promoter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-127), 5-6-14) 
Secs. 75-189-75-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES RELATED TO GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS 

Sec. 75-200. - Resisting arrest. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly prevent or attempt to prevent any police officer acting under color of his or her official authority from effecting an arrest of the actor or another by: 
(1)  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the police officer or another; 
(2)  Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing bodily injury to the police officer or another. 
(b)  It is no defense to a prosecution under this section that the police officer was attempting to make an arrest which in fact was unlawful, if the officer was acting under color of his or her official authority, and was not resorting to unreasonable or excessive force giving rise to the right of self-defense. A police officer acts under color of his or her official authority when, in the regular course of assigned duties, he or she is called upon to make, and does make, a judgment in good faith based upon surrounding facts and circumstances that an arrest should be made by him or her. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-128), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-201. - Obstruction of peace officer, code enforcement officer, animal control officer, firefighter, emergency medical services provider, rescue specialist or volunteer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct a peace officer, firefighter, emergency medical services provider, rescue specialist, code enforcement officer, animal control officer or volunteer when, by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference, or an obstacle, such person knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders the enforcement of any penal law or the preservation of the peace by a peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority; knowingly obstructs, impairs, or hinders the prevention, control, or abatement of fire by a firefighter, acting under color of his or her official authority; knowingly obstructs, impairs, or hinders the administration of medical treatment or emergency assistance by an emergency medical service provider or rescue specialist, acting under color of his or her official authority; or knowingly obstructs, impairs, or hinders the administration of emergency care or emergency assistance by a volunteer, acting in good faith to render such care or assistance without compensation at the place of an emergency or accident. 
(b)  To assure that animals used in law enforcement or fire prevention activities are protected from harm, a person commits obstructing a peace officer or firefighter when, by using or threatening to use violence, force, physical interference, or an obstacle, he or she knowingly obstructs, impairs or hinders any such animal. 
(c)  It is not a defense to a prosecution under this section that the peace officer was acting in an illegal manner, if the peace officer was acting under color of his or her official authority. A peace officer acts "under color of his or her official authority" if, in the regular course of assigned duties, he or she makes a judgment in good faith based on surrounding facts and circumstances that he or she must act to enforce the law or preserve the peace. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  "Rescue specialist" means a member of a public or private rescue agency, whether that person is a volunteer or receives compensation for services rendered as such rescue specialist. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-129), 5-6-13) 
Sec. 75-202. - False reporting to authorities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly: 
(1)  Cause by any means, including but not limited to activation, a false alarm of fire or other emergency or a false emergency exit alarm to sound or to be transmitted to or within a fire department, ambulance service, law enforcement agency, or any other government agency responsible for emergencies involving danger to life or property; or 
(2)  Prevent by any means, including, but not limited to, deactivation, a legitimate fire alarm, emergency exit alarm, or other emergency alarm from sounding or from being transmitted to or within a fire department, ambulance service, law enforcement agency, or any other government agency responsible for emergencies involving danger to life or property; or 
(3)  Make a report or knowingly cause the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities of a crime or other incident within their official concern when he or she knows that it did not occur; or 
(4)  Make a report or knowingly cause the transmission of a report to law enforcement authorities to furnish information relating to an offense or other incident within their official concern when he or she knows that he or she has no such information or knows that the information is false; or 
(5)  Knowingly provide false identifying information to law enforcement authorities. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "identifying information" means a person's name, address, birth date, social security number or driver's license or Colorado identification number. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-130), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-203. - Refusing to aid a police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, upon command by a person known to him or her to be a police officer to unreasonably refuse or fail to aid the police officer in effecting an arrest, securing the custody of an arrestee, or preventing the commission by another of any offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-131), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-204. - Impersonation of police officer or firefighter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, except upon the authorization of the city administrator or administrators designee for any person other than a police officer or firefighter of the city to wear the uniform, or any insignia of a police officer or firefighter of the city or any colorable imitation of such as adopted and worn by police officers or firefighters of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a police officer of firefighter of the city, to, in any manner, represent him or herself to another as a police officer or firefighter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-132), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-205. - Counterfeit insignias. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, imitate, or cause to be counterfeited, or imitated, any insignia of office used by the police or fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-133), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-206. - Impersonation of city official, employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not a city official or city employee to falsely represent him or herself to be a city official or an employee of the city or to perform any act in the false capacity as a city official or employee. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-134), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-207. - Unlawful interference-Public buildings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to so conduct him or herself at or in any public building owned, operated or controlled by the city, the state or any of its political subdivisions, as to willfully deny to any public official, public employee or any invitee on such premises, the lawful rights of such official, employee or invitee to enter, use the facilities of or leave any such public building. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person at or in any such public building to willfully impede any public official or employee in the lawful performance of duties or activities through the use of restraint, coercion or intimidation or by force and violence or threat thereof. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully refuse or fail to leave any such public building upon being requested to do so by an administrative officer or such officer's designee charged with maintaining order in such public building, if such person has committed, is committing, threatens to commit or incites others to commit any act which did, or would if completed, disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures or functions being carried on in such public building. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any meeting or session conducted by any judicial, legislative or administrative body or official at or in any public building to willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such meeting or session by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other such areas designated for the use of the body of official conducting such meeting or session, or by any act designed to intimidate, coerce or hinder any member of such body or official engaged in the performance of the duties of such meeting or session. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person, by any act of intrusion into the chamber or other areas designated for the use of any executive body or official act or in any public building, to willfully impede, disrupt or hinder the normal proceedings of such body or official. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-135), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-208. - Interference with staff, faculty or students of educational institutions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person on or near the premises, or facilities of any educational institution, to willfully deny to students, school officials, employees, and invitees: 
(1)  Lawful freedom of movement on the premises; 
(2)  Lawful use of the property or facilities of the institution; 
(3)  The right of lawful ingress and egress to the institution's physical facilities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person on the premises of any educational institution, or at or in any building or other facility being used by any educational institution, to willfully impede the staff or faculty of such institution in the lawful performance of their duties or willfully impede a student of the institution in the lawful pursuit of his educational activities through the use of restraint, abduction, coercion, or intimidation or when force and violence are present or threatened. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully refuse or fail to leave the property of or any building, or other facility, used by any educational institution, upon being requested to do so by the chief administrative officer, his designee charged with maintaining order on the school premises and in its facilities, or a dean of such educational institution, if such person is committing, threatens to commit, or incites others to commit any act which would disrupt, impair, interfere with, or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures, or functions of the institution. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense that the defendant was exercising his or her right to lawful assembly and peaceful and orderly petition for the redress of grievances, including any labor dispute between an educational institution and its employees, any contractor or subcontractor, or any employee thereof. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make or convey to another person a credible threat to cause death or to cause bodily injury with a deadly weapon against: 
(1)  A person the actor knows or believes to be a student, school official, or employee of an educational institution; or 
(2)  An invitee who is on the premises of an educational institution. 
(3)  For purposes of this subsection, "credible threat" means a threat or physical action that would cause a reasonable person to be in fear of bodily injury with a deadly weapon or death. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-136), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-209. - Obstructing government operations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally obstruct, impair, or hinder the performance of a governmental function by a public servant, by using or threatening to use violence, force, or physical interference or obstacle. 
(1)  It shall be an affirmative defense that: 
a.  The obstruction, impairment, or hindrance was of unlawful action by a public servant; or 
b.  The obstruction, impairment, or hindrance was of the making of an arrest; or 
c.  The obstruction, impairment, or hindrance of a governmental function was by lawful activities in connection with a labor dispute with the government. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-137), 5-6-14) 
Secs. 75-210-75-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY 

Sec. 75-220. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Acts. It is unlawful for any person knowingly to perform any of the following in a public place or place within public view: 
(1)  An act of sexual intercourse; or 
(2)  A lewd exposure of a person's intimate parts, which means the external genitalia, or the perineum, or the anus, or the buttocks, or the pubis, or a woman's breast done with the intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of any person; or 
(3)  A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person; or 
(4)  A knowing exposure of the person's genitals to the view of a person under circumstances in which such conduct is likely to cause affront or alarm to the other person; or 
(5)  Urination or defecation in any public or private place other than in or upon a toilet facility provided for such purpose. 
(b)  Affirmative defense to prosecution. It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section: 
(1)  That a person who has exposed her breast had the consent or assent of all persons who viewed or may have viewed such act. Persons who utilize public places or patronize businesses where they know or should know that such will be exposed shall be deemed to have given their assent to such conduct. 
(2)  That the person exposing her breast was nursing an infant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-138), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-221. - Prostitution prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in prostitution. A person engages in prostitution when the person performs, offers, or agrees to perform any act of sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation or anal intercourse with any person other than such person's spouse in exchange for money or other thing of value. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-139), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-222. - Soliciting for prostitution. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit for prostitution. A person solicits for prostitution if the person: 
(1)  Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution; or 
(2)  Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of prostitution; or 
(3)  Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for the purpose of prostitution. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-140), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-223. - Pandering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pander. A person panders when, for money or other thing of value, the person knowingly arranges a situation in which a person may practice prostitution. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-141), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-224. - Keeping a place of prostitution. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a place of prostitution. Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any premises which offers seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution, keeps a place for prostitution if the person: 
(1)  Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution; or 
(2)  Permits the continued use of such place for the purpose of prostitution after becoming aware of facts or circumstances from which the person should reasonably know that the place is being used for purposes of prostitution. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-142), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-225. - Patronizing a prostitute. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to patronize a prostitute. Any person who performs any of the following patronizes a prostitute: 
(1)  Engages in an act of sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation or anal intercourse with a prostitute; or 
(2)  Enters or remains in a place of prostitution with the intent to engage in an act of sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation or anal intercourse with a prostitute. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-143), 5-6-14) 
Secs. 75-226-75-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING DRUGS, ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO 
DIVISION 1. - DRUG OFFENSES 

Sec. 75-240. - Possession of marijuana. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall mean as set forth unless the context specifically specifies otherwise: 
(1)  Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. 
Marijuana does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plan, which is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. 
(2)  Marijuana products means concentrated marijuana products and marijuana products that are comprised of marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments and tinctures. 
(3)  Openly means occurring or existing in a manner that is unconcealed, undisguised or obvious. 
(4)  Publicly means occurring or existing in a public place, or occurring or existing in any outdoor location where the consumption of marijuana is clearly observable by the naked eye from a public place. 
(5)  Public place means a place to which the public or a substantial number of the public have access, and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, and highways, transportation and recreation facilities, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds and the common areas of public and private buildings or facilities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one (1) ounce or less of marijuana or marijuana products unless such person is twenty-one (21) years of age or older or otherwise permitted by law to possess marijuana or marijuana products. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except as specifically authorized by law to: 
(1)  Sell one (1) ounce or less of marijuana or marijuana products to any person, or 
(2)  Permit the transfer of marijuana or marijuana products with or without remuneration to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, or 
(3)  Permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to purchase, possess, use, transport, grow or consume marijuana or marijuana products. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Openly and publicly consume marijuana, or 
(2)  Possess, use, sell, grow, distribute, display or consume marijuana or marijuana products, 
upon or within any park, athletic field, playground, recreation area, golf course, aquatic center, camp ground, open space, trail, parking lot, or building or facility, owned, occupied or controlled by the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume, use, display, transfer, or distribute marijuana within one thousand (1,000) feet of any public or private elementary school, middle school, junior high school or high school when such person is upon any street, sidewalk or other property owned or controlled by the city. 
(f)  It shall not be an offense under subsection (d)(1) of this section if the consumption of marijuana is occurring on private residential property behind the rear building line of the principal structure and the person consuming the marijuana is: 
(1)  An owner of the property, or 
(2)  A person who has a leasehold interest in the property, or 
(3)  Any other person who has been granted express or implied permission to consume marijuana on the property by the owner or lessee of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-144), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-241. - Open marijuana container-Motor vehicle prohibited. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall mean as follows unless otherwise specified: 
(1)  Motor vehicle shall mean a vehicle driven or drawn by mechanical power and manufactured primarily for use on public highways but does not include a vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails. 
(2)  Motor home means a vehicle designed to provide temporary living quarters and which is built into, an integral part of or a permanent attachment to, a motor vehicle chassis or van. 
(3)  Open marijuana container means a receptacle or marijuana accessory that contains any amount of marijuana and: 
a.  That is open or has a broken seal; 
b.  The contents of which are partially removed; or 
c.  There is evidence that marijuana has been consumed within the motor vehicle. 
(4)  Passenger area means the area designed to seat the driver and passengers, including seating behind the driver, while a motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in his or her seating position, including, but not limited to, the glove compartment. 
(5)  Trailer coach means a wheeled vehicle having an overall length, excluding towing gear and bumpers, of not less than twenty-six (26) feet, without motive power, that is designed and generally and commonly used for occupancy by persons for residential purposes, in temporary locations, and that may occasionally be drawn over the public highways by a motor vehicle and is licensed as a vehicle. 
(b)  Except as otherwise permitted in paragraph (1) of this subsection (b), a person while in the passenger area of a motor vehicle that is on a public street or roadway, or the right-of-way of a public street or roadway may not knowingly: 
(1)  Use or consume marijuana; or 
(2)  Have in his or her possession an open marijuana container. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Passengers, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, located in the passenger area of a motor vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of persons for compensation; 
(2)  The possession by a passenger, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, of an open marijuana container in the living quarters of a motor home, or trailer coach; 
(3)  The possession of an open marijuana container in the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk; or 
(4)  The possession of an open marijuana container in an area not normally occupied by the driver of a passenger in a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-145), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-242. - Drug paraphernalia definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall mean as set forth unless the context specifically specifies otherwise: 
(1)  Controlled substance means a drug, substance or immediate precursor included in Schedules I through V as set forth in the Uniform Controlled Substances Act of 2013 (C.R.S. Section 18-18-101 et seq.) as same may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance. The term "drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances. 
b.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
c.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining cannabis. 
d.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
e.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
f.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
g.  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
1.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
2.  Water pipes; 
3.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
4.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
5.  Roach clips; defined as objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
6.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
7.  Chamber pipes; 
8.  Carburetor pipes; 
9.  Electric pipes; 
10.  Air driven pipes; 
11.  Chillums; 
12.  Bongs; or 
13.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(3)  Marijuana accessories , as defined in Section 16 of Article XVIII of the Colorado Constitution and used in this section means any equipment, products, or materials of any kind that are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, composting, manufacturing, compounded, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, vaporizing, or containing marijuana, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
(4)  Drug paraphernalia does not include marijuana accessories if possessed or used by any person, twenty-one (21) years of age or older or who is otherwise lawfully permitted to possess or use marijuana. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-146), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-243. - Possession, manufacture, sale or delivery of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  [Unlawful.] It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess drug paraphernalia. 
(b)  Manufacture, sale, or delivery of drug paraphernalia. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or deliver, possess with intent to sell or deliver, manufacture with intent to sell or deliver equipment, products, or materials, knowing that such equipment, products, or materials constitute drug paraphernalia. 
(c)  Determination considerations. In determining whether an object constitutes drug paraphernalia, the court may consider, in addition to all other relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  Proximity of the object to any controlled substance; 
(3)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
(4)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the knowledge of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, or evidence that such person knows that it will be delivered to persons who he knows could use the object to facilitate a violation of this section; 
(5)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
(6)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
(7)  National or local advertising concerning the object's use; 
(8)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(9)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a supplier of like or related items to the community for legal purposes, such as an authorized distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(10)  The existence and scope of legal uses for the object in the community; 
(11)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(d)  [Evidentiary hearing.] In the event a case brought pursuant to this section is tried before a jury, the court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on issues raised pursuant to this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-147), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-244. - Inhaling toxic vapors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors for the purpose of causing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulled senses of the nervous system, or possess, buy, or use any such substance for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate this section. This section does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "toxic vapors", includes, but is not limited to, the following substances or products containing such substances: alcohols (methyl, isopropyl, propyl or butyl); aliphatic acetates (ethyl, methyl, propyl, or methyl collective acetate); acetone; benzene; carbon tetrachloride; cyclohexane; freons (freon 11 and freon 12); hexane; methyl ethyl ketone; methyl isobutyl detone; naphtha; perchlorethylene; toluene; tricholoroethane; or xylene. Evidence that a container lists one (1) or more of these substances shall be prima facie evidence that the substance in such container contains toxic vapors and emits the fumes thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-148), 5-6-14) 
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO OFFENSES 

Sec. 75-245. - Alcohol definitions. 
(a)  As used within this article the following words shall mean as follows unless the context specifically specifies otherwise: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages or alcoholic liquors means malt, vinous, or spirituous liquors; except that "alcoholic beverages" and "alcoholic liquors" shall not include confectionery containing alcohol within the limits prescribed by C.R.S. § 25-5-410(1)(i)(II), as amended. 
(2)  Fermented malt beverage means any beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any similar product or any combination thereof, in water containing not less than one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent and not more than three and two-tenths (3.2) percent alcohol by weight; except that "fermented malt beverage" shall not include confectionery containing alcohol within the limits prescribed by C.R.S. § 25-5-410(1)(i)(II), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-149), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-246. - Consumption regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container of or consume any fermented malt or alcoholic beverages in public, except upon premises licensed or permitted under the provisions of Articles 3, 4 or 5 of Title 44, as amended of the Colorado Revised Statutes. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article "open container" means any container which is either opened so that the contents can be removed or upon which the bottle cap seal has been broken. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, "in public" means: 
(1)  In or upon any public highway, street, alley, walk, parking lot, building, park or other property or place which is owned or leased by the city or other governmental entity, whether in a vehicle or not; and 
(2)  In or upon those portions of any private property upon which the public has express or implied license to enter or remain. If such express or implied license is subject to time or conduct restrictions, consumption or prohibited possession of fermented malt alcoholic beverages on such property shall be deemed to be "in public" even if the entry or remaining on the property is in violation of time or conduct restrictions. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section evidence that a container, or a similar container, if the label is missing or unreadable, lists as contents any fermented malt or alcoholic beverages is prima facie evidence that the substance in such container is fermented malt or alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge of violating this section that the owner of the property involved or the owner's authorized agent gave prior express written permission to the accused or to members of the accused's group or entity to perform the acts complained of. 
(f)  The city manager or manager's designee may, as provided below, grant express written permission to persons to consume fermented malt or alcoholic beverages on city owned property for the following special functions: athletic events; artistic events; cultural events; receptions; street closure events; or civic events. 
(1)  The city manager shall adopt an administrative directive specifying the city properties or portions thereof upon which fermented malt or alcoholic beverages may be consumed. 
(2)  The city manager shall grant such permission to persons applying therefor if, considering the type of function and type of alcohol to be served, the manager finds that: 
a.  The application to the city manager was filed not later than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the date of the event. 
b.  The time, location and duration of the function are not likely to significantly interfere with public traffic or services, including public safety services. 
c.  The number and concentration of participants at the function are not likely to result in crowds exceeding limitations of the city fire code or create a nuisance resulting in inconvenience to the residents of the surrounding neighborhood. 
d.  Procedures are proposed that are likely to ensure that underage persons and persons under the influence of alcohol will not obtain or consume fermented malt or alcoholic beverages served at the function. 
e.  Procedures are proposed that are likely to secure and supervise the area and the participants during the function. 
f.  The applicant agrees to provide sandwiches and other food services at the location during the time consumption is permitted in an amount sufficient to serve the persons anticipated to attend. 
g.  The applicant agrees to be personally responsible for and provide financial guaranties to ensure the cleaning, trash disposal or repairs necessary as a result of the event for which the permission was granted. The city manager shall determine the amount of required financial guaranty based upon the city facility involved, the duration of the event, the number of persons anticipated to attend, the type of beverage to be served, the failure of the applicant to clean or repair city property in conjunction with past events and the financial resources of the applicant. 
h.  The applicant agrees, to the extent permitted by law, to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its employees and agents for all liability claims arising out of the event and to provide general liability insurance, with minimum liability limits equal to that established by the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act, C.R.S. § 24-10-101 et seq., as amended, to guarantee indemnification. The city manager may waive or reduce this insurance requirement if the applicant affirmatively establishes that the risk of liability to the city as a result of the function does not present the city with any significant additional risk of liability. 
(3)  The city manager shall deny permission where: 
a.  There is insufficient data presented by the applicant to make the findings required in subsection (f)(2) of this section. 
b.  Approval would be detrimental to the public safety, health, morals, order or welfare by reason of the nature of the event, the likelihood that the event would create a public nuisance, an unreasonable risk of violence or public disorder or result in the consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage persons or, alternatively, that the proximity of the event to schools or the failure of the applicant to conduct a past event in compliance with this section and the applicable rules and regulations. 
c.  Another event has previously been scheduled for the same location on the same date and time. 
d.  The event would unreasonably interfere with normal activities and customary and general use and enjoyment of the facility. 
(4)  An applicant who has been denied permission or who claims to be otherwise aggrieved by the city manager's decision concerning an application may make written request to the city manager's office for a hearing on the application. Such request shall be made within seven (7) days of the postmarked date of the city manager's decision. Within ten (10) days of receipt of such a request, the city manager shall designate an independent hearing officer who shall conduct a hearing at which the applicant and the city may present such evidence and information as may be relevant to the application. 
(5)  The granting of permission by the city manager under this section does not relieve the applicant from the responsibility of obtaining any license or special permit as may be required by state law or city ordinances. 
(g)  This section is not intended to create a right of use or possession of city owned or leased property in any person or group; rather, this section relates only to permission to consume malt, vinous or spirituous liquor or fermented malt beverage by an individual or group who otherwise has the lawful right to use or possess city owned property pursuant to city policy. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-150), 5-6-14; Ord. No. 2018-25, § 9, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 75-247. - Underage persons alcoholic beverages prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, give away, dispose of, exchange, deliver, or permit the sale, serving, giving or procuring of any fermented malt or alcoholic beverages to or for any person under the age of twenty-one (21). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to obtain or attempt to obtain fermented malt or alcoholic beverages by misrepresentation of age or by any other method in any place where fermented malt or alcoholic beverages are sold. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to possess or consume alcoholic or fermented malt beverages. Illegal possession or consumption of alcoholic or fermented malt beverages is a strict liability offense. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to make false statements or to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false registration card, identification card, or note or other document or documents issued to a person other than the person presenting the same, for the purpose of procuring the sale, gift or delivery of fermented malt or alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to engage or utilize the services of another person, whether for remuneration or not, to procure for such person under the age of twenty-one (21) fermented malt or alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether for remuneration or not, knowingly to procure for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) fermented malt or alcoholic beverages. 
(g)  As used within this section, the following words shall mean as follows unless the context clearly specifies otherwise: 
(1)  Establishment means a business, firm, enterprise, service or fraternal organization, club, institution, entity, group or residence, and any real property, including buildings and improvements, connected therewith, and shall also include any members, employees and occupants associated therewith. 
(2)  Possession of alcoholic or fermented malt beverages means that a person has or holds any amount of alcoholic or fermented malt beverages on his/her person, or that a person owns or has custody of, or has alcoholic or fermented malt beverages within his/her immediate presence and control. 
(3)  Private property means any dwelling and its curtilage which is being used by a natural person or natural persons for habitation and which is not open to the public and privately owned real property which is not open to the public. "Private property" shall not include: 
a.  Any establishment which has or is required to have a liquor license or permit pursuant to Articles 3, 4 or 5 of Title 44, C.R.S.; or 
b.  Any establishment which sells alcoholic or fermented malt beverages or upon which alcoholic or fermented malt beverages are sold; or 
c.  Any establishment which leases, rents or provides accommodations to members of the public generally. 
(h)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the offense described in subsection (c) of this section that the alcohol or fermented malt beverage was possessed or consumed by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age under the following circumstances: 
(1)  While such person was legally upon private property with the knowledge and consent of the owner or legal possessor of such private property and the alcohol or fermented malt beverage was possessed or consumed with the consent of his/her parent or legal guardian who was present during such possession or consumption; or 
(2)  When the existence of alcohol or fermented malt beverages in a person's body was due solely to the ingestion of any substance which was manufactured, designed or intended solely for medicinal or hygienic purposes. 
(i)  The possession or consumption of alcohol or fermented malt beverages shall not constitute a violation of this section if such possession or consumption takes place for religious purposes protected by the First Amendment of the United States constitution. 
(j)  Prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (c) of this section shall consist of: 
(1)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and possessed or consumed alcoholic or fermented malt beverages; or 
(2)  Evidence that the defendant was under the age of twenty-one (21) years and manifested any of the characteristics commonly associated with alcoholic or fermented malt beverage intoxication or impairment. 
(k)  During any trial for violation of this section, any bottle, can or any other container with labeling indicating the contents of such bottle, can or container shall be admissible into evidence, and the information contained on any label on such bottle, can or other container shall be admissible into evidence and shall not constitute hearsay. A jury or a judge, whichever is appropriate, may consider the information upon such label in determining whether the contents of the bottle, can or other container were composed in whole or in part of alcoholic or fermented malt beverages. A label which identifies the contents of any bottle, can or other container, as "beer", "ale", "malt beverage", "fermented malt beverage", "malt liquor", "wine", "champagne", "whiskey", "gin", "vodka", "tequila", "schnapps", "brandy", "cognac", "liqueur", "cordial", "alcohol", or "liquor" shall constitute prima facie evidence that the contents of the bottle, can, or other container was composed in whole or in part of alcoholic or fermented malt beverages. 
(l)  In any judicial proceeding concerning a charge under subsection (c) of this section, the court shall take judicial notice of methods of testing a person's blood, breath, saliva, or urine for the presence of alcohol and of the design and operation of certified devices for testing a person's blood, breath, saliva or urine for the presence of alcohol. This subsection shall not prevent the necessity of establishing during a trial that the testing devices were working properly and that such testing devices were properly operated. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a defendant from offering evidence concerning the accuracy of testing devices. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-151), 5-6-14; Ord. No. 2018-25, § 10, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 75-248. - Underage person's tobacco restrictions and prohibitions. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section the following words shall mean as defined unless the context specifies otherwise: 
(1)  Cigarette means any product that contains nicotine, is intended to be burned or heated under ordinary conditions of use, and consists of or contains: 
a.  Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not containing tobacco; or 
b.  Tobacco, in any form, that is functional in the product, which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by consumers as a cigarette; or 
c.  Any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco that, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette described in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph (1). 
d.  The term "cigarette" includes roll-your-own, meaning any tobacco that, because of its appearance, type, packaging, or labeling, is suitable for use and likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as tobacco for making cigarettes. 
(2)  Tobacco products are defined as: cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or for smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase, possess, consume or use either by burning, ingesting, absorbing or chewing any cigarettes or tobacco products. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly furnish to any person who is under eighteen (18) years of age, by gift, sale, or any other means, any cigarettes or tobacco products. 
(d)  Any person who sells, or offers to sell any cigarettes or tobacco products, shall display a warning sign as specified in this section. The warning shall be displayed in a prominent place within the establishment, and shall have a minimum height of three (3) inches and a width of six (6) inches, and shall read as follows: 
WARNING 
IT IS ILLEGAL FOR ANY PERSON UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE TO PURCHASE CIGARETTES OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS. 
(e)  That any person under the age of eighteen (18) is/was in possession of any package or container with labeling indicating that such contains cigarettes or tobacco products shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of subsections (b) and (c) herein. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person who sells or offers to sell any cigarettes or tobacco products to store, display, or sell such cigarettes or tobacco products in any area or means that is accessible for use by the public without assistance from the seller of such goods or products. This subsection shall not be construed to preclude or prohibit the storage or display of cigarettes or tobacco products in an area viewable by the public so long as such items are not accessible to the public without assistance from the seller. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-152), 5-6-14) 
Secs. 75-249-75-259. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 75-260. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, the following shall mean as defined herein unless otherwise specifically provided: 
(1)  Blackjack means any billy club, sand club, sandbag, sap gloves or other hand-operated striking weapon consisting, at the striking end, of an encased piece of lead or other heavy substance and, at the handle end, a strap or springy shaft which increases the force of impact. 
(2)  Crossbow means any device resembling a firearm in configuration, having a bow or similar device mounted perpendicularly to a stock, grip or frame, and usually equipped with a winch or similar device which draws back the bowstring and cocks the weapon and which fires an arrow, bolt, stone or other projectile from a groove or depression in the stock, grip or frame by the manipulation of a trigger or other similar mechanism. 
(3)  Firearm means any handgun, revolver, pistol, rifle, shotgun or other instrument or device from which any shot, bullet or other missile can be discharged. 
(4)  Gas gun means any device designed for projecting gas-filled projectiles which release their contents after being projected from the device and includes projectiles designed for use in such device. 
(5)  Gravity knife means any knife, the blade of which is released from the handle or sheath thereof by the force of gravity or the application of centrifugal force and which blade, upon release, becomes locked in place by means of a button, spring, plate, level or other device. 
(6)  Handgun means a pistol, revolver, or other firearm of any description, loaded or unloaded, from which any shot, bullet, or other missile can be discharged and the length of the barrel, not including any revolving, detachable, or magazine breech, does not exceed twelve (12) inches. 
(7)  Illegal weapon means a blackjack, gas gun, metallic knuckles, or knife. 
(8)  Juvenile means any person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(9)  Knife means any dagger, knife, bayonet, straight razor, dirk, machete, stiletto, sword or sword cane with a blade over three and one-half (31/2) inches in length, or any other dangerous instrument designed to inflict cutting, stabbing or tearing wounds; but, as used in this article, does not include a knife or hatchet of the type customarily used in hunting, fishing or camping, when such is being carried for sporting use; and does not include any instruments being used in pursuance of a lawful home use, trade, occupation or profession or otherwise being lawful under federal or state statutes, or being used as an item of display or collector's item in any home or place of business. 
(10)  Mechanical gun means an air, spring operated or blow gun that discharges pellets, BB shots, paint balls, arrows or darts and includes but is not limited to BB guns, spring guns, pellet guns, paint ball guns or other similar devices. 
(11)  Metallic knuckles means a weapon worn on the hand, consisting of a metal strip or chain with holes or links into which the fingers fit. 
(12)  Nunchaku means an object consisting of two (2) sticks, clubs, bars, or rods to be used as handles, connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
(13)  Switchblade knife means any knife, the blade of which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or device in its handle. 
(14)  Throwing star means a disk having sharp radiating points or any disk-shaped bladed object which is hand-held and thrown and which is in the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of self-defense. 
(15)  Weapon means any instrument or device specifically designated for use in attack or defense in combat or fighting, and includes, but is not limited to, those enumerated in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-153), 5-6-14; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 2-20-18) 
Sec. 75-261. - Prohibited use of weapons; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Knowingly and unlawfully aim a firearm at another person; or 
(2)  Recklessly or with criminal negligence discharge a firearm or shoot a bow and arrow; or 
(3)  Knowingly set a loaded gun, trap, or device designed to cause an explosion upon being tripped or approached, and leave it unattended by a competent person immediately present; or 
(4)  Have in his or her possession a firearm while the person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a controlled substance, as defined in C.R.S. § 18-18-102; 
(5)  Have in his or her possession an illegal weapon; or 
(6)  Knowingly aim, swing, or throw a throwing star or nunchaku at another person, or knowingly possess a throwing star or nunchaku in a public place except for the purpose of presenting an authorized public demonstration or exhibition or pursuant to instruction in conjunction with an organized school or class. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-154), 5-6-14; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 3, 2-2-16) 
Sec. 75-262. - Unlawful open carrying of deadly weapons in city buildings, parks, trails, open spaces or recreation areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to openly carry any deadly weapon upon the grounds of or within any building or facility owned or leased by the city, or any department or agency thereof. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to openly carry any deadly weapon within or upon any city park, trail, golf course, athletic field, camp ground, aquatic center, recreation area or open space. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be deemed to affect or impair in any way the authority of any private or public property owner other than the city to prohibit the carrying of deadly weapons into or upon other public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-155), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-263. - Unlawful carrying of a concealed weapon; unlawful possession of weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry a concealed weapon or possess weapons. A person commits the crime of unlawfully carrying a concealed weapon or possessing a weapon, when a person knowingly: 
(1)  Carries a knife concealed on or about his or her person; or 
(2)  Carries a firearm concealed on or about his or her person; or 
(3)  Without legal authority, carries, brings, or has in such person's possession, a firearm or any explosive, incendiary, or other dangerous device on the property of or within any building in which the chambers or offices of the city council are located, or in which a city council hearing or meeting is being or is to be conducted, or in which the official office of any member, officer, or employee of the city is located. 
(b)  It shall not be an offense if the defendant was: 
(1)  A person in his or her own dwelling or place of business or on property owned or under his or her control at the time of the act of carrying; or 
(2)  A person in a private automobile or other private means of conveyance who carries a weapon for lawful protection of such person or another person or property while traveling; or 
(3)  A person who, at the time of carrying a concealed weapon, held a valid permit to carry a concealed handgun, or a temporary emergency permit issued pursuant to state law, except that it shall be an offense under this section if the person was carrying a concealed handgun in violation of the provisions of C.R.S. § 18-12-214. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-156), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-264. - Defacing or possession of defaced firearm. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly: 
(1)  Remove, deface, cover, alter or destroy the manufacturer's serial number or any other distinguishing number or identification mark of a firearm; or 
(2)  Possess a firearm, the manufacturer's serial number of which, or other distinguishing number or identification mark, has been removed, defaced, altered, or destroyed, except by normal wear and tear. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-157), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-265. - Exception for law enforcement and military personnel. 
    Nothing within this article shall be construed to forbid any enforcement officer of the law enforcement agencies of the United States government, city or the state, or any sheriff or his or her deputies, or any regular, special or ex officio peace officer as defined by state law, or members of the United States armed forces, Colorado National Guard or Reserve Officer Training Corp or any other person specifically authorized by state or federal law from carrying, wearing, concealing or using such weapon as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of his or her duties, or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-158), 5-6-14) 
Secs. 75-266-75-279. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - NOISE 

Sec. 75-280. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases used herein are defined as follows: 
    Amplified outdoor music means the use of musical instruments or sound equipment to produce or amplify sound that is not fully enclosed by permanent, solid walls, and a roof. 
    Chief of police means the chief of the city's police department or the chief's authorized designee. 
    Construction activities means any and all activity incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings, structures, roads or appurtenances thereof, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling. 
    Domestic power equipment means any power equipment, rated five (5) horsepower or less, used in home or building repair or grounds maintenance, including, but not limited to, lawn mowers, garden tools, snow blowers and chain saws. 
    Muffler means an apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates designated for the purpose of transmitting gases while reducing sound emanating from such apparatus. 
    Plainly audible means any sound which can clearly be heard, by unimpaired auditory senses on a direct line of sight from fifty (50) or more feet; however, words or phrases need not be clearly discernable but such sound shall include bass reverberation. 
    Planning director means the city's planning director or the director's authorized designee. 
    Public works director means the city's public works director or the director's authorized designee. 
    Sound equipment means a loudspeaker, public address system, amplification system, or other sound producing device. 
    Sound level means the A-weighted sound level in decibels (dBA). 
    Sound level meter means an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to standards as specified in American National Standards Institute (S.I. 4-1983), as same may be amended from time to time. 
    Unreasonable noise means any sound of such level, intensity or duration as may or tends to be injurious to human health or welfare, or that unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or property, or causes damage to any property, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee relationship; concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a place of employment. 
    Vehicle means any machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides to transport persons or property or pull machinery and includes, without limitation, automobile, airplane, truck, trailer, motorcycle, motor scooter, tractor, buggy and wagon. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-159), 5-6-14; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 75-281. - Noise prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause to be made, or to permit any unreasonable noise upon any property within a residential, public or developing resource district or for any district within any vehicle owned, possessed or operated or controlled by such person. 
(b)  Law enforcement personnel, including community service officers, may, in the determination of whether a noise is unreasonable consider factors that include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The time of day; 
(2)  The size of any gathering of persons creating or contributing to the noise; 
(3)  The presence or absence of sound amplification equipment; and 
(4)  Any other factors tending to show the magnitude and/or disruptive effect of the noise. 
(c)  With regard to vehicles, the determination of unreasonable noise, in addition to the previously stated factors shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The continuous or repeated sounding of any horn, alarm or signal device of a vehicle, except where an actual emergency or danger exists. For the purposes of this subsection, "continuous" shall mean continuing for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  The operation of any vehicle in a manner which causes unreasonable noise as a result of unnecessary rapid acceleration, deceleration, revving the engine or tire squeal. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or permit any noise as measured in the manner described herein, from any source, at a level in excess of the dBA established for the time period and zoning districts set forth herein. 
Zoning Districts Time Period Max dBA Level Commercial and Business Districts 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 70 
65 Industrial Districts 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 75 
70  
(1)  If the noise source is located on private property, or public property other than public right-of-way, the noise shall be measured at the property boundary of any property receiving the noise. 
(2)  If the noise source is located within the public right of way, the noise shall be measured at least twenty-five (25) feet from the noise source. 
(3)  No outdoor measurement shall be taken without a commercial wind screen, or during periods when wind speeds, including gusts, exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(4)  The measurement time period shall not be less than five (5) minutes in length, and highest dBA reading measured for a majority of this time shall be deemed the official measurement. 
(5)  Outdoor amplified music in commercial, business or industrial districts shall be exempt from the time and dBA requirements of this section but are subject to the requirements set forth herein in section 75-284. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-160), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-282. - Conditions/exceptions. 
(a)  The prohibitions set forth in section 75-281(a), (c) and (d) shall not apply to sound from or subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and not continuing for more than five (5) minutes. 
(2)  Any siren, whistle, or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any other alarm system used in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police activity or other imminent danger; provided, however, that burglar alarms not terminated within fifteen (15) minutes after being activated shall not be excepted. 
(3)  City authorized events, including, but not limited to, parades, festivals, community activities and fireworks displays. 
(4)  Any domestic power equipment operated between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(5)  Noise from commercial construction activities between 7:00 a.m., and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. The public works director, upon consultation with the planning director and chief of police, may grant an exception to the time restrictions herein upon receipt and review of a written request when the public works director determines such exception is necessary for the public welfare, and/or denial would cause an undue hardship upon the applicant. Any exception must be in writing, shall not violate any restrictions of an approved planned unit development (PUD), and shall be subject to all terms and conditions deemed reasonably necessary by the public works director. 
(6)  Activities directly related to the abatement of an emergency. 
(7)  Loading, unloading, opening or otherwise handling boxes, crates, containers, trash or recycle materials, or other objects or goods between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(8)  Noise generated from open space, golf course and park maintenance activities or operations. 
(9)  Noise generated from agricultural activities or operations on property owned by the city. 
(10)  School activities. 
(11)  Noise generated from snowblowers, snowplows, or snow removal equipment for the purpose of snow removal. 
(b)  As a means to mitigate noise generated by the activities set forth herein in subsections (a)(8) and (9), the city administrator, for improvements within his or her purchasing authority, or city council, for improvements in excess of the city administrator's purchasing authority, may authorize construction or installation of sound mitigation improvements on city property without regard to zoning restrictions set forth in chapter 26 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-161), 5-6-14; Ord. No. 2014-24, § 1, 1-6-15; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 3, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 75-283. - Specific prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or permit the following, all of which shall be deemed unreasonable noise; however, the following list shall not be deemed exclusive: 
(1)  The operation of any vehicle with an engine compression brake device (jake brake) which is not properly muffled. 
(2)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, air compressor equipment, motorboat, vehicle or other power device, which is not at all times equipped with an adequate muffler in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any unreasonable noise, and no such muffler or exhaust system shall be modified or used with a cutoff, bypass or similar device. 
(3)  To play, use or permit the operation of any device for producing or reproducing sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for any persons in the structure or vehicle in which the device is operated or in such manner as to be plainly audible from the structure or vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-162), 5-6-14) 
Sec. 75-284. - Amplified outdoor music restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause to be made, or to permit amplified outdoor music upon any premises possessed or controlled by such person where such music occurs: 
(1)  Between the hours of 9:30 p.m., through 10:00 a.m., of the next day, except that on Friday and Saturday nights music is permitted until 10:30 p.m.; or 
(2)  Where any amplified outdoor music as measured in accordance with subsection 75-281(d) herein exceeds 82 dBA. 
(3)  City authorized events, including, but not limited to, parades, festivals, community activities and fireworks displays which include amplified outdoor music shall be exempt from the restrictions set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1(75-163, 5-6-14) 
Chapter 76 - ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY OTHER THAN MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 2014-13, adopted May 6, 2014, amended the Code by directing ch. 75, art. III, §§ 75-71-75-74, be renumbered as ch. 76. Formerly the included provisions derived from Ord. No. 2011-12, adopted Apr. 19, 2011. Said legislative information has been maintained in the history notes following each section. 
Cross reference- Abandoned vehicles, § 115-56 et seq. 

Sec. 76-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall, unless otherwise specified, mean as follows: 
    Abandoned, lost, or unclaimed property means any item or items, except for motor vehicles that come into the possession of the police department and for which the custodian is unable to determine an owner. 
    Chief of police means the chief of the Lafayette Police Department or the chief's designee. 
    Custodian means the person assigned by the chief of police to act as the official holder of all property coming into the possession of the police department. 
    Criminal instruments means any personal property seized as evidentiary property and used directly in the commission of any criminal act, other than such property used in the commission of a traffic offense. 
    Evidence means an item or material that has probative value in either tending to prove or disprove a material fact in a criminal manner. 
    Owner means a person or entity, including a corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity other than the city, or a duly authorized legal representative of same, which has a legal or equitable interest in property subject to this article. 
    Property means tangible personal property and, for purposes of this article, includes cash, checks, securities, and gift cards or certificates. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12, § 1, 4-19-11; Ord. No. 2014-13, § 2, 5-6-14) 
Sec. 76-2. - Control of property. 
    The provisions of this article shall, unless otherwise required by law, govern the disposition of all property delivered or otherwise coming into the possession of the city or police department. 
    Such property shall, upon coming into possession of the city, be delivered to the custodian, who shall secure and keep a record of all such property, which shall include when and from where the property was obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12, § 1, 4-19-11; Ord. No. 2014-13, § 2, 5-6-14) 
Sec. 76-3. - Disposition of property. 
    All abandoned, lost, or unclaimed property, and all property that is no longer being held as evidence in a judicial proceeding shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  Last known owner determined by custodian. 
a.  If, following examination of the property and those public records readily available to the custodian, the custodian is able to identify the owner of the property, the custodian shall notify the apparent owner by a written notice sent by United States first class mail to the last known address of the apparent owner. Such notice shall state that if the owner does not make claim to the property within sixty (60) days of the date of notice, any claim of ownership shall be waived, and the property shall be deemed forfeited, and become the sole property of the city. In addition, the notice shall state how to contact the police department to make a claim to the property. The claimant must provide photo identification to the custodian prior to release of any property to the apparent owner. 
b.  If the apparent owner is unable to perfect a claim such person may designate an agent to perform such task. The agent must provide the custodian proof of entitlement, which may include a notarized letter setting forth the agents powers and duties, a power of attorney or court order. 
(2)  No last known owner determined. If, following examination of the property and those public records readily available to the custodian, the custodian is unable to determine the identity of the owner, the property shall, subject to the procedure set forth in subsection 76-3(3) herein, be deemed considered abandoned, lost, or unclaimed. 
(3)  Procedure. The custodian shall publish a notice in a publication of general circulation within the city and post notice on the police department's website for any property having a value of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more, as determined by the custodian, that has not been claimed by the last known owner, and for all other property that has been deemed abandoned, lost, or unclaimed. The notice shall describe the property and contain a statement that the custodian is holding the property, and the place at which the property may be claimed. The notice shall state that the owner, in claiming the property, must provide proof of ownership acceptable to the custodian. The claimant must also provide photo identification to the custodian prior to release of any property to the owner. Finally, the notice shall state that if no one comes forward within thirty (30) days of the posting of the notice, any claim of ownership shall be deemed waived, and the property deemed forfeited and the sole property of the city. 
(4)  Form of claim. Any claim for property shall be on such form or forms as shall be provided by the custodian, shall be in writing, and shall be signed by the claimant. 
a.  Each claim received by the custodian, within the claim period as set forth herein, shall be evaluated by the custodian. The custodian may at any time during evaluation of the claim request additional supporting documentation from the claimant. 
b.  If there is more than one (1) claimant for the same property, the custodian may deposit the disputed property with the registry of the district court in an interpleader or other action. Should the custodian petition any court to resolve any disputed claims, the custodian shall notify each claimant of this action. 
c.  If a claim is upheld with respect to any unclaimed property, the claimant shall, as a prerequisite to recovering possession, reimburse the city for all reasonable expenses incurred in the storing or handling of such property. 
d.  If a claim is denied with respect to any unclaimed property, such property shall be deemed forfeited and become the sole property of the city. 
(5)  Any property deemed forfeited to the city may be disposed of in the following manner: 
a.  The property may be sold or auctioned in accordance with police department policy. 
b.  The property may be donated to a recognized charitable institution or nonprofit organization. 
c.  The property may, in the discretion of the custodian, be retained by the police department for use in training or for other official duties. 
d.  The property may otherwise be destroyed or disposed of as deemed appropriate by the custodian. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12, § 1, 4-19-11; Ord. No. 2014-13, § 2, 5-6-14) 
Sec. 76-4. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Disposition of dangerous or nominal property. The provisions of section 76-3 do not apply to the disposition of dangerous property or property of a value of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), as determined by the custodian, any of which, unless ordered otherwise by judicial order, may be destroyed or disposed of as deemed appropriate by the custodian. Dangerous property includes, but is not limited to, burglary tools, explosives, armor or bulletproof clothing; gambling apparatus; beer, wine, spirituous liquors, or fermented malt beverages; cigarettes or tobacco products; soiled, bloody, or unsanitary clothing and goods; hazardous solids or liquids, drugs, medicines, pharmaceutical products; hallucinogenic substances, hypodermic syringes or needles; obscene pictures, images, or other such objects, contained in or on any media or format; any poisonous or noxious solids or liquids; or any other property which reasonably might result in injury to the health or safety of the public or be the subject of unlawful use. 
(b)  Disposition of criminal instruments. The provisions of section 76-3 do not apply to the disposition of criminal instruments. Criminal instrument(s) used by the owner in a criminal episode shall be destroyed or may be used by the city unless the owner is exonerated of all charges. Exoneration shall not include a plea of guilty to any charge in exchange for dismissal of any other charge, a deferred judgment and sentence, or a no contest plea. 
(1)  Criminal instrument(s) used by someone other than the owner in a criminal episode shall be destroyed or may be used by the city, unless the owner can prove to the custodian that the property had been taken from the owner and used without the owner's consent, express or implied, or that the owner was not involved in the criminal acts and neither knew nor reasonably should have known of those acts. 
(c)  Disposition of weapons and firearms. The provisions of section 76-3 do not apply to the disposition of weapons, including firearms, cartridges and ammunition. These items shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  Illegal or contraband weapon. Any weapon that is illegal, or deemed to be contraband pursuant to state or federal law shall be deemed forfeited and become the sole property of the city and disposed of as set forth in subsection 76-3(5) herein. 
(2)  Lawful possession apparent. If the custodian has determined that the item may be lawfully possessed by the owner, or other person entitled to the possession of the item, or if there exists a valid court order directing that the item be released to such person, the custodian shall release the item in accordance with the custodian's determination or the court order. 
(3)  Lawful possession not apparent. If the custodian has determined that the owner or other person thought to be entitled to possession of the item is no longer legally entitled to possession of the item pursuant to federal, state or local law, and if there exists no valid court order directing that the item be released to any person, the forfeited item shall be disposed by the custodian as follows: 
a.  The custodian may authorize the destruction of the item. 
b.  The custodian may authorize the retention of the item by the police department for the purpose of training members of the department in the identification, safe handling and operation of those weapons. 
c.  The custodian may authorize the sale of the item, provided that the sale is restricted to federally licensed dealers or collectors. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12, § 1, 4-19-11; Ord. No. 2014-13, § 2, 5-6-14) 
Chapter 80 - PARKS, OPEN SPACE, AND GOLF[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 19 of Ord. No. 2006-22, adopted June 6, 2006, retitled Ch. 80, Parks, Recreation and Cemeteries, to read as herein set out. 
Charter reference- Department of parks, recreation and cemeteries authorized, § 4.13. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 45; nuisances, Ch. 70; solid waste, Ch. 100; traffic, Ch. 115. 
State Law reference- Municipal parks, C. R. S. § 31-25-201; cemeteries, C. R. S. § 31-25-701 et seq.; wildlife, parks and outdoor recreation, C. R. S. Title 33. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 80-1. - Department created-Director. 
    Pursuant to the authority of section 4.6 of the Charter of the city, there is hereby created and established a department of parks, recreation and cemeteries, which shall be generally managed, controlled and governed by a director to be known as the director of parks, recreation and cemeteries. 
(Code 1963, § 24-1) 
Sec. 80-2. - Department duties. 
    The department of parks, open space and golf shall prepare and recommend to the city council and the city administrator general plans for development of parks, open space and golf activities and facilities. The department shall prepare a set, or sets, of rules and regulations governing the care, control, charges, maintenance, use, management and operation pertaining to parks, open space and golf, which rules and regulations shall be approved by the city council. The department shall maintain the municipal cemeteries. 
(Code 1963, § 24-4; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 20, 6-6-06) 
Secs. 80-3-80-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 19 of Ord. No. 2006-22, adopted June 6, 2006, retitled Art. II, Parks and Recreation, to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference- Parks and recreation, C. R. S. § 31-25-201 et seq. 

Sec. 80-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 7 of Ord. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, repealed § 80-16 in its entirety. Former § 80-16 pertained to the creation of the acquisition and development fund and derived from Ord. No. 840, adopted June 5, 1979. 
Sec. 80-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 8 of Ord. No. 2007-38, adopted Sept. 4, 2007, repealed § 80-17 in its entirety. Former § 80-17 pertained to expenditures of the acquisition and development fund and derived from Ord. No. 840, adopted June 5, 1979. 
Secs. 80-18-80-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1985-15, § 1, adopted June 4, 1985, provided for the repeal of §§ 80-18-80-26, which pertained to parks; their closing hours, beverage rules, permits, and certain rules of conduct therein. Such sections were derived from Ord. No. 725, §§ 1-3, adopted May 17, 1977, and Ord. No. 882, §§ 1-10, 13, adopted July 15, 1980. For current provisions relative to similar subject matter, see § 80-50 et seq. 
ARTICLE III. - CEMETERIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal cemeteries, C. R. S. § 31-25-701 et seq.; cemeteries generally, C. R. S. § 12-12-101 et seq. 

Sec. 80-36. - Price of cemetery lots-Classification of purchasers. 
    For purposes of selling cemetery lots a classification of resident and nonresident shall be established. A resident is defined as a person who has resided for a minimum of thirty (30) days within the corporate limits of the city, and a nonresident as a person who has not. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 2, 5-15-79) 
Sec. 80-37. - Same-Established. 
    The sales price for cemetery lots and fees for internments and other services shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 833, § 3, 5-15-79; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 39, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 80-38. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city council may, from time to time, adopt by resolution such rules and regulations for the care, control, charges, maintenance, use, management and operation of the cemetery as it may deem appropriate. Any such rules and regulations adopted shall be filed in the office of the city clerk of the City of Lafayette, Colorado and shall be open to public inspection during regular business hours. The city clerk shall provide interested persons with a copy of any rules and regulations adopted upon request and payment of the applicable fee set by the city clerk, if any. Violation of any rule or regulation so adopted is subject to the penalties provided in section 80-39 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1998-38, § 1, 1-5-99) 
Sec. 80-39. - Penalties. 
    The following penalties, herewith set forth in full, shall apply to this article and to any rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions stated or adopted in this article or in any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Every person who is eighteen (18) years of age or more on the date of said violation and convicted of a violation of any provision stated in or adopted pursuant to this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(3)  Every person who is under eighteen (18) years of age on the date of said violation and convicted of a violation of any provision stated in or adopted pursuant to this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1998-39, § 1, 1-5-99) 
Sec. 80-40. - Coal Creek Memorial Cemetery perpetual care fund. 
    There is hereby established a perpetual care fund to provide for the perpetual care and maintenance of those lots within the Coal Creek Memorial Cemetery, which at the time of the city's acquisition were subject to an endowment care obligation. Such fund shall be a separate city fund managed by the city's finance director who may invest such monies in accordance with the city's investment policy. Should the monies within the perpetual care fund exceed the amount required to ensure the perpetual care of the specified lots, the excess monies may be used for the Coal Creek Memorial Cemetery's general operations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 4-20-10) 
Secs. 80-41-80-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKS AND RECREATION RULES AND REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, adopted June 4, 1985, amended the Code by adding provisions pertaining to rules and regulations for use of parks. Such provisions were designated herein as Art. IV, §§ 80-50-80-76. 

Sec. 80-50. - Disfiguration and removal of park property. 
    It shall be unlawful to willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever. It shall further be unlawful to dig or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down any timber or other wood, damage, cut, or carve any tree or plant. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 2006-30, adopted July 18, 2006, repealed § 80-51, which pertained to hunting prohibited, and derived from Ord. No. 1985-15, adopted June 4, 1985. 
Sec. 80-52. - Pollution of waters. 
    It shall be unlawful to throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-53. - Refuse and trash. 
    It shall be unlawful to dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash, anywhere except in proper receptacles where these are provided. If not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-54. - Operation of vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate and/or drive any motorized vehicle including, but not limited to, any self-propelled vehicle, motorbike, motorcycle, whether designed for travel on public highways or designed for off-road travel, moped, trail bike, go-cart, golf cart, motorscooter, or snowmobile, on any area except upon established roadways. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-55. - Parking of motor vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle including all vehicles mentioned in section 80-54 in any area except those areas which are posted as designated parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-56. - Bathing and swimming prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to swim, bathe or wade in any waters in any park including any lake, stream, pond, irrigation ditch, reservoir or other body of water unless such body of water has been designated and posted as an area set aside for swimming and/or wading. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-57. - Boating prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to bring into or operate any private boat, raft, or other watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places designated and posted for private boating. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-58. - Fishing. 
    Fishing in any and all waters located in public parks shall be governed and regulated by the laws of the State of Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-59. - Firearms and other missiles prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, carry, or possess air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows, slings, or any other forms of weapons; it shall further be unlawful to possess or use fireworks of any kind or nature; it shall further be unlawful to play golf or hit any golf balls. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 2005-8, § 1, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 80-60. - Fires prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to make or allow to burn any fire except in designated concrete or metal fire pits or fireplaces. It shall further be unlawful to fail to completely extinguish any fire made or maintained in a designated fire pit or fireplace prior to leaving a park. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-61. - Horses prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to bring a horse or ride a horse anywhere in a park. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-62. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to possess and/or to consume any alcoholic beverage or any fermented malt beverage in or upon any park. "Alcoholic beverages" and "fermented malt beverages" are as defined by the Colorado Revised Statutes covering alcoholic beverages and fermented malt beverages. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-63. - Glass containers prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any beverage in a glass container or containers in or upon any park at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 6 of Ord. No. 2006-30, adopted July 18, 2006, repealed § 80-64, which pertained to dogs running at large prohibited, and derived from Ord. No. 1985-15, adopted June 4, 1985. The user is directed to § 25-61 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 80-65. - Going onto ice prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to go onto the ice of any of the waters located in parks except as such areas are designated and posted for such use. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-66. - Vending and peddling prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to expose or offer for sale any article or thing and it shall further be unlawful to station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. This prohibition shall not apply to any concession operated by or with the approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-67. - Advertising prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-68. - Signs prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-69. - Park closing hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in or upon the premises of any park during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. during which time all parks shall be closed. The director of parks, open space and golf shall cause appropriate signs to be erected giving notice of such closing hours. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 21, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-70. - Indecent exposure prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in or upon any park to not wear sufficient articles of clothing to completely cover his or her sex organs from the view of any person or the public, and it shall further be unlawful for any female in or upon any park to not wear clothing sufficient to cover the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-71. - Exceptions to park closing hours and use of alcoholic beverages. 
    The city council hereby finds that justification for exception to park closing and possession and consumption of alcoholic and fermented malt beverages may exist in the case of activities of groups of persons when valid reasons are established for the extension of said closing hours and possession and consumption of alcoholic and/or fermented malt beverages, and the responsibility for removal of litter, trash and debris can be established. The director of recreation and facility management parks and recreation may issue a permit for the use of Forest Park, Whitetail Park, Lamont Does Park or Waneka Lake Park after the closing time specified in this article and/or the possession and consumption of alcoholic and fermented malt beverages. When any such permit has been issued, the closing time of the park specified in this article shall be extended to the time specified in the permit. Such permit may require performance of conditions, including removal of litter, trash and debris and in such case shall entitle the applicant to be or remain in such park after the extended time until such conditions are performed. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 1988-09, § 1, 5-17-88; Ord. No. 2006-20, § 1, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 80-72. - Park reservation. 
    At the time any person or group of persons shall reserve the use of a park or portion thereof by making a reservation with the director of recreation and facility management and at the time of issuance of a permit pursuant to section 80-71, the director of recreation and facility management shall have the authority to require a cash or surety bond up to the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) to guarantee the cleanup of the park or portion thereof as used. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 22, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-73. - Applicability of prohibitions. 
    The prohibitions contained within this article shall be applicable in and on all parks located within the city limits of Lafayette, Colorado, which parks are owned and maintained by the City of Lafayette, Colorado. The provisions contained within this article shall not apply to employees of the city, firemen or any state, county or city officers engaged in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 1985-15, § 2, 6-4-85) 
Sec. 80-74. - Dog park regulations. 
(1)  Definitions. As used in this section, the terms "animal owner," "owner," "dog," "leash" and "vicious" shall mean as defined in section 25-2 of the Code. 
(2)  [Regulations.] It shall be unlawful for any animal owner to violate any of the following regulations regarding the use of any city designated dog park: 
(a)  All dogs who enter the park must be over four (4) months of age, spayed or neutered, have a valid license and current vaccination with an accompanying tag. The tag must be securely affixed to the dog's collar at all times. 
(b)  All dogs must be leashed when entering or leaving the park's fenced enclosures and owners must retain possession of the leash at all times when within the park's fenced enclosure. 
(c)  Owners must be at least eighteen (18) years of age and remain within the park's fenced enclosure and in control of all dogs under their care at all times when within the park. Owners are limited to three (3) dogs per visit. 
(d)  Owners shall immediately pick up their dogs excrement and deposit it in a park trash receptacle. 
(e)  Aggressive, vicious or contagious dogs are prohibited from use of the park. 
(f)  Owners shall immediately close and secure the gate upon entering or exiting the confines of the park's fenced enclosure. 
(g)  Owners shall immediately pick up any litter or trash, including cigarette butts, resulting from their use of the park and deposit same in a park trash receptacle. 
(h)  Glass containers are prohibited within the park. 
(i)  Entrance within the park in violation of its posted hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. or when closed by the city, is prohibited. 
(3)  [Responsibility assumed by owners.] Owners voluntarily assume all risks, loss or injury for themselves or their dog(s) associated with or resulting from use of the park. 
(Ord. No. 2006-57, § 1, 11-21-06) 
Secs. 80-75-80-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GOLF COURSE ENTERPRISE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-55, adopted Jan. 4, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1-4 of said ordinance as §§ 80-81-80-84 herein was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 80-81. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the authority of section 16.13 of the Charter of the city, there is hereby created and established the golf course enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 1993-55, § 1, 1-4-94) 
Sec. 80-82. - Appointment of board. 
    The city council is hereby appointed as the board of the golf course enterprise. There shall not be appointed any persons other than the city council to serve on the board of the golf course enterprise nor shall city council delegate to any other person or entity the powers reserved to the board of the golf course enterprise hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1993-55, § 2, 1-4-94) 
Sec. 80-83. - Authority to issue revenue bonds. 
    The golf course enterprise, acting by and through the city council sitting as the board of the golf course enterprise, may issue its own revenue bonds or other obligations (including refunding securities) on behalf of the city, which revenue bonds or other obligations shall be payable solely from the net revenue (including special assessments) derived from the operation of the golf course enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations may be additionally secured by mortgages on or security interests in any real or personal property of the city used in the operation of the golf course enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations shall be issued by ordinance of the board of the golf course enterprise, adopted in the same manner and subject to referendum to the same extent as ordinances of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-55, § 3, 1-4-94) 
Sec. 80-84. - Restrictions on board's authority. 
    The city council shall not authorize the board of the golf course enterprise to acquire, construct or install or hold title to or dispose of any city-owned property used in the operation of the golf course enterprise, to impose or adjust rates, fees, tolls or charges for the use of any such property or for any service or commodity furnished by the golf course enterprise, to levy special assessments or to exercise any power reserved to the council or other city officials by the City Charter or otherwise (other than the power to issue revenue bonds and other obligations). 
(Ord. No. 1993-55, § 4, 1-4-94) 
Secs. 80-85-80-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OPEN SPACE 

Sec. 80-90. - Establishment of committee. 
    There is hereby established, as first promulgated by Resolution 92-33, an open space advisory committee. Appointments to the committee shall be made from citizens representing differing geographic areas and constituencies, in an effort to bring recommendations to the city council which consider the needs of the city as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, § 23, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-91. - Purpose. 
(1)  The committee shall serve the city council in an advisory capacity for the following purposes: 
(a)  To examine the needs of the city for additional open space which has not already been identified on the city's comprehensive plan, and make recommendations to the planning commission and city council with respect to the location and identification of such additional open space for inclusion in the city's comprehensive plan; and 
(b)  To assist the city council in establishing priorities for the acquisition of park and open space properties, funds permitting; and 
(c)  To examine and make recommendations to the city council with respect to possible sources of funding for the purchase of land by the city for use as developed parks, preservation of open space, establishment of trails, and similar purposes; and 
(d)  To make recommendations to council regarding management policies for open space and the process by which these policies are assigned to city-owned land. 
(2)  The committee shall also serve as a citizen tree board for the city. The tree board shall establish the standards necessary for the city to receive Tree City USA designation from the National Arbor Day Foundation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, § 23, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-92. - Composition. 
    The committee shall serve without pay and shall consist of five (5) members, each of whom shall have been a resident of the city for at least one (1) year immediately prior to the day of appointment and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the city. The city council shall appoint each of the members, and in addition, shall appoint one member of the city council, one member of the planning commission and the city administrator to serve as nonvoting ex officio members. City council may, upon recommendation of the committee, appoint up to two (2) alternate members, which member(s) shall be called upon to serve and vote in the absence of a regular member(s). The committee may recruit and recommend nominees to city council for appointment. A city employee appointed by the city administrator shall serve as a nonvoting staff liaison to the committee. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, § 23, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 8, 2-1-11) 
Sec. 80-93. - Term of service. 
    The city council shall appoint each member to a four-year term. Alternate members shall serve a term of four (4) years, unless appointed by city council to fill a vacancy on the committee pursuant to section 80-94. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, § 23, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 8, 2-1-11) 
Sec. 80-94. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the committee shall be filled for the unexpired term by city council appointment as soon as possible. The committee may recommend any alternate member for appointment by council to a vacant position. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, § 23, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 8, 2-1-11) 
Sec. 80-94.1. - Open space use regulations. 
(a)  Prohibitions. This section shall apply only to open space lands so designated and owned solely by the city. On such lands, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Engage in any business or commercial activity, including but not limited to, races or events, filming movies or commercials, sale of any goods, services or merchandise or equipment demonstrations without the prior written authorization of the director. It shall be an affirmative defense to this subsection that one is engaging in still camera photography. 
(2)  Distribute, circulate, give away, throw or deposit any handbills, circulars, pamphlets, papers or advertisements, or post or affix any handbills, circulars, pamphlets, papers or advertisements anywhere within or upon any open space without the prior written authorization of the director. 
(3)  Utilize any machine or device for the purpose of amplification of human voice, music or any other sound in any open space without the prior written authorization of the director. 
(4)  Drive, putt, or in any other fashion play or practice golf or use golf balls or golf clubs. 
(5)  Operate, drive, park, ride, wash, repair or service any motor vehicle, as defined in the Model Traffic Code, Section 102(41) as amended, except as permitted by the director. Vehicles in violation of this subsection shall be subject to being towed at the owner's expense. Motorized wheelchairs used by persons with disabilities shall be permitted for use upon open space on the condition that such use occurs within those areas permitted and upon the conditions established by the director. In accordance with the Model Traffic Code, Section 1208, as amended, only persons with disabilities may park in open space parking spaces designated for persons with disabilities. 
(6)  Except as permitted by federal law, take off or land any motorized or nonmotorized aircraft, including but not limited to airplanes, helicopters, ultralights, gliders/sailplanes, and hot-air balloons, operate or ride a bicycle, except on officially designated roads and trails. The director may impose additional restrictions on bicycle use of such roads and trails when such restrictions are necessary for resource protection or safety issues. 
(7)  Fail to comply with all requirements regarding the care, treatment and possession of animals, including wildlife, as set forth in chapter 25 of the Code, as amended. To pasture or graze an animal except as specifically authorized by the director or ride horses except where permitted by posting. 
(8)  Deposit, scatter, throw or leave any garbage, trash, refuse, waste or junk, of any form or substance, except that waste resulting from the lawful use of open space shall be deposited in the provided receptacles. 
(9)  Encroach into or upon, or construct or maintain any private improvements, including but not limited to gardens, landscaping, fences, tree houses, swings, swing-sets, bike ramps, paths or compost piles, or store any personal property on open space. 
(10)  Possess, sell, use, distribute, or consume any alcoholic beverages except as permitted by state law and chapter 10 of the Code. 
(11)  Dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate, apply chemicals, collect, deface, pollute, or cut any natural, historic, geologic, archeological, or cultural resource or any portion thereof, including but not limited to soil, rock, trees, weeds, grass, or any vegetation or plant, seed or scatter any nonindigenous vegetation. 
(12)  Cut, break, injure, mark, write or print upon or otherwise deface or disturb any rock, building, monument, sign, fence, kiosk, bench, or other manmade or natural feature or property; or attach thereto any sign, card, display, or other similar device, or any other object for the purpose of decorating or for any other purpose, except as authorized by prior written permission of the director. 
(13)  Light or maintain a fire, grill, or stove. 
(14)  Bring onto or use any glass or other breakable container. 
(15)  Discharge, possess, use or carry any weapon except as permitted by chapter 75 of the Code. 
(16)  Conduct any research project, special event or other similar activity requiring equipment which impacts open space without prior written authorization of the director. Passive nature study which does not cause any disturbance to open space is permitted and encouraged. 
(17)  Fail to yield to other trail users in the manner defined herein or as otherwise posted. The correct manner for yielding the trail right-of-way is as follows: Bicyclists and pedestrians yield to horses, bicyclists yield to pedestrians, and bicyclists headed downhill yield to bicyclists headed uphill. Yielding the right-of way requires slowing down to a safe speed, being prepared to stop, establishing communication, and passing safely. 
(18)  Engage in any of the following activities: hangliding, paragliding, parapenting, parachuting, parasailing, mountain skateboarding, mountain ski-biking, off-road roller blading, archery, or any sporting activity, to include but not limited to, baseball, football, soccer, lacrosse or field hockey or the use of remote-controlled land, water, or airborne devices without the prior written authorization of the director. 
(19)  Violate any posted regulatory sign. 
(b)  Geocaching. For purposes of this subsection: 
(1)  Definitions for purposes of this subsection: 
    Geocaching is defined as a recreational activity requiring the participant to search for hidden items or landmarks using a global positioning system and coordinates retrieved from an internet site or other source. 
    Multi-caching is defined as a variation of geocaching requiring the participant to obtain clues by locating numerous physical sites with a global positioning system, which clues eventually lead the participant to a final physical site. 
(2)  All caching must adhere to all rules set forth within this section and in addition; 
(3)  The department encourages virtual caching or "multi-caching." 
(4)  Caching is prohibited in areas designated as "wildlife preserve." 
(5)  Caching may occur only within designated trail corridors. 
(c)  Hours of use. Unless otherwise posted, open space shall be open daily from 4:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. No person shall be or remain in any open space at any other time, unless prior written permission is obtained from the director. Unless specifically authorized by the director motor vehicles or bicycles may not remain in open space parking lots during closed hours. Motor vehicles and bicycles in violation of this section shall be subject to being towed or removed at the owner's expense. 
(d)  Use of lakes and other bodies of water. All regulations set forth in this section shall also apply to use of lakes, ponds, streams, reservoirs or other bodies of water within any open space. 
(1)  No fishing is allowed in any body of water owned by the city within open space, unless under the jurisdiction of the state. 
(2)  No person shall swim, dive, wade, ice skate, or ice fish on any lake, pond, stream, reservoir or other body of water within any open space area. Boating is not allowed on any lake, pond, stream, reservoir or other body of water within any open space. 
(e)  Administrative rules and regulations. The director is authorized to adopt and enforce administrative rules and regulations that implement and supplement the regulations set forth in this section, when such rules or regulations are necessary for maintenance, repairs, or the protection or conservation of any lands, structures, property, wildlife or vegetation or to protect the public. All persons shall comply with such rules and regulations. 
(f)  Closures. City council may, when it deems necessary, close for any time period any open space area. The director may close any open space area as the director deems necessary due to conservation, wildlife, vegetation, management review, contractual or public safety concerns. No person shall enter open space areas that are closed by either city council or the director. 
(g)  Exceptions. City employees, authorized agents of the city and law enforcement personnel are exempt from the regulations set forth in this section while in the performance of their lawful duties. 
(Ord. No. 2006-39, § 1, 9-19-06) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2006-39, adopted Sept. 19, 2006, enacted provisions designated as § 80-94. Inasmuch as there already exists such a section, at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been redesignated as § 80-94.1. 
Secs. 80-94.2-80-94.4. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TREES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Section 25 of Ord. No. 2006-22, adopted June 6, 2006, recodified §§ 116-11-116-24 as §§ 80-94-80-107. 
Cross reference- Landscaping requirements and guidelines, § 26-19-5. 

Sec. 80-94.5. - Purpose. 
    The city council hereby finds and declares that trees are a vital part of the community because they provide oxygen, control pollution, store water, prevent soil erosion, provide shade and wind breaks, shelter wildlife, add beauty and provide living natural history. The city council intends to promote and protect the welfare of trees within the community by providing regulations for planting, maintaining and removing certain trees within the city limits of Lafayette subject to existing specifications and standards for landscaping, tree planting, maintenance and tree removal set forth elsewhere in the Code. The city council further declares that the policy of the city should be to encourage the planting of trees for the beautification and benefit of the community now and for the future. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 1, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Editor's note- Section 25 of Ord. No. 2006-22, recodified § 116-11 as § 80-94. Inasmuch as there already exists a § 80-94, said provisions have been redesignated as § 80-94.5, to avoid duplication of numbers. 
Sec. 80-95. - Applicability. 
    Nothing contained herein is intended to nor shall it be interpreted to void, nullify or obviate other provisions of the code including any provision of the development and zoning code. The provisions of this chapter are to be used either in conjunction with or are subordinate to the standards, specifications and provisions pertaining to landscaping and the planting, maintenance and removal of trees contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 2, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-96. - Tree board; creation. 
    Pursuant to Section 4.13 of the Charter, the "tree board" is hereby created for the purposes stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 3, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-97. - Same-Purposes. 
    The tree board is created to serve solely in an advisory capacity to make recommendations to the city council on matters related to trees and coordinate the following activities: 
(a)  Examine and review the needs of the city for tree preservation and make recommendations to city council, the planning commission and other departments of the city with respect to rules, regulations and policies governing the care, proliferation and protection of trees. 
(b)  Develop, implement and coordinate tree preservation activities through outreach, education, training and technical assistance programs. 
(c)  Work with local nurseries and other tree providers to educate and train citizens on the planting, care and proliferation of trees. Tree education programs should emphasize trees which are recommended for planting within the city and identify those trees which are unlawful to plant pursuant to section 26-19-5. 
(d)  Collect, evaluate and distribute information related to tree education and preservation including the development of a public information document educating citizens about the provisions contained in this chapter and the development and zoning code. 
(e)  Prepare an annual report for city council describing the various programs related to the tree board. The annual report will include data on the number of participants in the voluntary landmark tree program. 
(f)  Perform all other duties assigned to them by city council. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 4, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-98. - Same-Organization. 
(a)  The tree board shall be composed of eight (8) members to be appointed by city council no later than April 24, 1998. The members shall include the five (5) members of the open space advisory committee whose terms shall be concurrent with their term on the open space advisory committee. Three (3) members shall be ex officio members and shall include one (1) member of city council, one (1) member of the planning commission and the city administrator. 
(b)  The tree board shall annually elect from its membership a chairman and such other officers as it may deem necessary during its first meeting of each calendar year and adopt such rules as may be necessary to conduct its business. In the event a vacancy occurs, the city council shall appoint a new member to serve for the remainder of the vacated term in the manner prescribed for appointments to the open space advisory committee. 
(c)  All members of the tree board shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age, residents of the city for at least one (1) year and qualified registered voters. Members will serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 5, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-99. - City forester. 
    The director of parks, open space and golf shall act as the city forester. The city forester is appointed to administer and implement the provisions contained in this chapter. Duties and responsibilities of the city forester will include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  The review of voluntary requests from property owners to have their tree designated as a landmark tree. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Undergo training sufficient to carry out his/her duties as the city forester. 
(d)  Meet with the tree board each year prior to Arbor Day. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 6, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06; Ord. No. 2007-38, § 9, 9-4-07) 
Sec. 80-100. - Voluntary landmark tree program. 
(a)  Any property owner desiring to do so may request in writing that a qualified tree located on such property owner's property be designated by the city forester as a "landmark tree." Any tree which meets one or more of the following criteria may be designated by the city forester as a landmark tree: 
(1)  The tree is at least thirty (30) years old; 
(2)  The tree has a circumference of ten (10) feet or more when measured three (3) feet above its base; or 
(3)  The city forester in his discretion considers the tree rare or the tree is associated with a historical event. 
(b)  Any property owner whose tree is designated as a landmark tree shall record, at the property owner's expense, the document provided by the city forester evidencing such designation in the office of the clerk and recorder of Boulder County. The designation of a tree as a landmark tree shall constitute a restrictive covenant that shall be appurtenant to and shall run with the property. 
(c)  The city forester shall designate any tree located on city property as a landmark tree if it meets the criteria of subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 7, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-101. - Removal of a landmark tree; replacement. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), no person may remove or alter the location of a landmark tree without first obtaining a permit free of charge from the city forester. The city forester shall give such permit under any one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The landmark tree is diseased or otherwise poses a threat to other trees, persons or property; 
(2)  The property owner has shown cause sufficient to demonstrate that removal is necessary to protect the safety and welfare of citizens or their property; or 
(3)  The property owner agrees to plant one replacement tree either on the owner's property or on city property identified by the city forester. The replacement tree must have a circumference equal to at least one-tenth the circumference of the landmark tree removed provided, however, that such replacement tree meets the minimum plant size requirements of section 26-19-5(e) but not to exceed four (4) inch caliper measured six (6) inches above the ground. In lieu of planting replacement trees, the property owner may make a donation to the tree fund equal to the cost of the replacement trees that would otherwise be required by this section. 
(b)  Landmark trees located on city property may be removed by the city forester or his designee without a permit. 
(c)  A property owner who removes a landmark tree without first obtaining a permit shall make a donation to the tree fund in an amount equal to two (2) times the cost of the replacement tree that would otherwise be required under this section. Payment shall be made to the city clerk within thirty (30) days of removing the landmark tree. In the event payment is not made, the city administrator may elect to have such costs become a lien against the subject property at such time as the city discovers the landmark tree is removed and the city administrator or designee certifies the costs to the office of the county treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. A notice of the lien shall be recorded in the office of the Boulder County clerk and recorder. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 8, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-102. - Diseased or damaged trees. 
    The city forester shall serve written notice to the property owner of record for any property upon which the city forester discovers a tree infected with any destructive or communicable disease, insect or other pestilence which, in the sole discretion of the city forester, endangers the growth or health of other trees, or threatens to spread disease or insect infestations. Said notice shall require the property owner to eradicate, remove or otherwise control the complained of condition or request a hearing before the city administrator for the purpose of showing cause why the city forester's decision should be overturned within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 9, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-103. - Hearing. 
(a)  If the property owner requests a hearing within the time specified in section 80-102, the city administrator shall set the matter for hearing within ten (10) days and send notice of such hearing to the property owner. The property owner shall appear before the city administrator or a designee thereof for the purposes of presenting evidence as to why the city forester's decision should be overturned. 
(b)  At the hearing referred to above, the city administrator or designee shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the city forester, the property owner, or any witness shall offer relative to the complained of condition. The city administrator or designee shall make findings of fact from the statements and evidence offered as to whether the complained of condition exists and if so, what is the appropriate remedy. If the city administrator or designee determines that certain remedial action is warranted, the city administrator or designee shall issue an order based on the findings of fact made pursuant herewith commanding such remedial action be taken by the owner within thirty (30) days from the hearing. If the property owner does not comply with such order, the city may undertake such remedial action at the expense of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 10, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-104. - Appeal. 
(a)  The property owner shall have the right to request in writing an appeal of the decision of the city administrator or designee to the city council within three (3) days of the date of the written decision. Failure of a property owner to appeal said order constitutes a waiver by such property owner of any right the property owner may otherwise have to contest the city's right to require remedial action on such property and charge the resulting costs against the property owner's property. 
(b)  The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal at its next meeting but not later than twenty-one (21) calendar days from the date of the written request for appeal. At the appeal hearing, the city council shall hear such statements and consider such evidence as the city forester, city administer, the property owner, or any witness shall offer relative to the complained of condition. The city council shall make findings of fact from the statements and evidence offered as to whether the provisions of this chapter were violated and if so, what is the appropriate remedy. If the city council determines that certain remedial action is warranted, the city council shall issue an order based on the findings of fact made pursuant herewith commanding the owner to undertake such remedial action. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 11, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-105. - Remedial action. 
(a)  If the complained of condition has not been removed within the time stated in the city forester's notice, the order of the city administrator or the order of the city council, the city administrator or designee may remove the tree or take such other remedial action as is stated in the notice or order. 
(b)  The property owner shall be charged with all administrative costs and expenses incurred in conjunction with the remedial action. Such administrative costs shall include the cost of said remedial action including without limitation, inspection fees, legal expenses and other expenses as ascertained by the city administrator, or designee, which are the result of undertaking remedial action. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 12, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-106. - Collection of costs. 
(a)  All costs incurred by the city under this chapter may be assessed against the subject property. If the city administrator or designee thereof determines to assess costs against the subject property, the city administrator or designee shall prepare a statement enumerating all such costs to be assessed. A copy of the city administrator's determination shall be served upon the property owner by first class mail. 
(b)  In the event payment of the assessment pursuant to subsection (a) is not made to the city clerk within thirty (30) days after a copy of the city administrator's determination is served, the city administrator may elect to have the assessed amount become a lien against the subject property as of the date the city administrator or designee certifies the assessed costs to the office of the county treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. A notice of the lien shall be recorded in the office of the Boulder County clerk and recorder. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 13, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Sec. 80-107. - Payment and assessment of costs. 
(a)  The amount of assessment for the costs provided for under section 80-106 or 80-101 of this chapter may be paid to the city treasurer at any time prior to certification of the same by the city administrator or designee to the office of the county treasurer, but thereafter payments shall be made only to the office of county treasurer. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the assessment roll under this chapter, the county treasurer shall proceed to collect the amounts so assessed and certified against the property affected thereby in the same manner as the collection of general property taxes and the redemption thereof. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, § 14, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2006-22, § 25, 6-6-06) 
Chapter 81 - RECREATION AND FACILITY MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 81-1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 81-2. - Department duties. 
    The department of recreation and facility management shall prepare and recommend to the city council and the city administrator general plans for development of recreation facilities and public recreation programs. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, § 26, 6-6-06) 
Secs. 81-3-81-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 81-36. - Authority to enforce. 
    To the extent that the rules and regulations in sections 80-50 through 80-80 are applicable to any parks and recreation facility under the authority of the director of recreation and facility management, the director of recreation and facility management shall be responsible to enforce them. 
(Ord. No. 2006-22, § 26, 6-6-06) 
Secs. 81-37-81-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SENIOR SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 2011-33, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, recodified Ch. 50, Art. II, as Ch. 81, Art. III, and renumbered § 50-10 as § 81-50. Section 6 of said ordinance further provided for the addition of reserved §§ 81-37-81-49. 

Sec. 81-50. - Senior advisory board established. 
(a)  Established. There shall be and is hereby established a senior advisory board which shall have the primary responsibility of serving as an advisory group to city council with regard to the quality of life in the city for older adults, and to the provision of services for this age group. 
(b)  Membership. The board shall consist of seven (7) citizens of Lafayette, who shall be appointed by the city council. A city employee appointed by the city administrator shall serve as a nonvoting staff liaison to the board. 
(c)  Term. All appointments to the board shall be for a period of three (3) years. The board may recruit and recommend nominees to city council for appointment. Vacancies on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term by city council appointment as soon as possible. A member of the board shall not receive a salary or other compensation for services as a board member, but necessary traveling and subsistence expenses actually incurred may be paid from the general fund. City council may, upon recommendation of the board, appoint up to two (2) alternate members, which member(s) shall be called upon to serve and vote in the absence of a regular member(s), and the board may recommend any alternate member for appointment by council to a vacant position. Board members serve at the pleasure of city council. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The board shall: 
(1)  Adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for its guidance and government. 
(2)  Prepare and submit to city council a plan for the enhancement of the quality of life of older adults living in the city, and as necessary amend the plan. 
(3)  Review the annual senior services budget request. 
(4)  Monitor gifts of money which shall be segregated in the accounting records of the city or property or endowments as may be granted to and accepted for senior services purposes and to encourage grants, or gifts, in support of senior services. 
(5)  Adopt policies that provide for the provision of senior services. Such policies shall be effective upon adoption or at the time specified in the policy, unless and until city council disapproves of the policy. The senior advisory board shall promptly submit any adopted policy to city council for its review. 
(6)  Review the qualifications of all final candidates for the staff position directly administering senior services. 
(7)  Recommend to city council local legislation and policies that will encourage the inclusion of older adults in the community and support their needs. 
(Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 6, 2-1-11; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 5, 9-20-11) 
Chapter 85 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Resolution No. 2005-40, passed Oct. 4, 2005, supports the repeal of the personnel board; therefore, at the direction of the city, §§ 85-1-85-11, containing provisions pertaining to said board, have been removed. Former §§ 85-1-85-11 derived from Ord. No. 1984-13, adopted June 5, 1984. 

Secs. 85-1-85-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city to establish an alternative pension plan or retirement system, C. R. S. § 24-54-101 et seq. 

Sec. 85-21. - Creation of retirement association. 
    Pursuant to C.R.S. § 24-54-101 et seq., as amended, there is hereby established the "Lafayette Employees Retirement Association," for the purpose of establishing a retirement plan or system for the city's elected or appointed officers and its employees, excluding sworn ambulance and fire and commissioned police personnel. The Lafayette Employees Retirement Association may be referred to in this article as the "association." 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 1, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 2007-22, § 1, 7-3-07) 
Sec. 85-22. - Purpose of association. 
    The association is being created for the purpose of establishing an alternative pension plan or retirement system as permitted by C.R.S. § 24-54-101 et seq., as an alternative to Lafayette's affiliation with the Public Employees' Retirement Association, established by C.R.S. § 24-51-101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 2, 5-19-92) 
Sec. 85-23. - Membership. 
    The membership of the association may include all elected or appointed officers of the city, and the city's employees, as established by the retirement plan or plans (hereafter "retirement plan") adopted by the board of retirement created hereby. The retirement plan shall not apply to or include sworn ambulance and fire and commissioned police personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 3, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 2007-22, § 1, 7-3-07) 
Sec. 85-24. - Funds not subject to process. 
    Except for assignments for child support purposes as provided by Colorado statute, and except for writs of garnishment which are the result of a judgment taken for arrearages for child support or for child support debt, none of the monies, funds, annuities, individual accounts, or other benefits adopted by the association shall be assignable either in law or in equity or be subject to execution, levy, attachment, garnishment or other legal process. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 4, 5-19-92) 
Sec. 85-25. - Creation of board of retirement. 
    There is hereby created a board of retirement in whom is vested the general administration, management and responsibility for the proper operation of the association, and for making effective and construing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 5, 5-19-92) 
Sec. 85-26. - Composition of board; compensation; term. 
    The board shall serve without pay and shall consist of five (5) members, as follows: 
(1)  City administrator, mayor, and city treasurer; 
(2)  Two (2) regular full-time employees, elected by said employees to serve overlapping four-year terms, with the initial employee receiving the lesser number of votes to serve a two-year term. An employee may be reelected to unlimited consecutive four-year terms. 
    The board of retirement may select ex officio (nonvoting) individuals for membership on the board. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 6, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 2007-22, § 1, 7-3-07) 
Sec. 85-27. - Officers of the board. 
(a)  Chairman. The city treasurer shall act as chairman of the board. 
(b)  Treasurer. The city treasurer shall be ex officio treasurer of the board and the administrative officer of the association. The treasurer shall be bonded in an amount to be determined by the board. The cost of the bond shall be paid from the retirement plan; provided, however, if the bond of the treasurer required by the city is sufficient to meet the board's requirements, no additional bond shall be required of the treasurer. 
(c)  Secretary. The city clerk, or designee, shall act as secretary to the board. 
(d)  Legal advisor. The city attorney shall act as legal advisor to the board. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 7, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 2007-22, § 1, 7-3-07) 
Sec. 85-28. - Meetings of the board. 
    The board shall hold meetings regularly, at least annually, and shall designate the time and place thereof. All meetings of the board shall be public, and notice thereof shall be given in accordance with applicable state or ordinance requirements. Unless the board shall otherwise determine at its first meeting in any calendar year, notice of board meetings shall be posted on the main door to the city council chambers, located in the Lafayette City Hall at 1290 S. Public Road, Lafayette, Colorado. Each member of the board, other than ex officio, shall be entitled to one (1) vote in the meetings of the board. 
    Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the board, and a majority vote of the board shall be determinative of any issue before the board. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 8, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 2007-22, § 1, 7-3-07) 
Sec. 85-29. - Powers of the board. 
    The board shall be vested with the following powers: 
(1)  The board shall have full and complete control and management of any retirement plan established by the board; 
(2)  The board shall determine what type of retirement plan in which to participate and shall select, on the basis of the most sound proposal, a plan based either on the purchase of an insured group plan of retirement annuities funded through a group carrier, or a noninsured trust retirement plan, or participation in the public employees' retirement association; 
(3)  The board shall hear and decide all applications for relief, pensions, annuities, retirement, or other benefits pursuant to the plan or system adopted. A record of such action and all other matters properly coming before said board shall be kept and preserved; 
(4)  The board may appoint such consultants, advisors, or other persons as it deems necessary to assist it in performing its duties of control and management of the retirement plan. The retirement plan shall be responsible for payment of any costs incurred thereby; 
(5)  The board shall have any other powers necessary for it to carry out its functions as established by this article, not inconsistent with or limited by state or federal statute. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 9, 5-19-92) 
Sec. 85-29.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2007-22, adopted July 3, 2007, deleted § 85-29.1, which pertained to equity investments by individual plan members, and derived from Ord. No. 1994-2, adopted April 4, 1994. 
Sec. 85-30. - Records and reports. 
    The secretary of the board shall keep, or cause to be kept, such data as shall be necessary to document actions of the board. The board shall render a report to the city council at least annually. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 10, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 2007-22, § 1, 7-3-07) 
Sec. 85-31. - Interest of board members. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, no board member or any officer or employee of the association shall have any interest, direct or indirect, in the gains or profits of any investments made by the board. No board member, nor any entity with which the board member may have an interest, as owner, shareholder, employee, or otherwise, may engage in any contractual relationship with the association. No board member or other person connected with the board, directly or indirectly, for himself or as an agent or partner of others, shall borrow any of the funds or deposits of the association, or in any manner use the same, except to make such current and necessary payments as are authorized by the board; nor shall any board member, or other person connected with the board, become an endorser, surety or become, in any manner, an obligor for monies loaned or borrowed of the retirement plan. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 11, 5-19-92) 
Sec. 85-32. - Vacancies on the board. 
    In the event that any board member ceases to be qualified to serve on the board, the board shall declare that member's office vacated. If any vacancy so occurs, the vacancy shall be filled within ninety (90) days after the date of the vacancy for the unexpired term, in the same manner as the office was previously filled. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 12, 5-19-92) 
Sec. 85-33. - Rules and regulations. 
    The board shall make all necessary rules and regulations for managing and discharging its duties (not inconsistent with statute or with the provisions of this article), for its own government and procedure in so doing, and for the preservation and protection of any fund or annuity contract. 
(Ord. No. 1992-10, § 13, 5-19-92) 
Chapter 86 - COLLECTIVE BARGAINING FOR FIREFIGHTERS 

Sec. 86-1. - Statement of policy. 
    The protection of the public health, safety and welfare demands that the city's firefighters or any employee organization not be allowed to strike or engage in any work stoppage, slowdown or mass absenteeism. This necessary prohibition imposed by the city does not, however, require the denial to firefighters the right to organize, the right to be represented by an employee organization of their choice, and the right to bargain collectively. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to have a system of collective bargaining to establish a productive relationship between the city and its firefighters and to use such system to establish compensation, hours, and certain terms and conditions of the firefighter's employment as specified in this chapter. The city hereby adopts a system of independent fact finding with submission of certain unresolved issues to the registered electors of the city to resolve such issues. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different interpretation, the following terms shall have the following meaning: 
    American Arbitration Association means the American Arbitration Association or its successor organization. 
    City administrator shall mean the city administrator or the administrator's designated representatives. 
    Collective bargaining shall mean the performance of the mutual obligation of the city, through its designated representatives, and the firefighters' bargaining agent, to meet at reasonable times and places and negotiate in good faith with respect to compensation, hours, and certain terms and conditions of employment, as defined in this section. 
    Compensation shall mean wages, salaries, and any other monetary compensation paid to firefighters. 
    Employee organization shall mean an organization that admits firefighters employed by the city to membership and represents firefighters in collective bargaining and includes any person acting as an officer, representative or agent of such organization. 
    Final offer shall mean the written offer on unresolved issues that are subject to negotiation as set forth in this chapter, made latest in time by a party to the other party at least seven (7) days prior to the start of the independent fact finding impasse hearing. 
    Firefighter shall mean a paid employee of the city whose primary duties are directly involved with the provision of fire protection or firefighting services up to and including the rank of lieutenant, except that, for the purposes of this chapter, "Firefighter" does not include clerical personnel or reserve firefighters. 
    Firefighters' bargaining agent shall mean an employee organization chosen by the firefighters as set forth in this chapter to be the sole and exclusive representative of the firefighters for the purpose of collective bargaining. 
    Fringe benefits shall mean vacation leave; holidays; sick leave; bereavement leave; jury duty leave; leave for union activity; other paid or unpaid leave; the method for applying for and voting for leave; insurance (levels of contributions and levels of benefit); allowance for uniforms and equipment and the maintenance of uniforms and equipment; tuition allowance reimbursement; and any other financial or economic benefits granted to individual fire department employees. 
    Good faith shall mean an honest and sincere attempt to reach a mutually acceptable resolution of all issues in dispute through the bargaining process. However, the obligation to negotiate in good faith does not compel a party to agree to a proposal or require the making of a concession. 
    Hours shall mean the amount of working time in the work period and the notice and the time intervals regarding changes of shifts. 
    Impasse shall mean failure of the parties to reach agreement only with regard to compensation, hours, or terms and conditions of employment within the period of collective bargaining specified by this chapter. 
    Independent fact finding shall mean the investigation and hearing of issue(s) of impasse arising out collective bargaining, selection of an independent fact finder, submitting a report defining the issue(s) of impasse, analyzing and reporting the facts relating thereto, and making non-binding recommendation(s) on the final offers of the city or the firefighters' bargaining agent for the purpose of resolving the issue(s) of impasse in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-3. - Right to organize and bargain collectively. 
    Firefighters shall have the right to engage in collective bargaining with the city and to be represented by an employee organization in such negotiations in accordance with this chapter as to the following matters, which are set forth as follows: 
(1)  Compensation as defined in this chapter; 
(2)  Fringe benefits as defined in his chapter; 
(3)  Hours as defined in this chapter; 
(4)  Personal safety and health equipment; 
(5)  Procedures relating to labor/management cooperation and communications; 
(6)  Procedures and notice relating to the layoff and recall of firefighters, but not the decision of whether to layoff or recall firefighters; 
(7)  Procedures for promotions, rotations and transfer of firefighters, but not the decision of whether to promote, rotate or transfer firefighters; and 
(8)  Grievance procedures for allegations of violations of the collective bargaining agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-4. - Management rights retained by the city. 
(a)  The city reserves and retains solely and exclusively all of its constitutional, statutory, home rule charter, ordinance and common law rights, duties and responsibilities to manage the fire department, supervise all fire department employees, and to take all necessary actions to carry out the mission of the city and of the state during federal, state or local emergencies. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to alter the employment status of firefighters or limit the authority of the fire chief and/or the city administrator to exercise powers to discipline firefighters as authorized by the city's home rule charter and implemented through the Code and the employee handbook. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-5. - Selection and recognition of bargaining agent. 
(a)  The city hereby recognizes International Association of Fire Fighters, Local 4620 ("Local 4620"), as the firefighters' bargaining agent since it represents a majority of firefighters, and such recognition shall continue unless and until Local 4620 is removed as the firefighters' bargaining agent as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Questions concerning the selection or removal of a bargaining agent may be raised by petition of any firefighter, group of firefighters or employee organization representing or wishing to represent the firefighters, but only if such petition is signed by at least fifty (50) percent of the firefighters. Such a petition may be submitted at any time to the American Arbitration Association provided that in the event there is a bargaining agent then certified or recognized by the city, no petition may be filed within twelve (12) months of the bargaining agent's certification or recognition; and further that no petition may be filed during the term of an existing agreement, except during the period from January 1 to January 31 of the final year of such agreement. 
(c)  When a petition is filed concerning the selection or removal of a bargaining agent, the American Arbitration Association shall promptly send the petition to the fire department for determination of whether it contains the requisite number of signatures. The fire chief shall promptly make that determination and notify the American Arbitration Association of its conclusion. If the petition has the requisite number of signatures, the American Arbitration Association shall determine the question of selection or removal of any bargaining agent by taking a secret ballot of firefighters and certifying in writing the results thereof to the city and the person, persons and employee organizations involved. The secret ballot election shall be conducted not less than fifteen (15) days, and not more than thirty (30) days, from the date of filing the petition. The American Arbitration Association shall certify the results of the above-described election within three (3) days of the close of the polls. The cost of running the election shall be borne equally by each organization on the ballot. Under no circumstances shall the city be responsible for any of the costs of such an election. 
(d)  The employee organization selected by the majority of the firefighters voting in an election conducted pursuant to subsection (c) of this section shall be recognized by the city as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for all firefighters unless and until the American Arbitration Association certifies a different organization, in accordance with the rules and procedures set forth in this section. 
(e)  The election procedure shall follow the rules established by the American Arbitration Association. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-6. - Obligation to engage in collective bargaining. 
(a)  The city administrator and the firefighters' bargaining agent shall have the duty to engage in collective bargaining, and the obligation to bargain in good faith. 
(b)  In order to begin the collective bargaining process under subsections (c) and (d) of this section, it is the obligation of the bargaining agent to serve written notice of request for collective bargaining on the city no later than sixty (60) days prior to the commencement of collective bargaining. 
(c)  The initial collective bargaining negotiations must commence upon the effective date of this chapter. Initial negotiations shall conclude thirty (30) days after the commencement of such negotiations. 
(d)  With the exception of the initial collective bargaining negotiations, collective bargaining shall commence in the final year of a collective bargaining agreement no later than April 1 and conclude thirty (30) days after the commencement of such negotiations. 
(e)  All time limits for action contained in this chapter, other than the times for requesting and commencing bargaining set forth in this section, may be waived by mutual consent of the parties. 
(f)  The city shall not negotiate as to matters controlled by any federal or state constitutional provision, law, rule, regulation, or the city's Home Rule Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-7. - Unresolved issues submitted to independent fact finding. 
    In the event that the firefighters' bargaining agent and the city are unable, within thirty (30) days from and including the date of their first meeting, to reach mutually acceptable terms as to matters subject to negotiation, final offers on any or all such unresolved issues may be submitted by either or both parties to an independent fact finder. The obligation of the parties to bargain in good faith shall continue after submission of unresolved issues to an independent fact finder. Any or all issues, which are unresolved between the firefighters' bargaining agent and the city, may be resolved by the parties at any time. In the event the firefighters' bargaining agent and the city are able to reach agreement upon any or all issues prior to the receipt of the decision of the independent fact finder, then the independent fact finder shall make no decision on such issue or issues. 
(Ord. No. 2106-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-8. - Independent fact finder selection. 
(a)  Within seven (7) days after the expiration of the thirty-day negotiation time period set forth in this chapter, either the firefighters' bargaining agent or the city shall notify the American Arbitration Association that an independent fact finder is required. The parties shall request that the American Arbitration Association submit simultaneously to each side an identical list of seven (7) persons qualified to serve as an independent fact finder within seven (7) days after the notification. 
(b)  In order to be qualified as an independent fact finder, a person must be a member of the National Academy of Arbitrators or the American Arbitration Association panel of labor arbitrators. Any person whose only experience is as a hearing officer in any civil or career service system shall not be qualified. 
(c)  Within seven (7) days from the service of the list on the parties, the parties shall alternately strike one (1) name from the list until one (1) individual is selected, who shall be appointed as the independent fact finder. 
(d)  Upon appointment, the independent fact finder shall sign an oath to uphold the terms of this chapter. 
(e)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the parties from agreeing to an independent fact finder. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-9. - Hearings. 
(a)  The independent fact finder shall call a hearing to begin within twenty-five (25) days of notification of selection, and shall give at least ten (10) days' notice in writing to the firefighters' bargaining agent and the city of the time and place of such hearing. The hearing shall be informal, and the rules of evidence prevailing in judicial proceedings shall not be binding. 
(b)  All oral or documentary evidence and other data deemed competent and relevant by the independent fact finder shall be received in evidence. The independent fact finder shall have the power to administer oaths and to require by subpoena the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of books, records and other evidence relating to or pertinent to the issues presented for determination. 
(c)  The hearing conducted by the independent fact finder shall be concluded within seven (7) days of the time of commencement. Within seven (7) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the parties may, if they deem necessary, submit written briefs to the independent fact finder. 
(d)  Within ten (10) days of receipt of such briefs, or within seventeen (17) days after the conclusion of the hearing if no post-hearing briefs are filed, the independent fact finder shall make written findings and conclusions setting forth the basis of the independent fact finder's decision on the issues presented, a copy of which shall be delivered on the same date and in the same manner to the firefighters' bargaining agent and the city. 
(e)  In the event the firefighters' bargaining agent and/or the city reject any or all of the independent fact finders decision(s) they may submit the unresolved issue(s) of impasse to an election as set forth in this chapter. 
(f)  Issue(s) of impasse not submitted to an election shall be deemed resolved by the decision of the independent fact finder, and the parties shall both be obligated to abide by, and give effect to that decision. 
(g)  By mutual agreement of the parties and the independent fact finder, the time frames in this section may be extended. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-10. - Required factors that shall be considered by the independent fact finder. 
    The independent fact finder shall conduct the hearing and render his or her decision(s) with due consideration of the need for a prompt, peaceful and just settlement of all unresolved issues between the involved firefighters' bargaining agent and the city. The independent fact finder's written findings and conclusions shall be reached only after consideration of the parties' final offers as to the issues of impasse and all of the following factors: 
(a)  The interests and welfare of the residents of the city; 
(b)  The city's finances; 
(c)  The lawful authority of the city; 
(d)  Stipulations of the parties; 
(e)  Comparison of what other fire service employees performing comparable services, for comparable public employers in comparable communities receive regarding the negotiable matters set forth in this chapter; 
(f)  Any claims of failure of a party to bargain in good faith as required in this chapter; and 
(g)  Other usual and customary standards recognized in the resolution of interest disputes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-11. - Final offer procedure. 
    The city and the firefighters' bargaining agent shall submit final offers, as set forth in the definitions section of this chapter to the independent fact finder on each issue of impasse that is to be decided by the independent fact finder. The decision of the independent fact finder on each issue of impasse shall be the final offer of the city or the final offer of the firefighters' bargaining agent. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-12. - The independent fact finder's decision. 
    The decision(s) of the independent fact finder is/are not binding on the firefighters' bargaining agent or the city. Nothing herein shall prohibit the parties from agreeing to terms different from the decision of the independent fact finder, as long as such agreements are made within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the independent fact finder's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-13. - Fees and expenses of independent fact finding. 
    The parties shall equally bear all necessary fees and expenses incurred in the course of the independent fact finding process (excluding all fees and expenses incurred by either party in the preparation or presentation of its case). 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-14. - Unresolved issues submitted at election. 
(a)  Upon the request of the firefighters' bargaining agent, or the city, made within thirty (30) days after receipt of the independent fact finder's decision, and after expiration of the parties additional fourteen-day negotiation period, the final offers of the firefighters' bargaining agent, or the city, on the issue(s) of impasse remaining unresolved may each be submitted as alternative single measure to a vote of the city's registered electors at a regular municipal election, or at a special municipal election held in conjunction with the state's November general election, whichever is earliest in time. 
(b)  The format and wording of the ballot question (ballot title) shall be framed to accurately reflect the final offers of the firefighters' bargaining agent and the city as presented to the independent fact finder. 
(c)  The registered electors shall by the majority of those voting select either the final offer of the firefighters' bargaining agent or final offer of the city as presented to the independent fact finder. 
(d)  Issues agreed to during the fourteen-day period described in subsection (a) of this section shall not be included in the final offer of the firefighters' bargaining agent or final offer of the city. 
(e)  The cost of the election shall be borne by the firefighters bargaining agent or the city, whichever refuses to accept the recommendations of the independent fact finder. 
(f)  If both the firefighter's bargaining agent and the city refuse, the election costs shall be borne equally by the firefighter's bargaining agent and the city. In such event, the firefighter's bargaining agent shall pay only its proportionate share of the election expenses that are related to resolving the impasse. 
(g)  In the event that issue(s) unrelated to the unresolved issue(s) of impasse are also to be decided upon in any election then the firefighter's bargaining agent shall pay only its proportionate share of the election expenses that are related to resolving the issue(s) of impasse. 
(h)  Any prorating of cost under this section shall be on the basis of the number of issues, questions, or offices included on the ballot, with the unresolved issue(s) of impasse collectively considered as one (1) matter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-15. - Obligation to abide by the results of collective bargaining. 
    The city and the firefighters and their bargaining agent are obligated to abide by, give effect to, and execute a written collective bargaining agreement incorporating any understandings reached by the city and the firefighters' bargaining agent, regarding those matters which are: 
(a)  Agreed to by both parties after collective bargaining; or 
(b)  Agreed to by both parties after the decision of the independent fact finder, or 
(c)  Approved by the majority of the registered electors of the city voting at an election. 
    The term of a collective bargaining agreement shall commence on January 1 and be for a duration of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 86-16. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Neither the firefighters' bargaining agent nor any firefighter, nor any person acting in concert with them, will cause, sanction or take part in any withholding of any services or performance due to the city or its citizens by means of a strike, walkout, sit down, slowdown, stoppage of work, abnormal absenteeism, or other method. All such actions are expressly prohibited. 
(b)  Violation of any provision of subsection (a) of this section by any firefighter may result in discipline, up to and including termination, of the firefighter, in addition to whatever other remedies may be available to the city at law or in equity. 
(c)  No firefighter or person seeking to become a firefighter shall be appointed, promoted, reduced, removed or in any way discriminated against because of affiliations or non-affiliations with an employee organization. 
(Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Chapters 87-89 - RESERVED 
[1] 
Footnotes: 

Chapter 90 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Improvement districts, Ch. XI. 
Cross reference- Public improvement information furnished to planning commission, § 5-43; parks, recreation and cemeteries, Ch. 80; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 105. 
State Law reference- Public improvements generally, C. R. S. § 31-15-707 et seq.; special improvement districts, C. R. S. § 31-25-501 et seq.; improvement districts (1949 Act), C. R. S. § 31-25-601 et seq. 
Annotation- Where electors presented to the city council a referendum petition demanding the repeal of Ordinance No. 355, an emergency ordinance providing for a street-paving improvement district, the petition was valid and could be applied to an emergency ordinance. Burks v. Lafayette, 142 Colo. 61, 349 P.2d 692 (1960) 

Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter: 
    Alley improvements. The term "alley improvements" shall include surfacing and necessary improvements incidental thereto. 
    City administrator. All references to the "city administrator shall include his authorized representative, when such authority has been given by a written order of the city administrator. 
    City engineer. All references to the "city engineer" shall include any engineer, or firm of engineers or corporation engaged in the practice of engineering which may be under contract with the city with respect to local public improvements contracted for or installed pursuant to this Chapter. 
    Lots, etc. Lots, plots, block and other subdivisions may be designated in accordance with any recorded plat thereof, and unplatted lands by any definite description. 
    Real estate. The term "real estate" shall be held to mean all lands, whether platted or unplatted, regardless of the lot or land lines. 
    Street. The term "street" shall include avenues, boulevards and other highways. 
    Street improvements. The term "street improvements" shall include any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Surfacing of roadways. 
(2)  Construction of curbs, gutters and sidewalks. 
(3)  The necessary grading therefor. 
(4)  Landscaping of adjoining parkways by the planting of trees and shrubs. 
(5)  Storm drainage incidental thereto. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 23, 2-2-72) 
State Law reference- Definitions relating to improvement districts, C. R. S. §§ 31-25-501 and 31-25-602. 
Sec. 90-2. - Power of city generally. 
    The city shall have the power to contract for, construct or install special or local public improvements; to assess the cost thereof wholly or in part against the property specially benefited; to jointly make and jointly contract for a local public improvement and a general public improvement and to pay from any lawful fund that portion of the cost which is general public benefit; and to accept contributions or grants-in-aid to supply the whole or any part of the cost apportioned to the city, or to accept and apply such contribution or grants-in-aid wholly or in part credit to the appropriate public improvement district. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 2, 2-2-72) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.1 
State Law reference- Power of city to make local improvements, C. R. S. § 31-25-502. 
Sec. 90-3. - Improvements. 
(a)  The improvements authorized by this chapter may consist of any special or local improvement of any character, which improvement confers special benefits on real estate abutting on or in the vicinity of such improvement. 
(b)  Without limiting the generality of subsection (a) of this section, such improvements may consist of grading, paving, curbing, guttering, providing parking for, or otherwise improving the whole or any part of any street or alley, or streets or alleys in the city, or any one or more of said improvements, including the reconstruction, replacement, renewal, or extension of the same. In case of grading only, or grading and curbing only, the improvements may include the necessary cross walks. 
(c)  Such improvements may also consist of the construction of district sewers, or storm sewers in districts to be known as storm sewer districts, the same to be provided by ordinance in accordance with the provisions herein contained. Said sewers may consist of the necessary manholes, inlets and appurtenances, and shall be so constructed as to connect with some existing public sewer or natural drainage. Said districts may be divided into subdistricts to be specially named or numbered in said ordinance. The costs of district storm sewers may be assessed on all of the land in said storm sewer district respectively in proportion as the area of each piece of land in the district or in the part improved is to the area of all the land in the district, exclusive of public streets and highways, or by any other method that will result in the assessments being equitable in proportion to the benefits received. Such storm drains may be made, contracted for, or constructed larger than required by a local public improvement district, and the city may pay from any lawful fund that portion of the cost that may be in excess of the cost required by the district, and upon the extension at a later time of the mains or submains to an area not included within the district for which mains or submains were made and contracted for, the city may assess the amount paid by the city as a lien upon real property benefited by the over-sized construction and extension of the mains and submains. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 24, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 1, 5-1-84) 
State Law reference- What improvements may be made, C. R. S. § 31-25-503. 
Sec. 90-4. - Petitions for improvement-Contents. 
    Every petition for a proposed improvement under this chapter shall describe the real property owned by each signer as being benefited by the proposed improvement, shall state the nature and location of the proposed improvement and the proposed maximum unit cost thereof, which unit cost shall be exclusive of the cost of collection of the assessments, other incidentals and all interests on any bonds issued in payment of construction and other costs from the time of issuance of said bonds to the time that interest commences on assessments; shall authorize advertising of the proposed improvement for remonstrances, if a preliminary, informal estimate of the city engineer indicates that the cost of the proposed improvement will not exceed by more than ten (10) percent the maximum unit cost set forth in the petition; and shall authorize an increase of the proposed maximum unit cost by not more than ten (10) percent thereof, and the assessment of such increase, if the estimate of the city engineer determines that such increase is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 5, 2-2-72) 
State Law reference- Petition for improvement, C. R. S. § 31-25-503. 
Sec. 90-5. - Same-Signatures. 
    All signatures on petitions shall be subscribed and acknowledged in the manner provided by law for the acknowledgement of deeds of conveyance of real estate; provided, however, that the signature of any owner or owners of real property may be attached to a petition by their agents duly authorized by power of attorney accompanying the petition. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 5, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-6. - Same-Withdrawal. 
    No petitioner, his heirs or assigns shall be permitted to withdraw from a petition after such petition has been filed with the city administrator unless the proposed improvement is not advertised for remonstrances within nine (9) months from the filing of the petition with the city administrator, and any petitioner who fails to withdraw prior to advertising shall be deemed to have waived his right to withdraw. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 5, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-7. - Assessment of property generally. 
(a)  In all cases when the cost of a local public improvement is to be assessed wholly or in part upon the property benefited, the cost shall be assessed in proportion to benefits received. Such assessments may be in proportion as the frontage of each lot or tract of land is to the frontage of all the lots and lands so improved, or may be in proportion as the area of each piece of real estate in the district is to the area of all the real estate in the district, or may be by any other method that will result in assessments being most equitably in proportion to benefits received. 
(b)  If, at the time of the passage of the ordinance authorizing any improvement, any piece of real estate has the whole or any part of the proposed improvement conforming to the general plan and acceptable to the city engineer, the existing improvement may be adopted in whole or in part, or necessary changes thereof may be made to make the same conform to the general plan, and the owner of such real estate shall, when the assessment is made, be credited with the amount which is saved by reason of adopting or adapting such existing improvement. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 4, 2-2-72) 
State Law reference- Cost assessed in accordance with benefits, C. R. S. § 31-25-513. 
Sec. 90-8. - Public notice-Required. 
    In all cases where the cost of local public improvements is assessed wholly or in part upon property benefited, public notice of the proposed improvements, either individually or in groups, shall be given. If the petition for an improvement is signed by one hundred (100) percent of the owners of the real property to be assessed and contains a request for waiver, or if each of such property owners otherwise executes and delivers to the city council a waiver agreement satisfactory to the city council, the city council may, in its discretion, waive any or all of the requirements for notice, publication, and hearing set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 6, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1986-14, § 1, 4-1-86) 
Sec. 90-9. - Same-Assessed real estate not adjacent to improvement. 
    When it is proposed to assess real estate which is not abutting, adjoining, contiguous or adjacent to any proposed improvement, the notice shall state the exterior boundaries of the real estate proposed to be so assessed, or of the proposed district. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 6, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-10. - Same-How advertised. 
    The city administrator shall, by advertisement at least once, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, give notice to the owners of the real estate benefited and to all persons interested generally, without naming such owners or persons, of the proposed improvements and of the real property which would be assessed therefor, a proposed method of assessment and the manner of payment therefor, and the date, place and time for hearing written remonstrances to the proposed improvement, which date shall be not less than ten (10) days after the publication of the notice of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 6, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 2, 5-1-84) 
Sec. 90-11. - Same-How mailed. 
    The city administrator shall mail by first class mail, not less than seven (7) days prior to the hearing, a copy of the notice of proposed improvements to the owners of record of all real estate in the proposed district as such owners of record are determined by reference to the current records in the office of the county assessor, as such records are kept by that official for the purpose of performing his function of county assessor. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 6, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 3, 5-1-84) 
Sec. 90-12. - Objections to improvement. 
    In all cases where the cost of a local public improvement is to be assessed wholly or in part upon property benefited, the improvement shall be initiated by the city administrator without receiving a petition therefor, except that when the owners of the real estate which would bear thirty-five (35) percent or more of the estimated cost of the proposed improvements have filed a regularly executed petition therefor, the city administrator shall advertise such improvement for remonstrances unless, in his judgment, the proposed improvement is not good and sufficient for the particular locality; provided, however, that no improvement proposed by petition shall be advertised for remonstrances if the preliminary informal estimate of the city engineer exceeds by more than ten (10) percent the maximum unit cost stated in the petition. The estimate of the city engineer shall be conclusive for this determination. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 5, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-13. - Hearing-Conduct; filing of remonstrances. 
    On the day and at the time and place specified in the notice set forth in this chapter, the city administrator shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of considering the desirability of and the need for such advertised proposed improvements. If for any reason the hearing is postponed and not held until a later hour or date, and the city administrator is hereby authorized to postpone any hearing to a fixed later hour and date, written remonstrances to a proposed improvement shall be accepted up to the opening of the postponed session of the hearing; otherwise, such written remonstrances must be filed prior to the date and hour of the original hearing. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 8, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-14. - Same-Signing remonstrances. 
    All written remonstrances to a proposed improvement shall be subscribed and acknowledged in the same manner required for petitions for proposed improvements. No person who has signed his name for an improvement shall be permitted to sign a remonstrance to the same improvement unless such person has regularly withdrawn from such petition as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 8, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-15. - Same-Remonstrances. 
    If a duly executed written remonstrance is timely filed by the owners of a majority of the property to be assessed, except in case the city shall pay one-half or more of the total cost of the improvements made, the proposed improvements shall not be ordered. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 8, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 4, 5-1-84) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.1. 
Sec. 90-16. - Approval of improvements. 
    After the hearing and subject to the foregoing limitations, the city administrator shall enter an order approving those proposed improvements which he considers proper. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 8, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 5, 5-1-84) 
Sec. 90-17. - Objections to proceedings, etc. 
    Any objection to the regularity, validity and correctness of the proceedings and instruments taken, adopted or made prior to the date of a hearing under this chapter shall be deemed waived unless presented by remonstrance at the time and in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 8, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-18. - Modification of proceedings. 
    All proceedings by the city administrator may be modified or rescinded wholly or in part at any time prior to the final passage of the ordinance authorizing the improvements; provided that no substantial change in the district, details, preliminary plans or specifications shall be made after the publication of notice to property owners, except the deletion of improvements and property from the proposed program and district; and provided, further, that the city administrator shall have the right to make minor changes in the time, plans and materials entering into the work at any time before its completion. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 8, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 6, 5-1-84) 
Sec. 90-19. - Formation of districts-Procedure. 
    After the hearing set forth in this chapter, the city engineer shall combine into suitable construction units those proposed local improvements which have been approved by the city administrator. Each such construction unit, whether composed of noncontiguous parts or sections or not, shall constitute a local public improvement district and shall be so referred to in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 9, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-20. - Same-Conditions. 
    In the formation of local public improvement district or districts under this chapter, the city engineer shall make such condition as, in his judgment, will make for efficiency in construction and will result in the lowest possible construction cost. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 9, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-21. - Report by city engineer. 
    For each such local public improvement district, the city engineer shall submit to the city administrator a detailed estimate of the total cost of the improvements and a detailed estimate of cost for each improvement included within the district, exclusive of all incidental costs; full details and specifications for the proposed construction, which said details and specifications shall permit and encourage competition among bidders; a map showing the real property to be assessed for the cost of construction; and an estimate of that portion, if any, of the cost of such construction which is not to be assessed for a local public improvement. The estimates provided for in this section shall not be binding upon the city for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 9, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 7, 5-1-84) 
Sec. 90-22. - Submission of ordinance to council. 
    The city administrator shall cause to be prepared and submitted to the city council an ordinance authorizing creation of the district and the construction of the improvements proposed, which ordinance shall be in the form recommended by the city administrator by his endorsement thereon. Such ordinance may be passed on first reading by the city council prior to the hearing on the proposed improvements, but shall not be finally passed until after such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 10, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 8, 5-1-84) 
Sec. 90-23. - Finding of city council conclusive. 
    The findings of the city council by ordinance that any local public improvements were duly ordered after notice duly given, or that a petition or remonstrance was or was not filed, or was or was not duly subscribed and acknowledged as required in this chapter, shall be conclusive in every court or other tribunal. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 10, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-24. - Construction contracts-General requirements. 
    In all cases where the cost of local public improvements is to be assessed wholly or in part upon the property benefited, the improvements shall be constructed by independent contract or contracts. All such contracts shall be let by the city administrator with the approval of the city council. All such contracts shall be let to the lowest reliable and responsible bidder after publication of notice to bidders at least once, at least ten (10) days prior to the opening of bids, in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The right to reject any and all bids is reserved. No such contract shall be made without bond for its faithful performance with sufficient surety or sureties thereon. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 3, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 9, 5-1-84) 
State Law reference- Contracts for construction, C. R. S. § 31-25-516. 
Sec. 90-25. - Same-Conditions; guarantees. 
    In the letting of contracts under this chapter the city administrator may impose such conditions upon bidders with regard to bonds and securities and such guarantees of good faith and responsibility on the part of the bidders for the faithful completion of the work and providing for any other material matter or thing in connection therewith as may be considered advantageous to the city. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 3, 2-2-72) 
State Law reference- Surety bond with construction contracts, C. R. S. § 31-25-516. 
Sec. 90-26. - Same-Restrictions; supervision or termination. 
    Upon notice and for substantial cause, the work under such contracts may be suspended or terminated forthwith by the city council or the city administrator. Every such contract shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any ordinance authorizing the improvements or contracts. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 3, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 10, 5-1-84) 
Sec. 90-27. - Same-Default. 
    Upon default in the performance of any contract under this chapter the city administrator may advertise and let a contract for the uncompleted work in a like manner and without further ordinances, and charge the cost thereof to the original contractor upon his contract; and when a deficiency shall in such case occur, the city administrator with the approval of the city council may advance the amount thereof out of any available funds in the city and recover the same by suit on the original contract and bond. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 3, 2-2-72) 
State Law reference- Default in performance of contract, C. R. S. § 31-25-516. 
Sec. 90-28. - Improvement district bonds; tax authorized. 
    In consideration of general benefits conferred on the city at large from the construction or installation of improvements in special or local improvement districts, the city council may levy annual taxes on all taxable property within the city at a rate not exceeding two (2) mills in any one year, to be disbursed as determined by the city council for the purpose of paying for such benefits, for the payment of any assessment levied against the city itself in connection with bonds issued for special or local improvement districts or for the purpose of advancing money to maintain current payments of interest and equal annual payments of the principal amount of bonds issued for any special or local improvement district hereafter created. The proceeds of such taxes shall be placed in a special fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes specified herein, provided, however, that in lieu of such tax levies, the city council may annually transfer to such special fund any available money of the city, but in no event shall the amount transferred in any one year exceed the amount which would result from a tax levied in such year as herein limited. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 22, 2-2-72) 
Cross reference- Taxation, Ch. 110. 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.3. 
Sec. 90-29. - Special assessment bonds generally. 
(a)  For the purpose of paying all or such portion of the cost of any improvement constructed under the provisions of this chapter as may be assessed against the property specially benefited and not paid by the city, special assessment bonds of the city may be issued in such form as may be prescribed by the city council, payable in a period of years at least sufficient to cover the period of assessment installment payments provided. All such bonds may be issued on estimates approved by the city council and sold as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Such bonds shall be payable out of the monies collected on account of the assessments made for such improvements and from such other sources as may be provided for in the ordinance authorizing such bonds and as may be permitted by Article XI of the city charter. All monies collected from such assessments for any improvement shall be applied for the payment of the bonds issued therefor and interest thereon, until payment in full is made of all the bonds, both principal and interest. The bonds may be used in payment of the cost of the improvements, or the city council may sell said bonds to pay such cost by public or private sale to the best advantage of the city. All such bonds shall bear interest as may be fixed by the city council, and shall be payable and redeemable and shall otherwise be issued with such terms as may be provided by the city council in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 20, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 875, § 3, 4-15-80; Ord. No. 877, § 1, 5-6-80; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 11, 5-1-84) 
Charter reference- Improvement district bonds, general benefit, § 11.3. 
State Law reference- Power of city to issue special assessment bonds, C. R. S. § 31-25-534. 
Sec. 90-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1984-10, § 23, adopted May 10, 1984, repealed former § 90-30, payment of bonds, as derived from Ord. No. 493, § 21, adopted Feb. 2, 1972. 
Sec. 90-31. - Surplus and deficiency. 
    When all outstanding bonds of any series issued under this chapter have been paid and any moneys remain to the credit of the district, they shall be transferred to a special surplus and deficiency fund, and whenever there is a deficiency in any special or local improvement district fund to meet the payments of outstanding bonds and interest due thereon, the deficiency shall be paid out of said surplus and deficiency fund. Whenever a special or local improvement district has paid and cancelled three-fourths of its bonds issued, and for any reason the remaining assessments are not paid in time to take up the remaining bonds of the district and the interest due thereon and there is not sufficient money in said special surplus fund and deficiency fund; then the city shall pay said bonds when due and the interest due thereon, and reimburse itself by collecting the unpaid assessments due said district. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 22, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 12, 5-1-84) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.2. 
Sec. 90-32. - Connection to utilities. 
    Before beginning any authorized construction, the city administrator may order the owners of the abutting real estate to connect their several premises with the gas, water and sewer mains or with any other conduits in the street or alley adjacent to their several premises. In case of a failure or refusal by the owners of the abutting real estate to make the ordered connections, such connections shall be made incidental to the authorized construction cost and the cost thereof assessed upon the appropriate abutting real estate. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 11, 2-2-72) 
Cross reference- Sewers, Ch. 95; water, Ch. 120. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-515. 
Sec. 90-33. - Determination of cost. 
    In determining the whole cost of the local public improvement there shall be included therein, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the cost of constructing or otherwise acquiring such improvement or improvements (which may be based on bid price), contingencies, engineering and clerical services and supplies, cost of inspection, cost of collecting assessments, advertising, printing, interest on bonds until interest on assessments commences to defray such, fiscal services, legal services for preparing proceedings and advising in regard thereto and other incidental costs, which incidental costs may be based on estimates approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 12, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 13, 5-1-84) 
Sec. 90-34. - Notice of costs-Publication; contents. 
    Upon completion of any local improvement under this chapter, and upon acceptance thereof by the city administrator, or upon determination of the best bid therefor, with estimated incidental expenses, or whenever the whole cost of any improvement, or a complete unit thereof can otherwise be reasonably ascertained, the city administrator shall publish, at least once, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, a notice to the owners of the real estate to be assessed and all persons interested generally, without naming such owners or persons. Such notice shall specify the whole cost of the improvements, the portion, if any to be paid by the city, and the proposed apportionment on the real property benefited, and the date, place and time for hearing written remonstrances to the proposed apportionment, which date shall be not less than ten (10) days after the publication of the notice of the hearing. At such hearing, or at an adjournment thereof, any such written remonstrances will be heard and determined by the council, sitting as a board of equalization. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 12, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 14, 5-1-84) 
State Law reference- Notice of hearing on assessments, C. R. S. § 31-25-520. 
Sec. 90-35. - Same-Objections waived unless set out. 
    Any objection to the regularity, validity or correctness of the proceedings under this chapter, or of the proposed apportionment, or of any assessment based thereon, and of the amount levied on each tract and parcel of land, shall be deemed waived unless presented in writing at the time and in the manner herein specified. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 12, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-36. - Complaints-Hearing. 
    At such hearing, or an adjournment thereof, the city council, sitting as a board of equalization, shall hear and determine all written remonstrances filed with the city administrator and may confirm the apportionment proposed or make any modifications which may seem equitable and just. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 13, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 15, 5-1-84) 
State Law reference- Hearing on objections, C. R. S. § 31-25-521. 
Sec. 90-37. - Same-New apportionment. 
    After the consideration of all objections to the apportionment, if any change in the apportionment shall be made by the council it shall certify such change to the city administrator, who shall prepare a new apportionment in accordance therewith and transmit the same to the council. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 13, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 16, 5-1-84) 
Sec. 90-38. - Assessing ordinance. 
    The assessing ordinance shall assess the cost of the improvements against the real estate to be assessed in the district in the proportion finally determined. The assessing ordinance may be passed on first reading by the city council prior to the hearing on the proposed assessments, but shall not be finally passed until after such hearing. The final passage of the assessing ordinance shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that the property assessed is benefited in the amount of the assessment, and that such assessments have been lawfully made. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 13, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 17, 5-1-84) 
Sec. 90-39. - Assessment roll. 
    The city clerk shall from the assessing ordinance prepare a local assessment roll in book form, showing in suitable columns each piece of real estate assessed, the amount of the assessment, the amount of each installment of principal and interest if, in pursuance of this chapter, the same is payable in installments, and the date when such installments will become due, with suitable columns for use in case of payment of the whole amount, or of any installment or penalty, and deliver the same duly certified, under the corporate seal of the city, to the city treasurer for collection. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 14, 2-2-72) 
State Law reference- Assessment roll, C. R. S. § 31-25-523. 
Sec. 90-40. - Lien. 
    From the date of the final publication of the assessing ordinance, all assessments made pursuant thereto shall be a lien in the several amounts assessed against each lot or tract of land, and such assessments shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and prior assessment liens. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 15, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 18, 5-1-84) 
State Law reference- Assessment a lien, C. R. S. § 31-25-522. 
Sec. 90-41. - Irregularities. 
    No delays, mistakes, errors, defects or irregularities in any act or proceeding authorized in this chapter shall prejudice or invalidate any final assessment, but the same shall be remedied by subsequent or amended acts or proceedings as the case may require, and when so remedied the same shall take effect as of the date of the original act or proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 15, 2-2-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-522. 
Sec. 90-42. - Assessment set aside by court. 
    If in any court of competent jurisdiction any final assessment is set aside for irregularity in the proceedings or for any other reason, then the council, upon notice as required in the making of an original assessment, may make a new assessment in accordance with the provisions in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 15, 2-2-72) 
Charter reference- Commencement of action to question assessments, etc., § 11.4. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-539. 
Sec. 90-43. - Payment of assessments-When due; installments authorized. 
    All assessments shall be due and payable, without interest and without demand, within thirty (30) days after the publication of the assessing ordinance after its final passage; provided, that the city council may provide that at the election of the owners such assessments may be paid in installments, with interest on the unpaid portion of such assessment at a rate to be determined by the city council. The number of installments, periods of payment and rate of interest shall be determined and fixed by the city council in the assessing ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 16, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 875, § 1, 4-15-80; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 19, 5-1-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. §§ 31-25-527, 31-25-528. 
Sec. 90-44. - Same-Election to pay in installments. 
    Failure to pay the whole assessment under this chapter within said period of thirty (30) days shall be conclusively considered and held as an election on the part of all persons interested, whether under disability or otherwise, to pay in installments. Such election shall be conclusively considered and held a waiver of any and all right to question the power or jurisdiction of the city to construct the improvements, the quality of the work, the regularity or sufficiency of the proceedings, or the validity or correctness of the assessment. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 16, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 875, § 1, 4-15-80; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 20, 5-1-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-529. 
Sec. 90-45. - Same-Payment of principal. 
    The owner of any piece of real estate not in default as to any installment or payment may at any time pay the whole unpaid principal of his assessment with the interest to the time the next installment of interest becomes due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 16, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 875, § 1, 4-15-80; Ord. No. 1984-10, § 21, 5-1-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-530. 
Sec. 90-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1984-10, § 23, adopted May 10, 1984, provided that § 90-46 be repealed. Such section had pertained to the owner of an interest paying share of assessment, and was derived from Ord. No. 493, § 16, adopted Feb. 2, 1972, as amended by Ord. No. 875, § 1, adopted Apr. 15, 1980. 
Sec. 90-47. - Failure to pay installments. 
    Failure to pay any installment, whether of principal or interest, when due under this chapter shall cause the whole of the unpaid principal to become due and payable immediately, and the whole amount of the unpaid principal and accrued interest shall thereafter draw interest until the day of sale at a rate to be determined by the city council; but at any time prior to the date of sale the owner may pay the amount of all delinquent installments, with interest at the rate determined by the city council, as aforesaid, plus all penalties accrued, and thereupon shall be restored to the right thereafter to pay in installments in the same manner as if default had not been suffered. No statute of limitations shall apply until the last installment of assessments becomes due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 18, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 875, § 2, 4-15-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-530; limitation of actions, C. R. S. § 13-80-101 et seq. 
Sec. 90-48. - Default of payment. 
    At the expiration of said thirty-day period, provided in the preceding section, the city treasurer shall return the local assessment roll to the clerk, thereon showing all payments made thereon with the date of each payment. Said roll shall be certified by the city clerk under the corporate seal of the city, and by him/her redelivered to the city treasurer with a warrant for the collection of the same. The city treasurer shall receive payment for all assessments appearing on the assessment roll, with interest. In case of default in the payment of any installment of principal or interest when due, the city treasurer shall cause to be advertised and sold any and all property, concerning which such default is suffered, for the payment of the whole of the unpaid assessments, with interest and penalties thereon. Said advertisements and sales shall be made at the same time and in the same manner, under all the same conditions and penalties and with the same effect, as are provided by general law for sales of real estate in default of payment of general taxes. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 17, 2-2-72; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 3-17-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-531; tax sales, C. R. S. § 39-11-101 et seq. 
Sec. 90-49. - Sale of unpaid assessments. 
    At any sale by the county treasurer of any real estate in the city for the purpose of paying any special assessments for local improvements, the city treasurer, having the written authority from the city council, may purchase such real estate without paying for the same in cash, and receive a certificate of purchase from the county treasurer in the name of the city. Such certificates shall be received and credited at their face value, with all interest and penalties accrued, on account of the assessments in pursuance of which the sale was made. The certificates may thereafter be sold by the city treasurer for the best price obtainable at public sale, at auction or by sealed bids, in the same manner and under the same conditions as is provided in this chapter in respect to the sale of property owned by the city, and the proceeds, in the event that all bonded indebtedness incurred in payment for said local improvements has not been discharged in full, credited to the fund created by the ordinance for the payment of such assessments; or, in the event that all bonded indebtedness incurred in payment for said local improvements has been discharged in full, the proceeds shall be credited to the special surplus and deficiency fund provided for by section 90-31 of this chapter. Such assignments shall be without recourse, and the sale and assignment shall operate as a lien in favor of the purchaser and assignee as provided by law in the case of sale of real estate in default of payment of the general taxes. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 19, 2-2-72) 
Charter reference- Surplus and deficiency fund, § 11.2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-532; tax sales, C. R. S. § 39-11-101 et seq. 
Sec. 90-50. - Foreclosure by city. 
    In addition to all other remedies, the city, when it is the holder of a certificate of purchase, may bring a civil action for the foreclosure thereof joining as defendants all persons having or claiming any interest in the property or the proceeds of foreclosure sale, and all governmental units having taxes or other claims against said property, and all unknown persons having or claiming interest in said property. Any number of certificates may be foreclosed in the same proceeding. In such proceedings, the city, as plaintiff, shall be entitled to all relief provided by law in actions for adjudication of rights with respect to real property. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 19, 2-2-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-532. 
Sec. 90-51. - Sale of property by city. 
    Cumulatively, with all other remedies, the city being the owner of property by virtue of a tax deed or being the owner of property otherwise acquired in satisfaction or discharge of the liens represented by certificates of sale, may sell such property for the best price obtainable at public sale, at auction, or by sealed bids. Such sale shall be after public notice by the city treasurer to all persons having or claiming any interest in the property to be sold or the proceeds of such sale, such public notice to be by publication, once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks by three (3) insertions in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Such notice shall describe the property, state the time, place and manner of receiving bids and the time fixed for sale, which shall be not less than twenty (20) days after the first publication. The city may reject any and all bids. Any interested party at any time within ten (10) days after receipt of bids for the sale of property may file with the city administrator a written protest as to the sufficiency or the amount of any bid made, or the validity of the proceedings for the sale. If such protest shall be denied, such person, within ten (10) days thereafter, shall commence an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin or restrain the city from completing the sale. If no such action shall be commenced, all protests or objections to the sale shall be deemed to have been waived, and the city shall then convey the property to the successful bidder by quitclaim deed. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 19, 2-2-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-532. 
Sec. 90-52. - Proceeds of sale of property by city. 
    The proceeds of any sale of property by the city under this chapter shall be credited to the appropriate special assessment fund or the surplus and deficiency fund, as provided in this chapter. The city shall deduct therefrom the necessary expenses in securing deeds and taking procedures for the sale or foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 19, 2-2-72) 
Charter reference- Surplus and deficiency fund, § 11.2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-532. 
Sec. 90-53. - Manner of setting out descriptions. 
    In all proceedings authorized or required by this chapter figures may be used instead of words, and it shall not be necessary in improvement districts to designate each piece of real estate in the district separately, but general descriptions and quantities may be used except in the assessment rolls, and the cost may be stated as being a probable amount per front foot, or per square foot, or per lot of a given size, and proportionate amounts for other lots or, when a different rule of assessment is provided, then as being subject to such rule. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 23, 2-2-72) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 31-25-540. 
Sec. 90-54. - Legal proceedings. 
    No action or proceeding, at law or in equity, to review any acts or proceedings, or to question the validity or enjoin the performance of any act, or the issuance or collection of any bonds, or the levy or collection of any assessments, authorized in this chapter, or for any other relief against any acts or proceedings done or had pursuant hereto or under the provisions of the charter of the city, with reference hereto, whether based upon illegalities, irregularities or jurisdictional defects, shall be maintained, unless commenced within ninety (90) days after the performance of the act or the passage of the resolution or ordinance complained of, or else be thereafter perpetually barred. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 25, 2-2-72) 
Charter reference- Similar provisions, § 11.4. 
State Law reference- Maintenance of actions, C. R. S. § 31-25-538. 
Sec. 90-55. - Existing districts. 
    Local public improvement districts created but not completed and assessed on the effective date of this chapter shall not be affected hereby but shall be governed by the laws relating to such improvement districts on the date of their creation. 
(Ord. No. 493, § 25, 2-2-72) 
Sec. 90-56. - District 72-1 created. 
    Public Improvement District 72-1 is created and the proposed improvements constructed and the real property shown on Exhibit "B" of the ordinance from which this section is derived is assessed for the cost of construction of the proposed improvements. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 8-15-72) 
Sec. 90-57. - Statutes superseded. 
    Pursuant to Article XX of the Colorado Constitution and the City's Charter, Part 5 of Article 25, Chapter 31, C.R.S., and all other statutes or portions of statutes relating to the creation of local improvement districts, the issuance of special assessment bonds, or the levying of special assessments for improvements, are hereby superseded. 
(Ord. No. 1984-10, § 22, 5-1-84) 
Chapter 92 - REIMBURSEMENT ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS 

Sec. 92-1. - Type of improvements subject to reimbursement. 
(a)  The owner of any property in Lafayette who installs and dedicates street, sidewalk, water main, sewer main, bicycle trail, bridge, storm drainage facility or other public improvements, may apply for the establishment of a reimbursement assessment district to obtain reimbursement of a portion of the cost from the owners of other property specially benefitted by the improvements. 
(b)  If the city constructs any such improvement which specially benefits the owners of private property, it may establish a reimbursement assessment district for its own benefit, subject, however, to all the terms and conditions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1999-39, § 1, 10-5-99) 
Sec. 92-2. - Property eligible for inclusion. 
(a)  Property is eligible for inclusion in a district if it will be or has been specially benefitted by a street, sidewalk, bicycle trail, storm drainage facility, bridge, water main, sewer main or other improvement constructed and dedicated to the city or constructed and owned by the city. 
(b)  Property located outside the city limits may be included in a reimbursement district upon the application of the person installing the improvements. Such inclusion, however, shall be contingent and no assessment may be collected with respect to such property unless it has been annexed to the city prior to the last date to which the assessment may be deferred pursuant to section 92-4(a), or ten (10) years from the effective date of the ordinance establishing or renewing the reimbursement district, whichever date is later. 
(Ord. No. 1999-39, § 1, 10-5-99) 
Sec. 92-3. - Basis for assessment. 
(a)  Properties within a reimbursement district shall be assessed in such a manner as equitably to apportion the cost among all properties specially benefitted by the improvement, but no property shall be assessed an amount greater than the special benefit received by it. In the absence of unusual circumstances requiring a different method, improvements, other than bridges, shall be subject to reimbursement on the basis of front footage for streets, sidewalks and trails and on the basis of acres served in the case of water main, sewer main and storm drainage improvements. 
(b)  The cost to be apportioned within a reimbursement district shall be the reasonable cost of installing the improvement, but not including the cost of any part or portion which solely benefits the developer such as curb cuts or main connections to serve his property. Engineering, surveying, legal and similar costs, not to exceed fifteen (15) percent of construction costs, may be included for determining the cost. When possible, reimbursable construction costs shall be based upon the lowest responsible bid of three (3) bids obtained by the developer. If the city constructs any improvement which specially benefits the owner of private property and, in connection therewith, is granted an easement by the owner without consideration, then the owner shall receive a credit against any reimbursement assessment obligation established hereunder in an amount equal to the fair market value of such easement; provided however, that nothing herein shall be construed to give a credit to an owner that would otherwise be required to grant such an easement upon development, as the term is defined in section 26-8-1 of this Code, of the owner's property. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter limited, the term "special benefit" shall mean any benefit conferred upon a property which is greater or different in kind from that conferred upon properties in the city as a whole by an improvement. Among the factors to be considered in determining the existence of a special benefit are: 
(1)  Increased market value. 
(2)  Improvement in safety or convenience of access. 
(3)  Improved drainage. 
(4)  Alleviation of health or sanitation hazards. 
(5)  Adaptability of the property to a superior or more profitable use. 
(6)  Improved availability of public water or sewer service to the property. 
(7)  In the case of undeveloped property, the installation of an improvement which would otherwise be required upon development of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1999-39, § 1, 10-5-99) 
Sec. 92-4. - Reimbursement terms. 
(a)  The assessment shall be due and payable upon the effective date of the ordinance imposing the assessment; provided, however, if any property included within a reimbursement district is unplatted, undeveloped or has not connected to the improvement at the time the assessment is imposed, the owner of such property may defer payment of the assessment until such time as the property is platted, a building permit is issued, or the property connects to the improvement, whichever shall first occur after the assessment is imposed; provided however, that upon good cause shown, the city council may by resolution alter or vary the act or event that triggers the requirement of payment of deferred assessments. 
(b)  If the owner elects to defer payment of the assessment, the payment shall include interest at the rate provided by C.R.S. 5-12-102(4)(b) for judgments, as amended from time to time. Such interest shall commence on the effective date of the ordinance imposing the assessment. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, the city council may by resolution, upon good cause shown, vary the rate of interest, suspend interest for a certain time period or waive interest entirely for deferred assessments. 
(c)  A reimbursement district shall terminate ten (10) years from the effective date of the ordinance establishing it and any property which is platted or connected to the improvement or for which a building permit is issued thereafter shall not be subject to reimbursement assessment; provided however, that the city council may, prior to such termination and by ordinance, renew for not more than ten (10) years the reimbursement district and reimbursement assessment as to all properties for which the assessment is not then paid in full upon a finding of special benefit as to each such property in accordance with the standards contained in section 92-3 of this chapter. Said renewal ordinance shall be filed as a notice applicable to each such property in the office of the county clerk and recorder 
(Ord. No. 1999-39, § 1, 10-5-99) 
Sec. 92-5. - Establishment of districts. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  The owner of any property who has previously installed one or more public improvements may file with the city administrator an application for a reimbursement district. The application shall include the nature, location, and cost of the improvements, a description of the proposed district and a legal description of each of the individual properties within it, the names and addresses of the property owners within the district, the proposed manner of assessment and the amount proposed to be assessed against each property for each improvement. Nothing herein shall be construed to allow an original owner to seek reimbursement from a current owner of property once owned by the original owner. 
(2)  The owner of any property who proposes to install one or more public improvements may file with the city administrator an application for a reimbursement district. The application shall include the nature, location and anticipated cost of the improvements, a description of the proposed district and a legal description of each of the individual properties within it, the names and addresses of the property owners within the district, the proposed manner of assessment and the amount proposed to be assessed against each property for each improvement. When possible, the application shall be accompanied by three (3) construction bids. Nothing herein shall be construed to allow an owner to seek reimbursement from a future owner of property, which property is owned at the time of the application by the owner making application. 
(b)  Notice. Within thirty (30) days of the city's receipt of a complete application, a notice shall be mailed, by the applicant, by registered mail to the owners of each property within the proposed district together with a copy of the application. The notice shall state that any owner may file, within fifteen (15) days, a written request for an administrative hearing to contest the proposal. The request for hearing shall state in general terms the grounds of objection. 
(c)  Hearing. Upon written request for an administrative hearing, the city council shall schedule a hearing to be held within sixty (60) days and shall so notify the applicant and all objecting parties. The hearing shall be quasi-judicial in nature. 
(d)  Adoption of ordinance. After the hearing, or if no hearing is requested, the city council shall then consider the adoption of an ordinance establishing a reimbursement district and imposing appropriate assessments which may be, in the discretion of the city council, liens upon the property assessed. If the city council determines that the assessments shall be liens upon the property assessed, it shall so state in the ordinance and cause a notice of the lien to be filed for record in the office of the county clerk and recorder. If the city council determines that the assessments shall not be liens upon the property assessed, then it shall cause a notice of reimbursement assessment obligation to be filed for record in the office of the county clerk and recorder. 
(e)  Judicial review. Any reimbursement assessment ordinance adopted hereunder shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to Colorado Rule of Civil Procedure No. 106. 
(Ord. No. 1999-39, § 1, 10-5-99) 
Sec. 92-6. - Developer's responsibility. 
    After the adoption of a reimbursement ordinance, it shall be the responsibility of the person entitled to reimbursement to keep the city apprised of his current address. In the event of the recipient's death, it shall be his personal representative's responsibility to notify the city of the name and address of the person entitled to receive future reimbursements. In the case of a corporate recipient, a successor shall be designated prior to dissolution. Failure to comply with the developer's responsibilities shall constitute abandonment of all rights of reimbursement and shall be grounds for repeal of the reimbursement ordinance and refund of any assessments received by the city on behalf of the developer after the abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 1999-39, § 1, 10-5-99) 
Sec. 92-7. - Release. 
    Upon payment of assessment or expiration of the reimbursement term, whichever occurs first, the city shall, upon request, issue a written release to the owner of assessed property. 
(Ord. No. 1999-39, § 1, 10-5-99) 
Sec. 92-8. - Contracts. 
(a)  In lieu of the procedure set forth herein, the developer and the owners of any property that would be subject to assessment may contract for reimbursement in such manner and amount as they deem appropriate and the city will, at the request of the parties, collect the reimbursement at the time of connection, platting, or as otherwise agreed. 
(b)  In the event that a developer contracts with the owner of a portion of the property which would be subject to reimbursement assessment, such property shall be excluded from the district, but no property within the district shall be assessed in an amount proportionally greater than that provided by contract. 
(c)  The city council hereby ratifies and affirms all previously approved reimbursement agreements, development requirements or any conditions of approval heretofore entered into by the city and expresses its intent that the adoption of this chapter 92 not affect the validity of such preexisting contracts, requirements or conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1999-39, § 1, 10-5-99) 
Chapter 95 - WATER RECLAMATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2000-44, adopted Nov. 21, 2000, changed the title of Ch. 95 from "Sewers" to "Water Reclamation." 
Charter reference- Municipal utilities, Ch. XIII. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 30; mobile homes, Ch. 60; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 105; water, Ch. 120; subdivisions, App. B; connection to utilities, § 90-32; flood control standards for utilities, App. C, § 5.1-3. 
State Law reference- Municipal sewer systems, C. R. S. §§ 31-15-709, 31-35-401 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 95-1. - Mandatory connection. 
    All water closets and toilets in or belonging to any residence, factory, store, office or other building located within the city limits, together with all drainage from plumbing fixtures located therein, shall be connected to the public water reclamation system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 394, § 1, 6-1-65; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 8, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-2. - Extensions-Subdivisions. 
(a)  The developer of any subdivision desiring water reclamation service from the city shall pay the entire cost of extending the city water reclamation service to such subdivision and shall deed to the city all mains and service connections required to service the subdivision. The city shall pay for any oversized pipe that is required as a result of any master plan adopted by the city for water reclamation service to any area either within or outside of the existing city limits. All extensions shall conform to city specifications. 
(b)  For subdivisions inside the city limits, the city's main extension policy shall be as follows: 
The city will extend or require the subdivider to extend the required water reclamation main through the subdivision to be served. If the subdivider is required to extend the main, then the city will negotiate a repayment agreement with the subdivider which will allow said subdivider to recoup as much of the cost of the extension between the boundary of his subdivision and the nearest properly sized city sewer main as can be agreed upon. 
(c)  In the event no agreement can be made between the city and the subdivider, then the city shall not be responsible to extend the main. 
(Ord. No. 622, § 5, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 2000-44, §§ 2, 9, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-3. - Same-Individuals. 
(a)  Any individual desiring the extension of the city water reclamation system to serve his private property shall pay the entire cost of extending the city water reclamation service to his property and shall deed to the city all water reclamation lines and improvements necessary to extend the service to his property. The city shall pay the cost of any oversize pipes which the city requires to serve any individual property as the result of any master plan which is adopted by the city for water service within or outside the existing city limits. All extensions shall conform to city specifications in the office of the director of public works. 
(b)  For individuals inside the city, the city's main extension policy shall be as follows: 
The city will extend or require the individual to extend the required service mains to the individual being served. If the individual is required to extend the main, then the city will negotiate a repayment agreement with the individual which will allow the individual to recoup as much of the cost of extensions between the boundary of his property and nearest properly sized city water reclamation main as can be agreed upon. 
(c)  In the event no agreement can be made between the city and the individual, then the city shall not be responsible to extend the main. 
(Ord. No. 622, § 5, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-4. - Same-Inside city water reclamation line modifications. 
    The city recognizes its responsibility as it relates to water reclamation service to existing, developed, platted property within the city which is already served by water reclamation main which may be inadequate for conformance with sound engineering and public safety standards. When necessity arises for enlarging or replacing or otherwise upgrading the water reclamation system in an existing platted, developed area already served by city water reclamation, the improvement will be made by the city. If such improvements are made necessary by the development of a new subdivision which is to be served by a water reclamation main passing through an area described above, then the city may require the developer to negotiate a participation agreement with the city for the cost of the improvements. 
(Ord. No. 622, § 5, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-5. - Same-Oversizing; city participation. 
    If the size of water reclamation line required to serve a subdivision or individual is smaller than the size line the city wishes installed for sound future planning, then the city will participate in the oversizing of the pipe from a minimum of six (6) inches to the size the city wishes to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 622, § 5, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-6. - Same-City-developer cooperation on line extension. 
    The city council may, if it appears to be in the best interest of the city so to do, extend the water reclamation line for the purpose of serving a subdivision, group of subdivisions or an individual or individuals by constructing a line with force account labor or by contracting for construction of the line. If the council elects to construct such a line at city expense, then a fair portion of the cost of such line shall be recouped by the city through the addition, over and above the standard tap fee, of a surcharge established by resolution. The city administrator shall recommend the area to which the surcharge shall apply, and the amount of the surcharge to the city council based upon the density and type of development proposed along the projected line extension. 
(Ord. No. 622, § 5, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Secs. 95-7-95-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAPS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city to prescribe and collect sewer tap fees, C. R. S. § 31-35-402. 

Sec. 95-21. - Definitions. 
    The water reclamation tap fee prescribed in section 95-25 et seq. of this article shall be charged and paid pursuant to the following definitions: 
    Apartment: A multi-unit dwelling under a common ownership consisting of one (1) or more rental units. 
    Building: "Building" as used in this article for purposes of applying the schedule of charges means an independent structure standing alone, excluding fences. To qualify as one building, all portions, additions or extensions shall be connected by an attachment that is an enclosed part of the building and which is usable by the occupants thereof. 
    Combined uses: Developments with combined residential and other than residential uses in the same structure or building shall be assessed a tap fee based on the individual uses within the structure. The "other than residential" portion shall be assessed in accordance with the other-than-residential fee schedule, and the residential portion shall be assessed in accordance with the residential fee schedule. 
    Condominium: A multi-unit dwelling consisting of separate estates in individual air space units, each of which has an undivided interest in the common elements, if any. 
    Multi-unit dwelling: A building used by two (2) or more families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units. This definition does not include motels or hotels but does include trailer courts with each trailer space considered as one dwelling unit. 
    Other than residential: All utility customers not included under the classifications in this section as single-family or multi-unit dwellings shall be categorized as "other than residential," which includes but is not limited to business, commercial and industrial connections, and recreational facilities appurtenant to residential developments. Business, commercial and industrial developments designed to be sold and occupied in a manner similar to residential condominiums shall be assessed a tap fee pursuant to the "other than residential" schedule of fees. The industrial tap fee shall be based on the total demand of the building or structure. Any increase in total demand resulting from the installation of additional fixtures shall require an additional tap fee. 
    Single-family dwelling: A detached principal building other than a mobile home, designed for or used as a dwelling exclusively by one (1) family. 
    Townhouse: A multi-unit dwelling in which the ownership of each dwelling unit consists of a separate fee simple estate on an individually platted lot, together with an undivided fee simple interest in the common elements, if any. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 1, 6-6-79; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2001-17, adopted June 5, 2001, deleted § 95-22 which pertained to violations, and derived from Ord. No. 835, adopted June 6, 1979; and Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994. 
Sec. 95-23. - Permit. 
    No water reclamation tap shall be made upon any water reclamation main or any other portion of the water reclamation works of the city without first securing a permit therefor. The application for a water reclamation tap permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the director of public works, or his authorized deputy, and shall state clearly the tap size, address and name of the person applying for the tap and any other information which the director of public works may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 622, § 1, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-24. - Fee-Required. 
    Any person desiring to connect to the city water reclamation system shall pay to the city a water reclamation tap fee pursuant to the schedule of fees set forth in section 95-25, et seq., of this article and shall pay such other fees as set forth in section 95-24.1. Applicants desiring to connect to and use the city water reclamation system for a proposed building within the city limits shall pay such fee in full at the time of issuance of a building permit or at a time pursuant to Article XIV of Chapter 30 of this Code. Applicants desiring to connect to and use the city's water reclamation system for an existing building in the city limits or any building outside of the city limits, whether existing or proposed, shall pay such fee prior to the time of issuance of a water reclamation connection permit. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 1, 6-6-79; Ord. No. 1990-17, § 3, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-24.1. - Same-Surcharge on application for new water reclamation tap. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby imposed upon every application for a new City of Lafayette water reclamation tap, residential and nonresidential, a surcharge set by resolution of the city council per unit of new construction. The surcharge shall apply to all land (lots, outlots and tracts) platted prior to April 13, 2007, and payment shall be due in full upon application for a building permit for each unit of new construction. 
(b)  Purpose. The aforementioned surcharge shall be used by the City of Lafayette, Colorado, for the sole purpose of developing, constructing and maintaining a storm drain system within and throughout the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 919, §§ 1, 2, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 956, § 1, 10-5-82; Ord. No. 993, § 1, 9-20-83; Ord. No. 1984-32, § 1, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 1986-36, § 1, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 1986-42, § 1, 11-4-86; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 10, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 40, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2007-23, § 1, 7-3-07) 
Sec. 95-25. - Same-Residential schedule. 
    The residential tap fee schedule shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 622, § 2, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 835, § 1, 6-6-79; Ord. No. 861, § 1, 12-18-79; Ord. No. 896, § 1, 11-4-80; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 956, § 2, 10-5-82; Ord. No. 1984-32, § 2, 9-18-84; Ord. No. 1985-35, § 1, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 11, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 41, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 95-26. - Same-Other-than-residential schedule. 
(a)  All water reclamation system customers other than residential, shall pay a tap fee set by resolution of city council. The tap fee shall be based on the size of the water meter used for each property pursuant to section 120-40 of the Code. The actual physical connection size and location shall be solely determined by the public works department. All separate nonresidential irrigation water taps shall not pay water reclamation tap fees. 
(b)  Applicants shall provide all pertinent information necessary for determination of the tap fee as required by the director of public works. Water reclamation tap fees shall be paid at the time the building permit is issued, or at any time prior to the issuance of a building permit, or at a time pursuant to Article XIV of Chapter 30 of this Code. No building permit or water reclamation connection permit shall be released until all public utility requirements have been satisfied, unless deferred as above stated. 
(Ord. No. 622, § 2, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 835, § 1, 6-6-79; Ord. No. 861, § 2, 12-18-79; Ord. No. 896, § 2, 11-4-80; Ord. No. 1986-36, § 2, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 1990-17, § 5, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 12, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 42, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 95-27. - Same-Out-of-city fees. 
    Tap fees for connections outside the city limits shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 622, § 2, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 835, § 1, 6-6-79; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 43, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 95-28. - Same-Payment. 
    The city shall look only to the owner and the owner's successors in interest of each property or building desiring water reclamation service for payment of the water reclamation tap fee. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 1, 6-6-79; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-29. - Monthly charges. 
    In the event that a water reclamation tap is issued by the city, but such water reclamation tap is not put to use within one hundred eighty (180) days of issuance, the applicant shall be responsible for and liable for payment of minimum monthly water reclamation service charges as set forth in Article III of this chapter until such time as the tap is put to actual use. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 1, 6-6-79; Ord. No. 1986-44, § 1, 12-2-86; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 13, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-30. - Changes in use. 
    If a water reclamation system user applies for and obtains permission to make changes or additions to the property that would affect the demand on the water reclamation system, a new permit to use the water reclamation system shall be required. The water reclamation system tap fee for such permit shall be computed on the basis of the new service as determined by the schedule of fees set forth in this article. Credit shall be given for the current amount of the tap fee required for the use of the water reclamation system prior to the changes or additions to the property. Credit shall also be allowed for approved decreases in the amount of the water reclamation system service. Under no circumstances shall the city be required to pay cash refunds for either decreases in the amount of water reclamation system service provided or for allowable credits in excess of the new water reclamation system tap fee. Credits allowed herein shall apply only to the property served by the existing water reclamation system service and shall be applied only to the water reclamation system tap fees owed to the city and not to other utility fees or charges. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 1, 6-6-79; Ord. No. 1989-41, § 1, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Secs. 95-31-95-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE CHARGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Power of council to fix and collect utility rates and charges, §§ 13.4, 13.5. 
State Law reference- Power of city to prescribe and collect sewer service charges, § 31-35-402, C.R.S. 1973. 

Sec. 95-46. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to generate sufficient revenue to pay all costs for the operations and maintenance (including replacement) costs of the city water reclamation system. Costs shall be allocated to all users in proportion to each user's contribution to the total loading of the treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 2, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-47. - Classification of uses. 
    There shall be two (2) classifications of users of the city water reclamation system, residential and nonresidential. Nonresidential users may be assigned residential classification by the director of public works provided that the effluent strength from such user does not exceed the effluent strength of an average residential user. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 3, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 2000-44, §§ 2, 3, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-48. - Components. 
    Each user of the city's water reclamation system shall be assessed charges on a monthly basis for the use of the water reclamation system. Such charges shall consist of a basic monthly service charge, a charge based on the volume of average residential strength effluent discharged, and a surcharge for all nonresidential users discharging wastes in excess of average residential strength. Charges for out-of-the-city service shall be set by resolution of city council. For the purpose of this section, a "unit" is defined as an independent dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 955, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 1986-40, § 1, 11-4-86; Ord. No. 2000-44, §§ 2, 3, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 44, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 95-49. - Basic monthly charge. 
    The basic monthly residential and nonresidential charges shall defray the fixed costs of operating the city water reclamation system and be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 618, § 2, 3-19-74; Ord. No. 842, § 5, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 1986-40, § 2, 11-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-58, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2000-51, § 1, 12-16-00; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 45, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 95-50. - Average residential effluent strength. 
    Average residential effluent strength is as follows: 
Three hundred (300) mg/l biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), or five hundred (500) mg/l chemical oxygen demand (COD) 
Three hundred (300) mg/l suspended solids (SS) 
Thirty (30) mg/l ammonia nitrogen 
(Ord. No. 842, § 4, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 3, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 2, 6-5-01) 
Sec. 95-51. - Quality surcharge. 
    The quality surcharge shall defray the costs of collecting and treating effluent in excess of average residential strength. When in the judgment of the director of public works, a user's discharge exceeds average residential strength, the director of public works is authorized to take such measures as may be necessary to determine the amount of excess strength and to compute a quality surcharge to be assessed as set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 3, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 3, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 46, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 92-52. - Bills-Mailing; contents. 
    Bills for water reclamation service charges shall be mailed in conjunction with water bills, pursuant to the billing and payment provisions contained in section 120-61 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 622, § 4, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 842, § 6, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 14, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-53. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 15 of Ord. No. 2000-44, adopted Nov. 21, 2000, deleted § 95-53, which pertained to notice of delinquent bills, and derived from Ord. No. 622, adopted April 24, 1974; Ord. No. 842, adopted June 19, 1979; and Ord. No. 1984-05, adopted March 6, 1984. 
Sec. 95-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 16 of Ord. No. 2000-44, adopted Nov. 21, 2000, deleted § 95-53, which pertained to lien for delinquent bills, and derived from Ord. No. 622, adopted April 24, 1974; and Ord. No. 842, adopted June 19, 1979. 
Sec. 95-55. - Volume charge-Generally. 
    The volume charge under this article shall defray the marginal costs of collecting and treating the effluent discharge by each user. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 3, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-56. - Same-Users with consistent monthly flows. 
    The volume for all users with consistent monthly effluent flows shall be based on the number of thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed during an average winter month. Water consumed during an average winter month shall be the average consumption on the November, December and January bills of the previous winter for those accounts with some consumption during each of the three (3) billing periods. For accounts with no consumption in one or more of the billing periods, an average may be established using historical use records or other available data for the type of customer. The average for billing purposes shall be redetermined in March of each year. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 1986-40, § 3, 11-4-86; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 3, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-57. - Same-Users with inconsistent monthly flows. 
    When in the judgment of the director of public works, a user's discharge under this article is such that the volume charge based on the average number of thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed during a winter month is not representative of the user's true volume contribution to the system, the director of public works is authorized to take such measures as may be necessary to determine the user's actual volume contribution and to compute a volume charge based on such volume contribution. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 6-19-79) 
Sec. 95-58. - Same-New users; changes. 
    For any new user connecting to the city's water reclamation system, or for a user making a change in the use of his premises or making a substantial expansion of his premises, the director of public works or his duly authorized agent shall make an estimate of water consumed during an average winter month based upon a count of plumbing fixtures, consumption of similar users or such other information which under all the circumstances is relevant in making such a determination. Such estimate when made shall be used in charging for water reclamation service for that connection until the next May. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-59. - Same-Water from noncity sources. 
    The director of public works may require of any user of the water reclamation system that water used from wells or sources other than the water system of the city shall be metered, or he shall otherwise determine a reasonable method to be used to establish the water reclamation service charges to any such user. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 5, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-60. - Same-Amount. 
    The monthly volume charge per one thousand gallons (1,000) gallons of usage shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 1986-40, § 4, 11-4-86; Ord. No. 1989-58, § 2, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 2000-51, § 2, 12-16-00; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 47, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 95-61. - Review and revision. 
    The city administrator shall cause a review of the total annual cost of operation and maintenance of the water reclamation system as well as each user's estimated contribution no less than every two (2) years. Water reclamation service charges shall be revised, as necessary, to assure that the purpose set forth in this article is properly implemented. 
(Ord. No. 842, § 7, 6-19-79; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-62. - Rate regulation of city wastewater services. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a landlord to charge a tenant any amount for wastewater services which is greater than the amount charged for such class of customer by the city. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall prohibit landlords of multi-unit dwellings and multi-unit residential structures, exempt from the city's independent water metering requirements, from charging tenants a monthly amount to reimburse such landlord for the cost of supplying wastewater services for the term of the lease. 
(c)  The method of determining such amount and documentation supporting same shall be disclosed to the city upon its request and must, in the city's determination, be a reasonable estimate of the landlord's per capita or per dwelling unit cost to supply wastewater services based on previous usage rates and current water reclamation rates. 
(d)  The city has the authority to audit, upon reasonable notice, a landlord's records to ensure the landlord's wastewater charges are in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-29, § 1, 12-7-10) 
Secs. 95-63-95-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - USE REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 866, §§ 1-9, adopted Feb. 19, 1980, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as Art. IV, §§ 95-71-95-79, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 95-71. - Purpose. 
(a)  Generally. This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Lafayette, to provide with respect thereto for the mandatory hookup of sources of effluent within the city to the city's water reclamation system, to protect the capacity of the system by preventing the hookup of noneffluent sources and by requiring disconnection of existing noneffluent sources thereof, to ensure that new connections are properly designed by providing for a system of plan approval and on-site inspection and to protect the water reclamation facility and all related mains, laterals and equipment, the city's workers, the organisms used in treatment of effluent and the waters of the state by providing for either pretreatment and/or the nonintroduction of hazardous or deleterious substances into the city's system. 
(b)  Strict liability. The Lafayette City Council, recognizing the threats upon the frail ecology and expressing great concern for its protection, declares that merely committing any act prohibited by this Chapter 95 and/or orders of the city issued under the provisions of this chapter, or failing to perform any act required by this chapter or said orders of the city constitutes a violation of this chapter. The violator's intent is not a defense to any violation of this chapter or said order of the city, but intent may be considered as a matter in determining aggravation or mitigation. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 1, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 17, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 4, 6-5-01) 
Sec. 95-72. - Definitions. 
    [As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
    Act or the Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended. 
    Applicant shall mean the owner of the premises for which any permit is applied for or a person authorized in writing by such owner to act in his behalf with regard to such permit. 
    Best professional judgment shall mean the highest quality technical opinion developed after consideration of all reasonably available and pertinent data or information. 
    BMP or best management practice shall mean any reasonable practice or procedure deemed necessary by the city to prevent, abate or remedy the consequences of the introduction of unlawful pollutants or concentration of pollutants into the POTW by an industrial or commercial user to the extent technically and economically practical. 
    BOD or biochemical oxygen demand shall mean the quality of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lower horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building water reclamation conduit beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building water reclamation conduit shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public water reclamation conduit or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
    City shall mean the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    Clean Water Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act shall mean 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended. 
    COD or chemical oxygen demand shall mean the measure of the oxygen equivalent of that portion of organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant under laboratory procedures. 
    Combined conduit shall mean a water reclamation conduit intended to receive both effluent and storm or surface water. 
    Deleterious wastes shall mean any wastes contained in effluent that would be harmful or damaging to the city's water reclamation system or to the water reclamation process used by the city. 
    Domestic effluent shall mean the effluent derived principally from dwellings, business buildings and institutions. It is equivalent to normal effluent. 
    Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others whether required by written conveyance, prescription or otherwise. 
    Effluent shall mean the combination of liquid or water-carried waste conducted away from residences, business buildings and institutions that is known as domestic effluent, together with the liquid or water-carried waste resulting from manufacturing process employed in industrial establishments, including the washing, cleaning or drain water form such process, that is known as industrial waste. 
    Floatable oil is oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from effluent by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Effluent shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated, and the effluent does not interfere with the collection system. 
    FOG or fats, oil and grease shall mean any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils and any other material that is extracted in accordance with EPA approved methodology. 
    Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
    Hazardous or toxic materials shall mean all materials identifiable as hazardous waste or a toxic substance under the terms of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 U.S.C. sections 6901-6987, Pub. L. 94-580, specifically any substance which qualifies under the regulations issued pursuant to the terms of the act, as found at 40 C.F.R. section 250. 
    Holding tank wastes shall mean any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean the effluent from industrial processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic wastes. 
    May is permissive. 
    National categorical pretreatment standards shall mean any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR section 403.6. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) shall mean the program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters of the contiguous zone and the oceans pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet, including storm drains and combined conduit overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    Permit shall mean any written authorization required pursuant to the provisions of this Code or by any other rule, regulation or ordinance of the city for the installation, operation or use of any water reclamation facilities. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven (7) and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 10 -7 . 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public water reclamation conduits with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public water reclamation conduit shall mean a common water reclamation conduit controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
    Publicly-owned treatment works (POTW) shall mean that portion of the water reclamation treatment system owned by the city. This definition includes any water reclamation line that conveys effluent to the water reclamation plant, except private lines. For the purposes of this chapter, the term POTW shall also include any water reclamation line that conveys effluent to the POTW from persons outside the POTW boundaries who are by contract or agreement with the city, users of the POTW. The POTW is located at 750 East County Line Road, Lafayette, Colorado. 
    Septage shall mean wastes removed from a septic tank. 
    Shall is mandatory. 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water or effluent that in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the water reclamation plant. 
    Storm drain shall mean a conduit or drain for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. 
    Superintendent shall mean the director of public works of the City of Lafayette or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspended solids shall mean total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in water, effluent or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
    Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the water reclamation facilities provided. 
    User shall mean any person that discharges, causes or permits the discharge of effluent into a public water reclamation conduit. 
    Waste shall include effluent and any and all waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for the purpose of, disposal. 
    Watercourse shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
    Water reclamation conduit shall mean a pipe or channel that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Water reclamation facilities shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away and treat effluent, domestic and industrial wastes and sludge. 
    Water reclamation plant shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating effluent, industrial wastes and sludge. 
    Waters of the state shall mean any water, surface or underground, within the boundaries of the State of Colorado. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 2, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 18, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2001-17, § 5, 6-5-01) 
Sec. 95-73. - Improper disposal of waste; mandatory connection. 
(a)  Improper disposal prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under its jurisdiction any effluent or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any stream or water course any domestic or industrial waste water or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Private disposal systems unlawful, certain circumstances. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of effluent. Where a public water reclamation conduit or combined conduit is not available under the terms of this section, construction of any private effluent disposal system shall be governed by the provisions in section 95-76. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public water reclamation conduit or combined conduit of the city is hereby required at the expense of the owner(s) to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public water reclamation conduit in accordance with the provisions of this article within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public water reclamation conduit is within four hundred (400) feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 3, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 2000-44, §§ 3, 19, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-74. - Certain discharges into water reclamation conduits prohibited. 
    The following discharges to water reclamation conduits shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Unpolluted waters, discharge prohibited. Water which is the discharge from sump pumps or which has been used for cooling, heating transfer purposes, condensation, air conditioning, refrigeration or similar use; any storm water drainage from the ground surface, roof leaders, catch basins or any other source, or subsurface drainage or ground water, except in areas of existing combined conduits; it shall be unlawful to discharge through a direct or indirect connection to a public water reclamation conduit without a permit issued by the city unpolluted water of any type not specifically mentioned in this section. 
(2)  Hazardous or toxic materials, discharge prohibited. It shall be unlawful to discharge into the city's water reclamation conduits any "hazardous or toxic materials" as defined at section 95-72. 
(3)  Deleterious materials, discharge prohibited. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any public water reclamation conduits: 
a.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on any explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) of the meter. Fire or explosion hazard may also be determined using flash point concentration, by closed cup method as specified in 40 CFR 261.21. The flashpoint shall not be less than sixty (60) degrees centigrade or one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit; 
b.  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any water reclamation process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, exceed the limitation set forth in a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the water reclamation plant. Toxic pollutants shall include but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. These general discharge prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW, whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
c.  Any substance that may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process when the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with the sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal; 
d.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five point five (5.5) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the POTW; 
e.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in water reclamation conduits, or other interference with the proper operation of the waste water facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
f.  Any holding tank waste or septage without a permit issued by the city. Unless otherwise allowed by the city under the terms and conditions of the permit, a separate permit must be secured for each separate discharge. The permit shall state the specific location of discharge, the time of day the discharge is to occur, the volume of the discharge and the waste water constituents and characteristics. If a permit is granted for discharge of such waste into the public water reclamation system, the permittee shall pay the applicable charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required and set forth by the city; 
g.  Any substance that will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or any receiving water quality standards; 
h.  Any effluent with objectionable color not removable in the treatment process such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
i.  Any water or waste containing free or floating oil and grease; 
j.  Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; or 
k.  Any material or substance not specifically mentioned in this section that in itself is corrosive, irritating, or noxious to human beings or animals, or that by interaction with other water or waste in the public sewer system could produce undesirable effects or create any other condition deleterious to structures, treatment processes or quantity of the receiving stream. 
(4)  Limited discharge materials. The following-described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the water reclamation conduits, water reclamation process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The superintendent may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if, in his opinion, such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of the discharge, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the water reclamation conduits, materials of construction of the water reclamation conduits, the water reclamation process employed, capacity of the water reclamation plant, degree or treatability of the waste in the water reclamation plant and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or effluent discharged to the water reclamation system which shall not be violated without approval of the superintendent are as follows: 
a.  Effluent having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius; 
b.  Effluent containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will either interfere with or pass through the POTW; 
c.  Any water or waste that contains grease or oil or any other substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (65.5 degrees Celsius); 
d.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded as defined in section 95-72, "properly shredded garbage". Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary water reclamation conduits from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers; 
e.  Any waters or wastes containing concentrations of any toxic or objectionable substance which exceed standards which have been established by the city, whether or not a hazardous or toxic material under section 95-74(b); 
f.  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent; 
g.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
h.  Quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a "slug" as defined herein; 
i.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the waste water treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the waste water treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; 
j.  Any water or wastes which by interaction with other water or wastes in the public water reclamation system release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
k.  Any effluent containing BOD, COD, total solids, suspended solids, ammonia nitrogen (or substances readily converted thereto), or FOG of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the water reclamation plant; provided, however, that a user may be permitted by specific, written agreement with the city to discharge such BOD, COD, TSS, ammonia nitrogen, or oil and grease, which agreement may provide for special charges, surcharges, payments or provisions for treating and testing equipment. 
(5)  Federal categorical pretreatment standards. Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed herein for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed herein. The city shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements. 
(6)  Specific pollutant limitations. It is unlawful for any person to discharge effluent containing pollutants in excess of the limitations on discharge, as set forth below: 
Pollutant Concentration (mg/l) Arsenic, Total (As) 0.022 Cadmium, Total (Cd) 0.023 Chromium (Cr III), trivalent 0.097 Copper, Total (Cu) 0.40 Lead, Total (Pb) 0.52 Manganese (Mn), total 1.33 Mercury, Total (Hg) 0.0002 Molybdenum (Mo) 0.14 Nickel, Total (Ni) 0.31 Selenium, Total (Se) 0.032 Zinc, Total (Zn) 2.74  
(7)  State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those contained therein. 
(8)  POTW's right of revision. The city may establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW, if it is deemed necessary to comply with the purpose presented in section 95-71. 
(9)  Excessive discharge. It is unlawful for any user to increase the use of process water or to attempt in any way to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with any applicable limitations. 
(10)  Accidental discharges. 
a.  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated herein. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's own cost and expense. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user immediately to notify the city and the POTW of the incident. Notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration, volume and any corrective actions. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the city a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall neither relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or property, which such user shall be liable therefor, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability that may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. If the POTW is fined by the state or federal government for violation of the POTW's NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as the result of a spill or intentional slug discharge of a toxic pollutant, then such fine, including all POTW legal, sampling, analytical testing costs and any other costs shall be charged to the responsible user. 
b.  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may observe, cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(11)  Notification of discharge required. All nonresidential dischargers shall notify the superintendent of the nature of their business or activity, so that an assessment may be made as to any potential impacts on the water reclamation system. The user shall provide any additional information as deemed necessary by the superintendent. 
(12)  Alternatives available to superintendent. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public water reclamation conduits which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this article and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the water reclamation facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
a.  Reject the wastes; 
b.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public water reclamation conduits; 
c.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
d.  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or water reclamation charges as provided for by city ordinance. 
When considering the above alternative, the superintendent shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. 
(13)  Pretreatment or other facilities, cost to owner. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are required for any waters or wastes, such facilities shall be provided or installed by the owner(s) at his expense, and they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at his expense. 
a.  Amalgam separator required. 
1.  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following words and phrases shall mean as follows: 
"Amalgam" means any mixture or blending of mercury with another metal or with an alloy used in dental applications. 
"Amalgam separator" means a type of wastewater treatment equipment that is designed to remove amalgam particles and dissolved mercury from the wastewater discharged by dental practices. 
"Amalgam waste" means any waste containing mercury or residues from the preparation of amalgam. This includes any waste generated or collected by chair-side traps, screens, filters, vacuum system filters, amalgam separators, elemental mercury, or amalgam capsules. 
(i)  "Noncontact amalgam" includes scrap or excess amalgam after a procedure is completed, as well as the remaining amalgam capsule. 
(ii)  "Contact amalgam" means scrap that has come into contact with a patient or body fluids. Examples include: extracted teeth and scrap collected in chair-side traps and vacuum pump filters. 
"Best management practices" (BMPs) means a set of operational standards designed to minimize the environmental impact and human exposure to mercury. 
"Dental practice" means any dental facility that discharges wastewater from the placement or removal of amalgam. 
"Exempt dental practice" means any dental facility in which no dentist places or removes amalgams and/or teeth containing amalgams. 
2.  [Compliance; waiver.] 
A.  Any dental practice that discharges wastewater generated from the placement or removal of amalgam shall, within six (6) months from the effective date of this ordinance, implement and certify to the superintendent compliance with the BMPs set forth in this section. The dental practice shall also, within one (1) year from the effective date of this ordinance, install, operate and maintain an amalgam separator in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section. 
B.  Waivers will be granted by the superintendent to exempt dental practices. To receive a waiver a dental practice must submit a written waiver request to the superintendent within six (6) months of the effective date of this ordinance. 
3.  [Amalgam separator requirements.] Amalgam separators shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Amalgam separator design. An amalgam separator shall be International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 11143 certified and shall be designed and approved for a flow rate capable of handling the maximum volume discharged from the dental practice it serves. 
(i)  The amalgam separator must be tested according to the most current ISO 11143 standard. Each dental practice shall select a separator with the highest efficiency level attainable for the practice's working conditions. 
(ii)  If ISO increases the acceptable standard, the dental practice must comply with the new standard within five (5) years of ISO's adoption. 
B.  Installation. The amalgam separator shall be installed so that all amalgam-contaminated wastewater will pass through the unit before being discharged into any water reclamation conduit. 
C.  Inspection and maintenance. Each dental practice shall be responsible for inspection and maintenance of the amalgam separator. 
D.  Disposal. Waste removed from the amalgam separator shall be collected and handled in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and as described in the BMPs for this section. 
4.  Best management practices. Every dental practice shall comply with the following BMPs: 
A.  Equipment. The dental practice shall ensure that all dental chairs are equipped with chair-side traps and that all vacuum pumps are equipped with traps and filters. All equipment shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
B.  Clean-up procedures. The dental practice shall use nonchlorine or nonoxidizing disinfectants and neutral cleaners. When cleaning filters or collecting scrap amalgam, the dental practice shall not rinse filters or traps over sinks or drains. Each dental practice shall maintain a mercury spill kit and train all staff on clean-up procedures. Spilled amalgam must be cleaned up immediately in accordance with the most current Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) procedures as set forth in: http://www.epa.gov/epaoswer/hazwaste/mercury/faq/spills.htm 
C.  Salvaging. All contact and noncontact scrap amalgam shall be salvaged and stored in structurally sound, tightly closed and appropriately labeled containers. 
D.  Disposal. The dental practice shall not dispose of any amalgam waste. All amalgam waste shall be removed from the dental practice only by an authorized amalgam waste recycler. 
5.  Record keeping and reporting. 
A.  Record keeping. The dental practice shall maintain records of the disposition of all amalgam waste. The records shall include the name, address and telephone number of the amalgam waste recycler including the dates and amounts of amalgam waste delivered to the amalgam waste recycler. The dental practice shall also maintain records of all service and maintenance of the amalgam separator. All records shall be kept on site for a minimum of three (3) years and shall be made available to the superintendent upon request. 
B.  Reporting. Each year, no later than February 15, the dental practice shall submit to the superintendent a certification of compliance. The certification shall include: 
(i)  Amalgam separator compliance. The dental practice shall include the following information: the manufacturer and model name of the amalgam separator, the date of installation, the name, address and telephone number of the company which installed the unit or performed any service or maintenance and the name, address and telephone number of the amalgam recycler used by the dental practice. 
(ii)  BMPs compliance certification. To ensure compliance with the BMPs the dental practice shall sign a self-certification of the BMPs implemented at the dental practice. The certification shall be signed by all practicing dentists. The dental practice shall also report any change in its operations regarding BMPs or the use and maintenance of the amalgam separator. All certifications shall be sent to: 
Water Reclamation Division 
City of Lafayette 
1290 S. Public Road 
Lafayette, CO 80026 
(14)  Oil and grease interceptor installation. 
a.  Grease interceptor installation. Grease interceptors are required for all facilities used and operated regularly for the sale of prepared food, including but not limited to restaurants, cafes, fast food outlets, pizza outlets, delicatessens, sandwich shops and any and all other kinds and types of food vending establishments in which any food preparation (including heating or defrosting in or by means of any kind of oven or heating device) takes place on the premises, whether or not such facilities are located in a separate building or structure or occupy space in a building or structure that is occupied by other businesses, and including schools, churches, boardinghouses with communal kitchen facilities, nursing homes, and day care centers that have kitchens and engage in the preparation of food. In addition, meat cutting facilities and other facilities capable of discharging significant amounts of grease into the POTW shall be required to install grease interceptors. The exception shall be those facilities granted a variance by the city. Grease interceptors shall not be required for any private residence or dwelling unless a commercial use exists within the residence or dwelling that generates amounts of grease beyond that generated by a residential dwelling. 
b.  Grease interceptor sizing criteria. The city shall promulgate rules, regulations and criteria for grease interceptor sizing. 
c.  Inspection of grease interceptors. The city shall establish an inspection program for grease interceptors. The city shall develop rules and regulations to inventory all grease interceptors and document the inspections of these interceptors. 
d.  Grease interceptor pumping schedules. All users connected to grease interceptors will be required to pump out their interceptors at intervals determined in rules, regulations and criteria promulgated by the city. 
e.  Biological treatment. Biological treatment shall not be a substitute for the pumping of the grease interceptor. Biological treatment may be permitted in cases in which the superintendent has specifically approved such treatment. Standards for such approval shall be set by the superintendent. 
f.  Existing sources not connected to grease interceptors. Sources existing prior to June 15, 2001, not connected to grease interceptors and that may potentially contribute significant amounts shall be identified through such means as site inspections, discharge sampling and inspection of the collection system. Once these sources are identified, they will be required to implement best management practices (BMPs) to keep oil and grease out of the water reclamation system. The city shall promulgate rules, regulations and criteria for BMPs. 
g.  Failure to pass inspection. If the BMPs are not successful at the facility and the facility continues to contribute significant amounts of oil and grease to the sanitary sewer, as documented by field inspections, then the facility will be required to install an adequately sized grease collection device. 
h.  Right of entry. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this section 95-74(14), or whenever the city believes that there exists on any premises subject to this section any condition or violation with regard to the use and maintenance of oil and grease interceptors, city personnel may enter such premises to inspect the same provided that such personnel present proper credentials or otherwise have grounds for a search warrant exception as may be authorized by law. If requested entry be refused, the city shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including an issuance of an administrative warrant from the municipal court or from the District Court of the State of Colorado having jurisdiction. 
(15)  Information may be required. The superintendent may require a user of water reclamation services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. The superintendent may also require that such information be submitted to the city in the form of a periodic or regularly scheduled report. These requirements may include: 
a.  Effluent discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
b.  Chemical analyses of effluent; 
c.  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting effluent volume and quality; 
d.  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to water reclamation conduit use control; 
e.  A plot plan of water reclamation conduits of the user's property showing water reclamation and pretreatment facility location; 
f.  Details of effluent pretreatment facilities; 
g.  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal water reclamation system. 
(16)  Special agreements not prohibited. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(17)  Discharge permits may be required. Nonresidential dischargers may be required to obtain a discharge permit, wherein may be specified conditions and other agreements relating to specific use of the water reclamation system by said discharger. A permit fee sufficient to pay for any costs of administering the discharge permit shall be specified by the superintendent, and paid by the discharger. Standards for such permits shall be set by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 4, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 2000-44, §§ 2, 5-7, 20, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2001-17, §§ 6, 7, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 1, 7-15-03; Ord. No. 2007-11, § 1, 3-20-07; Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 4-15-14) 
Sec. 95-75. - Connections to water reclamation system, permits, plans, inspections. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public water reclamation conduit or appurtenances, or perform work on, or construct, a building water reclamation conduit or lateral without first applying for and obtaining a written permit from the city and paying all fees and connection charges as required therefor. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. The applicant's signature on the application for any permit shall constitute an agreement to comply with all of the provisions, terms and requirements of this article and other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and with the plans and specifications filed with the application, if any, together with such corrections or modifications as may be made or permitted by the city, if any. Such agreement shall be binding upon the applicant and may be altered only by the city in writing. 
(b)  Costs, protection, maintenance, repair, and replacement. 
(1)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building water reclamation conduit shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of a building water reclamation conduit. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any property using the Lafayette water reclamation system and the lessee of any such property to protect, maintain, repair, and replace the water reclamation service pipe as may be necessary in order to allow said water reclamation service pipe to function in an acceptable manner. For the purpose of this section "water reclamation service pipe" is defined as that pipe commencing at the water reclamation main and extending to the building or other appurtenance. It shall further be the duty of said persons to pay all costs of protection, maintenance, repair, and replacement of the water reclamation service pipe and the city shall have, for the security of the collection of such charges, a lien upon the real property served by such water reclamation service pipe which lien may be collected pursuant to section 95-54 of this chapter. 
(c)  Separate building water reclamation conduits required. A separate and independent building water reclamation conduit shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private water reclamation conduit is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building water reclamation conduit from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building water reclamation conduit, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. Old building water reclamation conduits may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(d)  Use of proper materials and construction techniques. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all water reclamation conduits, including building water reclamation conduits, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of suitable code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. Whenever possible, the building water reclamation conduit shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public water reclamation conduit, effluent carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building water reclamation conduit. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public water reclamation conduit unless such connection is approved by the superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. The connection of the building water reclamation conduit into the public water reclamation conduit shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(e)  Inspection. The applicant for the building water reclamation conduit permit shall notify the superintendent when the building water reclamation conduit is ready for inspection and connection to the public water reclamation system. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(f)  Safety precautions. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(g)  Lapse of permit. If work under a permit is not commenced within one (1) year or if after partial completion work is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, the permit shall thereupon become void and no further work shall be performed until a new permit or an extension of the original permit shall have been issued by the city. A new fee shall be required before the issuance of said new permit. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 5, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 1985-24, § 1, 7-16-85; Ord. No. 2000-44, §§ 2, 4, 5, 21, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-76. - Private effluent disposal systems; permit required; inspection; connection to public water reclamation system. 
(a)  When permitted. Where a public water reclamation or combined conduit is not available under the provisions of section 95-73(b), the building water reclamation conduit shall be connected to a private effluent disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Permit required. Before commencement of construction of a private effluent disposal system the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. A permit for a private effluent disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction; and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(c)  Standards for construction. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private effluent disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of public health of the State of Colorado. No permit shall be issued for any private effluent disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the proposed system does not meet the minimum setback requirements established in the Boulder County Individual Sewage Disposal System Regulations. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(d)  Connection with public sewer required. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private effluent disposal system, as provided in section 95-73(b), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within sixty (60) days in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private effluent disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(e)  Sanitary operation required. The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private effluent disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 6, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 2000-44, §§ 4, 6, 22, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-77. - Appeal of adverse decision. 
(a)  Notice of appeal. If any aggrieved person wishes to challenge any action taken by the superintendent in any matter concerning application or interpretation of this article, he shall file a notice of appeal with the city council. The notice of appeal shall be filed within twenty (20) days of any final action or determination by the superintendent. 
(b)  Procedure before city council. Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the notice of appeal, the matter shall be heard by no less than a quorum of the city council either at a regularly scheduled meeting, or at a special meeting called for the purpose of hearing the appeal. The vote of a majority of council members present shall be required to reverse or alter a decision or interpretation of the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 7, 2-19-80) 
Sec. 95-78. - Inspectors. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the effluent collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(c)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the water reclamation facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 8, 2-19-80; Ord. No. 2000-44, §§ 6, 7, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-79. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 8 of Ord. No. 2001-17, adopted June 5, 2001, deleted § 95-79, which pertained to violations and penalties, and derived from Ord. No. 866, adopted Feb. 19, 1980; and Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994. See §§ 95-100 and 95-101 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 95-80. - Effluent overflow-Liability. 
(a)  The city is not liable for damages arising from effluent overflowing into a residence, factory, store, office or other building caused by excessive rainfall or the negligence of the property owner or a third party or for any other reason not caused by the city and not due to negligent water reclamation connection or other negligent operation or maintenance on the part of the city. No owner of such property is entitled to reimbursement for damages from the city by reason of such effluent backup. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, the city, in its sole discretion, may elect to contribute an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) to the owner of any property that has suffered damage due to the occurrence of effluent overflowing into or onto such property. 
(Ord. No. 2000-44, § 23, 11-21-00) 
Secs. 95-81-95-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER RECLAMATION FUND ENTERPRISE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-54, adopted Jan. 4, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1-4 of said ordinance as §§ 95-91-95-94 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Section 2 of Ord. No. 2000-44, adopted Nov. 21, 2000, changed the title of Art. V from "Sewer Fund Enterprise" to "Water Reclamation Fund Enterprise." 

Sec. 95-91. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the authority of section 16.13 of the Charter of the city, there is hereby created and established the water reclamation fund enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 1993-54, § 1, 1-4-94; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-92. - Appointment of board. 
    The city council is hereby appointed as the board of the water reclamation fund enterprise. There shall not be appointed any persons other than the city council to serve on the board of the water reclamation fund enterprise nor shall city council delegate to any other person or entity the powers reserved to the board of the water reclamation fund enterprise hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1993-54, § 2, 1-4-94; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-93. - Authority to issue revenue bonds. 
    The water reclamation fund enterprise, acting by and through the city council sitting as the board of the water reclamation fund enterprise, may issue its own revenue bonds or other obligations (including refunding securities) on behalf of the city, which revenue bonds or other obligations shall be payable solely from the net revenue (including special assessments) derived from the operation of the water reclamation fund enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations may be additionally secured by mortgages on or security interests in any real or personal property of the city used in the operation of the water reclamation fund enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations shall be issued by ordinance of the board of the water reclamation fund enterprise, adopted in the same manner and subject to referendum to the same extent as ordinances of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-54, § 3, 1-4-94; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Sec. 95-94. - Restrictions on board's authority. 
    The city council shall not authorize the board of the water reclamation fund enterprise to acquire, construct or install or hold title to or dispose of any city-owned property used in the operation of the water reclamation fund enterprise, to impose or adjust rates, fees, tolls or charges for the use of any such property or for any service or commodity furnished by the water reclamation fund enterprise, to levy special assessments or to exercise any power reserved to the council or other city officials by the City Charter or otherwise (other than the power to issue revenue bonds and other obligations). 
(Ord. No. 1993-54, § 4, 1-4-94; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 2, 11-21-00) 
Secs. 95-95-95-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 95-100. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter by the Municipal Court of the City of Lafayette shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). These offenses are not punishable by imprisonment. 
(b)  Each day or portion thereof during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 9, 6-5-01) 
Sec. 95-101. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, the superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within seven (7) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) of this section, and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The superintendent may order a user that has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, to appear before the superintendent and show cause why any proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, the superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, water reclamation service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged into the water reclamation system. Issuance of a compliance order shall not relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed properly to address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Emergency suspensions. The superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or that presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure immediately to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent may take such steps as are deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the water reclamation connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection (g) of this section are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent prior to the date of any show cause or termination under subsections (c) or (g) of this section. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(g)  Termination of discharge. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, the superintendent may terminate such user's discharge. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause, under subsection (c) of this section, why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(h)  Injunctive relief. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, the superintendent, through the city attorney, may petition a court of proper jurisdiction for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that restrains or compels the specific performance of the effluent discharge order or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The superintendent may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(i)  Recovery of costs of investigation. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, the superintendent may bill the user for the city's costs of investigation of such violation. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, cost of time of city employees, laboratory costs incurred, and cost of transport or shipping of samples. 
(j)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The superintendent may take any, all or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 2001-17, § 9, 6-5-01; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 2, 7-15-03) 
Chapter 100 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-09, adopted March 3, 2015, amended ch. 100 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 100 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 100-1-100-13, and derived from Ord. No. 2007-17, adopted April 17, 2007; and Ord. No. 2007-58, adopted January 8, 2008. 
Charter reference- Municipal utilities, Ch. XIII. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 45; mobile homes, Ch. 60; nuisances, Ch. 70; offenses, Ch. 75; parks and recreation, Ch. 80; sewers, Ch. 95; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 105; littering, § 5-9 et seq.; junk automobiles, § 115-76 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal powers as to rubbish, C. R. S. § 31-15-401. 

Sec. 100-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
    Bulky item means refuse items that are too large or too voluminous to be placed in a residential refuse container, which include, but are not limited to, furniture or appliances, and small equipment, such as lawnmowers. 
    Electronic device means a device that is marketed by a manufacturer for use by a consumer and that is: 
(1)  A computer, peripheral printer, facsimile machine, digital video disc player, video cassette recorder or other electronic device specified by rule promulgated by the State of Colorado Solid and Hazardous Waste Commission, or 
(2)  A video display device or computer monitor, including a laptop, notebook, ultrabook, or network computer, television, tablet or slate computer, electronic book or other electronic device specified by rule promulgated by the State of Colorado Solid and Hazardous Waste Commission that contains a cathode ray tube or flat panel screen with a screen that is greater than four (4) inches measured diagonally. 
    Excluded waste means all commercial and industrial refuse, construction debris, large dead animals, institutional solid waste, hazardous waste, offal waste, stable matter, vegetable waste and special waste, highly flammable substances, liquid waste, certain pathological and biological wastes, explosives, toxic materials, radioactive materials, material that the disposal facility is not authorized to receive and/or dispose of, and other materials deemed by state, federal or local law, or in the reasonable discretion of the city, to be dangerous or threatening to health or the environment, or which cannot be legally accepted at the applicable disposal facility. 
    Food waste means all compostable pre and post-consumer food waste, such as whole and partial pieces of produce, meats, bones, cheese, bread, cereals, coffee grounds, or egg shells, and food-soiled paper, such as paper napkins, paper towels, paper plates, coffee filters, paper take-out boxes, pizza boxes, or other paper products accepted by the city's designated composting site. Food waste does not include dead animals, plastics, diapers, kitty litter, liquid wastes, ashes, pet wastes, and other materials prohibited by the city's designated composting site. 
    Homeowner association means any covenant-controlled community containing eight (8) or more residential property owners, which includes a lawfully constituted and operational board or other similar entity which is empowered to enforce the community's recorded covenants. 
    Large dead animals means animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten (10) pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for human use. 
    Offal waste means waste animal (land or marine) matter from establishments such as butcher shops, slaughterhouses, food processing and packing plants, rendering plants and fertilizer plants. 
    Organics means food waste and yard waste separately or combined. 
    Recyclable materials means those materials, goods and items deemed as single-stream recyclables by the city's designated recycling facility or those materials, goods and items deemed recyclable by other licensed collectors operating within the city. 
    Refuse means all nonhazardous, solid waste, including rubbish generated at a residential unit but does not include any excluded waste. 
    Residential waste collection services means the collection and transportation of residential refuse, recyclables and organics by the city's designated service provider from those participants in the city's residential waste collection service program. 
    Rubbish means all waste wood, wood chips, shavings, sawdust, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping, crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not included in the definition of excluded waste. 
    Refuse container means, for those persons subject to the city's residential waste collection service program, a wheeled cart suitable for mechanical lifting with a lid for containing and setting out refuse for collection in sizes of approximately thirty-two (32) gallons, sixty-four (64) gallons and/or ninety-six (96) gallons. For all other persons "refuse container" means a metal or other nonabsorbent container equipped with a tightly fitting metal or nonabsorbent lid. 
    Single-stream recycling container means, for those persons subject to the city's residential waste collection services program, a ninety-six-gallon wheeled cart suitable for mechanical lifting with lid for containing and setting out single-stream recycling materials for collection. For all other persons "single stream recycling container" means a metal or other non-absorbent container equipped with a tightly fitting metal or nonabsorbent lid. 
    Single-stream recycling means the co-mingling of all forms of materials, goods and items that are approved for recycling at the city's designated recycling facility. 
    Solid waste means useless, unwanted or discarded materials with insufficient liquid content to be free-flowing, that result from domestic, industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental and community operations, which require proper storage, collection, transportation and disposal to prevent environmental pollution inimical to public health, safety and welfare. Solid waste does not include sewage, earth or material used to fill land in accordance with building codes, mining residues, slag, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste water effluents which are not acceptable for disposal in any sanitary sewage treatment system or any material included in the definition of excluded waste. 
    Special waste means nonhazardous solid waste that is subject to additional governmental regulations or special handling requirements in its collection, transportation, processing or disposal as a result of the characteristics of or processes which generate such waste. Special waste includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Waste iron from a commercial or industrial activity; 
(2)  Waste generated by an industrial process or a pollution control process; 
(3)  Waste which may contain free liquids; 
(4)  Waste which may contain residue and debris from the cleanup of a spill of petroleum, chemical or commercial products or wastes, or contaminated residuals; 
(5)  Articles from the cleanup of a facility which generates, stores, treats, recycles or disposes of chemical substances, commercial products or wastes; 
(6)  Wastes which are nonhazardous as a result of proper treatment pursuant to Subtitle C of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 ("RCRA"); 
(7)  Asbestos containing or asbestos bearing material that has been properly secured under existing federal, state, or local laws, rules and regulations; 
(8)  Containers that once contained hazardous substances, chemicals, or insecticides so long as such containers are "empty" as defined by RCRA; 
(9)  Municipal or commercial solid waste that may have come into contact with any of the wastes described herein this subsection; 
(10)  Filter cake sludge wastes from waste water treatment processes; 
(11)  Wastes containing any regulated polychlorinated biphenyls; ash, sludge, tires and powders; and 
(12)  Electronic devices. 
    Vegetable waste means putrescible solid waste resulting from the processing of plants for food by commercial establishments such as canneries. This definition does not include food waste or waste products resulting from the preparation and consumption of food in places such as cafeterias and restaurants. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass, and clippings of woody, as well as fleshy plants. Materials larger than four (4) inches in diameter or four (4) feet in length are excluded. Bundles of yard waste up to two (2) feet in diameter by four (4) feet in length, and no more than fifty-five (55) pounds, shall be allowed, and must be secured by degradable string or twine, not nylon or other synthetic materials. Un-flocked whole Christmas trees cut to less than four (4) feet in height are acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-2. - Burial of refuse, recyclables or organics prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bury refuse, recyclable or organic materials anywhere within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-3. - Deposit of refuse, recyclables in water reclamation/stormwater systems prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse or recyclable materials into the city's waste or stormwater system. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-4. - Refuse-Collection requirements. 
(a)  Prior to being deposited for collection, all refuse shall be drained of liquid. 
(b)  Refuse containers, for those subject to the city's residential waste collection service program, shall be furnished by the city. 
(c)  For those persons subject to the city's residential waste collection services program, all refuse shall be placed in the refuse containers by the owners, tenant, or occupant of each residence. Containers shall be placed with their lids closed at the curb adjacent to each residence on a schedule as established by the city. 
(d)  No person shall place, leave, deposit or dispose of any refuse on any curb or other public place, or on any private property, unless the refuse is wholly contained within a proper refuse container for collection. Any accumulation of refuse in violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(e)  Refuse containers shall be kept off the curb and all other public ways, except on the scheduled day of collection, and then only for a maximum of twelve (12) hours before and twelve (12) hours after the scheduled time of collection. 
(f)  Household hazardous waste shall be disposed of as required by the Boulder County Household Hazardous Waste Collection Program. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-5. - Recyclable-Collection requirements. 
(a)  All recyclable materials shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection. 
(b)  Single-stream recycling containers, for those persons subject to the city's waste collection services program, shall be provided by the city. Such containers shall be used only for collection of materials deemed recyclable by the city's designated waste collector's recycling facility. 
(c)  For those persons subject to the city's residential waste collection services program, all recyclable materials shall be placed in the provided containers by the owner, tenant, or occupant of each residence. Containers shall be placed in the curb adjacent to each residence on a schedule as established by the city. 
(d)  No person shall place, leave, deposit or dispose of any recyclable materials on any curb or other public place, or on any private property, unless the recyclable materials are wholly contained within a single-stream recycling container approved by such person's collector. Any accumulation of recycling materials in violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(e)  Recycling containers shall be kept off the curb and all other public ways, except on the scheduled day of collection, and then only for a maximum of twelve (12) hours before and twelve (12) hours after the scheduled time of collection. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-5.5. - Organics-Collection requirements. 
(a)  All organic materials shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection. 
(b)  Organic collection containers, for those persons subject to the city's residential waste collection services program, shall be furnished by the city. Such containers shall only be used for collection of organic materials. 
(c)  All organic materials shall be placed in the collection containers by the owner, tenant, or occupant of each residence. Containers shall be placed with their lids closed in the curb adjacent to each residence on a schedule as established by the city. 
(d)  No person shall place, leave, deposit or dispose of any organic materials on any curb or other public place, or on any private property, unless the organic materials are wholly contained within an organics container or, for those persons not subject to the city's organics collection services, a container approved by the collector. Any accumulation of organic materials in violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(e)  Organic containers shall be kept off the, curb and all other public ways, except on the scheduled day of collection, and then only for a maximum of twelve (12) hours before and twelve (12) hours after the scheduled time of collection. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-6. - Refuse, recyclable and organic materials-Responsibility. 
    Refuse, recyclable and organic materials shall be gathered, deposited, disposed of, and placed, in the manner provided for in this chapter, by the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the property, or the agent or contractor of any of the foregoing, and each of the foregoing persons may be held jointly and severally liable for any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-7. - City residential refuse, recyclable and organic collection services. 
(a)  The city's contractual residential waste collection service provider shall furnish residential waste collection services as provided in this section for all residents within the city, except for those specifically excluded from such services. 
(b)  Bulky items shall be removed in accordance with the contractual requirements of the city's residential waste collection services provider, or by other providers authorized to haul refuse within the city, or by the resident in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter. Neither the city, nor its contractors or licensed operators, shall have any obligation to collect or transport any refuse not in a proper container, or from any containers not properly placed for collection. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set out, or allow to be set out, deposited, or stored for collection, any refuse other than that which has accumulated from the regular residential use of the premises upon which such refuse is set out, deposited, or stored for collection. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-8. - Premises excluded from service. 
(a)  All commercial and industrial establishments and multifamily residences containing eight (8) or more units are excluded from the city residential waste collection service program. 
(b)  All homeowner associations in existence upon the effective date of this ordinance, which provide their residents refuse and recycling collection services, are excluded from the city's residential refuse, recyclable and organics collection services. Homeowner associations may, however, subject to the requirements set forth in this chapter, participate in the city's residential waste collection service program, and all homeowner associations formed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be subject to the city's residential waste collection program. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-9. - Refuse hauling. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any person from contracting for or hauling one's own refuse, recyclable or organic materials, providing it is collected and disposed of in conformity with all applicable city rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-10. - Residential waste collection services fees. 
(a)  City council shall, by resolution, establish the fees to be imposed for residential waste collection services. The fees shall be imposed on all city residents receiving city water service not excluded from residential waste collection services pursuant to this chapter regardless of whether any or all of the city's residential waste collection services are actually utilized by such resident. The fee shall be billed in conjunction with the charge for city water service and such fee shall be due and payable at the same time and place as the charge for water service. 
(b)  The fees for residential waste collection services and the charge for water service are hereby declared to be parts of one (1) debt to the city insofar as the same affect any one (1) resident, and the refusal or failure to pay any part of such debt for any period of service shall be sufficient cause for the city to avail itself of any or all remedies as set forth in with the article III of chapter 120 of the code, as same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-11. - Residential waste collection services accounting and budgeting. 
    The finance director shall segregate residential waste collection services, expenses and revenues separate from the general fund expenditures and revenues and provide a general accounting for the expenditures and revenues. For each budget cycle, a projection of residential waste collection services expenditures and revenues shall be made as part of the city budget process. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Sec. 100-12. - Unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any excluded waste in any residential refuse, recyclable or organic container. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, 3-3-15) 
Chapter 104 - STORMWATER 
ARTICLE I. - STORMWATER UTILITY ENTERPRISE 

Sec. 104-1. - Enterprise created. 
    Pursuant to the authority of section 16.13 of the City Charter, there is hereby created and established the stormwater utility enterprise. For the purposes of this chapter "stormwater utility" shall mean as defined in section 104-16 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 104-2. - Appointment of board. 
    The city council is hereby appointed as the board of the stormwater utility enterprise. There shall not be appointed any persons other than the city council to serve on the board of the stormwater utility enterprise nor shall city council delegate to any other person or entity the powers reserved to the board of the stormwater utility enterprise hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 104-3. - Authority to issue revenue bonds. 
    The stormwater utility enterprise, acting by and through the city council sitting as the board of the stormwater utility enterprise, may issue its own revenue bonds or other obligations (including refunding securities) on behalf of the city, which revenue bonds or other obligations shall be payable solely from the net revenue (including special assessments) derived from the operation of the stormwater utility enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations may be additionally secured by mortgages on or security interests in any real or personal property of the city used in the operation of the stormwater utility enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations shall be issued by ordinance of the board of the stormwater utility enterprise, adopted in the same manner and subject to referendum to the same extent as ordinances of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 104-4. - Restrictions on board's authority. 
    The city council shall not authorize the board of the stormwater utility enterprise to acquire, construct or install or hold title to or dispose of any city-owned property used in the operation of the stormwater utility enterprise, to impose or adjust rates, fees, tolls or charges for the use of any such property or for any service or commodity furnished by the stormwater utility enterprise, to levy special assessments or to exercise any power reserved to city council or other city officials by the City Charter or otherwise (other than the power to issue revenue bonds and other obligations). 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 104-5. - Restrictions on funding. 
    The stormwater utility enterprise shall receive less than ten (10) percent of its annual revenues in grants from all Colorado state and local governments combined. For the purposes of this article "grants" shall mean as defined in C.R.S. 37-45.1-102(2). 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, § 1, 4-3-07) 
Secs. 104-6-104-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER UTILITY FEES 

Sec. 104-16. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Stormwater utility means all facilities used for collecting and conducting drainage and/or stormwater to, through and from drainage areas to the points of final outlet including, but not limited to, any and all of the following: conduits and appurtenant features, canals, ditches, streams, gulches, gullies, flumes, culverts, bridges, streets, curbs, gutters and pumping stations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, § 2, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 104-17. - Stormwater utility enterprise fund established. 
(1)  There is hereby established a separate stormwater utility enterprise fund to be segregated from all other city funds in which shall be deposited all revenues from all charges, fees, rates and other sources. 
(2)  The stormwater utility enterprise may pledge all or any portion of the funds, including revenues anticipated to be collected, to the payment of principal, interest, premium, if any, and reserves for revenue bonds, or any other obligations lawfully issued or otherwise contracted for by the enterprise, for the payment or other financing of costs of the stormwater utility system, or for the purpose of refunding any obligations issued or otherwise contracted for such purposes. 
(3)  The stormwater utility enterprise may invest such funds as permitted by law. The enterprise may also establish reserve funds to finance the capital costs of replacement of stormwater utility facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, § 2, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 104-18. - Fees established/developed land. 
    There is hereby imposed on each and every improved lot and parcel of land within the city a monthly usage fee for stormwater utility facilities. For purposes of this section, "improved lot and parcel of land" shall mean those properties which contain impervious improvements, such as, by illustration only, driveways, parking lots, residences, buildings and structures. This fee shall be used to fund stormwater quality issues and improvements (NPDES Phase II Program); and the operation, maintenance, construction, improvement and replacement of stormwater utility facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, § 2, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 104-19. - Fees established/new platted land. 
    There is hereby imposed on each and every new parcel of land being platted with the city a one-time stormwater development fee on the total gross acreage of the land being platted. For the purposes of this section "gross acreage" shall mean the total area of the land being platted regardless of how the land in question will be developed, zoned or what land dedications will take place. This fee shall be used to fund stormwater quality issues and improvements (NPDES Phase II Program); and the operation, maintenance, construction, improvement and replacement of stormwater utility facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, § 2, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 104-20. - Fee imposition. 
    The amount of the fee for developed and new platted lands shall be established by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, § 2, 4-3-07) 
Sec. 104-21. - Payment of stormwater utility enterprise fees. 
(1)  Stormwater utility enterprise fees shall be billed to the property owner on a monthly basis on the city utility bill. The obligation to pay such bill shall not be affected by the failure of the owner, occupant or customer to receive a statement of services. 
(2)  The monthly fee shall be considered as part of the water and water reclamation utility bill and subject to the rules and regulations in sections 120-61 and 120-62 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-18, § 2, 4-3-07) 
Secs. 104-22-104-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER QUALITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2017-21, adopted June 6, 2017, repealed Art. III in its entirety and reenacted provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. III pertained to the same subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2011-13, adopted April 10, 2011; Ord. No. 2012-12, adopted May 15, 2012, and Ord. No. 2013-23, adopted Sept. 4, 2012. 

Sec. 104-30. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to regulate nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system and subsequent receiving waters as required by federal and state law in order to protect and enhance the water quality of the city's watercourses, water bodies and wetlands in a manner consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate and reduce, to the maximum extent practicable (MEP), the introduction of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4); 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4; 
(3)  To provide for inspection and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article; 
(4)  To reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges from construction activity by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land; 
(5)  To require the construction of permanent stormwater runoff controls with development to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the deterioration of water quality; and 
(6)  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of pollutants into the storm drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-31. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
    Best management practices (BMPs): A technique, process, activity or structure used to prevent or reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the pollutant content of a stormwater discharge into receiving waters. BMPs include nonstructural methods such as good housekeeping and preventive maintenance and structural modifications to control the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into receiving waters, which limit the release of pollutants into stormwater discharges or function as treatment controls. For the purpose of this article, the term BMP is used interchangeably with the term control measure, and can include other methods such as the installation, operation, and maintenance of structural controls and treatment devices, which include; 
    Nonstructural BMPs: Practices that include: schedules of activities, site planning incorporating low-impact development techniques, general good housekeeping pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. 
    Structural BMP: A permanent system designed for the treatment of stormwater to prevent or reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of pollutants. 
    CDPHE: The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 
    CDPS: Colorado Discharge Permit System. CDPHE is authorized to administer the NPDES program in Colorado. 
    Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules, but remain related. "Contiguous" as applied to a common plan of development or sale means construction activities located within one-fourth (1/4) mile of each other. 
    Construction activity: Refers to ground surface disturbing and associated activities, which include, but are not limited to, clearing, grading, excavation, demolition, installation of new or improved haul roads and access roads, staging areas, stockpiling of fill materials, and borrow areas. Activities that include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility are not considered construction activities. Construction activity occurs from initial ground breaking to final stabilization regardless of ownership of the construction activities. 
    Control measure: Any best management practice or other method used to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state. Control measures include, but are not limited to best management practices. Control measures can include other methods such as the installation, operation, and maintenance of structure controls and treatment devices. 
    Director: The City of Lafayette public works director or designee. 
    Disturbed area: The area of the land's surface disturbed by any work or activity upon the property including construction activities that result in a land disturbance of greater than or equal to one (1) acre or that is less than one (1) acre, but is part of a larger common plan of development or sale that disturbs, one (1) acre or more, unless the disturbed areas have been finally stabilized. 
    Disturbed area does not include the tillage of land that is zoned for agricultural use. 
    Facility: Any building, including a private home, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant. 
    Hazardous materials: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illicit connections: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system, including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drainage system; and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains, sump pumps and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved. 
    Illicit discharge: Any direct or indirect release of pollutants to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in subsection 104-34(b) of this article. 
    Industrial activity: Activities subject to CDPS industrial permits, as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14). 
    Mobile washing operation: A commercial activity involving power washing, steam cleaning, and any other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning of, to include, but is not limited to, the following: vehicles, fabric, pets and/or exterior surfaces. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4): Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, catch basins, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, and natural and manmade or altered drainage ditches/channels/lakes/reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit or NPDES permit: A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Clean Water Act, including CDPS permits issued by the State of Colorado in compliance with the Act. 
    Nonstormwater discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Operator: The individual who has day-to-day supervision and control of activities occurring at a construction site or facility; this includes the owner, the developer, the general contractor or the agent of one (1) of these parties. 
    Owner: The person who owns a facility, development, part of a facility, or land. 
    Pollutant: Any sewage, sewage biosolids, garbage, chemical waste, biological material, solid waste, incinerator residue, ash, munitions, radioactive material, heat, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial and agricultural wastes discharged into the water. 
    Pollution: The presence in waters of the state of any substances, contaminants, or manmade or man-induced impairment of waters or alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water in quantities or at levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation unless authorized by applicable law. 
    Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, and including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Receiving water: Any water of the State of Colorado that receives a stormwater discharge from MS4, including all watercourses, even if they are usually dry, and irrigation ditches that receive municipal stormwater. It also includes storm sewer systems owned by other entities. 
    Spill: Any intentional or unintentional release of solid or liquid material which may cause pollution of the MS4 or waters of the state. 
    Storm drainage system: See definition of "Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)". 
    Stormwater: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater management plan (SWMP): A plan describing the BMP and activities to be implemented to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, MS4, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Threatened discharge: A condition creating a substantial probability of harm, which makes it reasonably necessary to take immediate action to prevent, reduce or mitigate damages to persons, property or natural resources. 
    Wastewater: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    Watercourse: A channel, natural depression, slough, artificial channel, gulch, arroyo, stream, creek, pond, reservoir or lake, including major drainageways, in which stormwater runoff and floodwater flow, either regularly or infrequently. 
    Waters of the State of Colorado (waters of the state): Any and all surface and subsurface waters that are contained in or flow in or through the State of Colorado, but does not include waters in sewage systems, waters in treatment works of disposal systems, waters in potable water distribution systems, and all water withdrawn for use until use and treatment have been completed. This definition includes all watercourses, even if they are usually dry. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-32. - Applicability of this article. 
    This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-33. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-34. - Illicit discharge prohibited; exemptions. 
(a)  Illicit discharges enumerated. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 or watercourses any illicit discharge, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Chemicals, petroleum products, paint, varnishes, solvents, oil and grease and other automotive fluids, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, or other toxic materials; 
(2)  Nonhazardous liquid, solid wastes and yard wastes; 
(3)  Hazardous materials, sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens, dissolved and particulate metals; 
(4)  Trash, refuse, rubbish, garbage, food wastes, pet wastes, litter, other discarded or abandoned objects, floatables and cleaning products; 
(5)  Landscaping materials, sediment, lawn clippings, leaves, branches or other landscaping and yard debris; 
(6)  Construction activities wastes and residues including, but not limited to, painting, paving, concrete placement, saw cutting, material storage and earthwork; 
(7)  Wastes and residues that result from mobile washing operations; discharges from toilets; sinks; industrial processes; cooling systems; boilers; fabric cleaning; equipment cleaning; commercial vehicle cleaning and substances added to the storm drain to control root growth; 
(8)  Any other material that is considered harmful to humans, animals, or aquatic life and its habitat. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following discharges, when properly managed, are exempt from the discharge prohibitions established by this article: 
(1)  Water line flushing in accordance with the CDPHE low risk policy discharge guidance: Potable water discharges from potable water sources in accordance with the CDPHE's low risk discharge guidance: potable water. 
The potable water shall not be used in any additional process. Processes include, but are not limited to, any type of washing, heat exchange, manufacturing, and hydrostatic testing of pipelines not associated with treated water distribution systems. 
(2)  Landscape irrigation or lawn watering, irrigation return flows, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater (discharges containing groundwater that comes into contact with construction activity are not considered "uncontaminated" due to the potential for sediment content), foundation or footing drains, crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washing, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges in accordance with the CDPHE's low risk discharge guidance: swimming pools, agricultural stormwater runoff, dye testing in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations, and stormwater runoff with incidental pollutants. 
(3)  Discharges resulting from emergency firefighting activities and water incidental to street sweeping (includes associated sidewalks and medians) that is not associated with construction. 
(4)  Discharges authorized by an NPDES or CDPS permit. 
(5)  Discharges that are in accordance with the CDPHE's low risk policy guidance documents or other CDPHE policies and guidance documents where the CDPHE has stated that it will not pursue permit coverage or enforcement for specified point source discharges or discharges added through the process detailed in the CDPS general permit COR090000 stormwater discharges associated with MS4s. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-35. - Illicit connections prohibited. 
    The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-36. - Threatened discharges. 
(a)  It is unlawful to cause materials to be deposited in such a manner or location as to constitute a threatened discharge into MS4 or waters of the state. Pollutants that are no longer contained in a pipe, tank or other container are considered to be threatened discharges unless they are actively being cleaned up. 
(1)  Cleaning of paved surfaces required: The owner of any paved parking lot, street or drive shall clean the pavement as necessary to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, an illicit discharge of pollutants. Paved surfaces shall be cleaned by dry sweeping, wet vacuum sweeping, collection and treatment of wash water or other methods in compliance with this article. 
(2)  Materials storage: Materials including, but not limited to, stockpiles used in construction and landscaping activities shall be stored to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the release of pollutants. 
(3)  Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers: Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer recommendations and applicable laws. Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be stored in a manner to prevent release to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-37. - Best management practices. 
    The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment or a disturbed area shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for premises, which are, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-38. - Right of entry and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(a)  Whenever the director has reasonable cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this article, the director shall have the right to enter the premises at any reasonable time to determine if the owner or operator is complying with all requirements of this article. In the event that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from a court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(b)  The director shall have the right to set up on the property of any discharger to the MS4 such devices that are necessary to conduct an investigation of such discharges. The investigation may include, but is not limited to, the following: sampling of any discharge or process waters, the taking of photographs, interviewing staff on alleged violations, and access to any and all facilities or areas within the premises that may have any effect on the discharge. 
(c)  If the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the director is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-39. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for any premises, facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4, or waters of the state, that person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-40. - Applicability of permit. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity resulting in the following total disturbed area without first obtaining a stormwater quality permit: 
(1)  One (1) acre or more. 
(2)  Less than one (1) acre if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(3)  The city may also require a stormwater quality permit regardless of the size of the total disturbed area in conjunction with approval of a final subdivision plat, special use permit, or site development plan, or if the construction activities are adjacent to a watercourse or wetlands. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Agricultural land management activities. 
(2)  Construction activities taking place on land under the authority of a non-standard MS4 permit holder. 
(3)  The discharge is from a parcel or area that is not under the jurisdictional authority of the city. 
(c)  Permit application. Applications for stormwater quality permits shall be filed on a form prescribed by the city. 
(1)  In support of the application, the applicant shall submit all information required on the city's form and any additional information requested by the city. 
(2)  The application shall be signed by the person or persons responsible for compliance with the permit throughout the permit's validity. 
(3)  The application shall include documentation of an application for a CDPHE stormwater general permit for construction activities. 
(d)  Permit approval required. Construction activities may not proceed until permit approval is received from the city. 
(e)  Permit issuance/denial. The city shall within thirty (30) working days of its receipt of a completed stormwater quality permit application either issue or deny a permit. The permit may be denied if the applicant fails to provide the information required by this section. If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the grounds for denial and of the corrective actions that must be taken to obtain a permit. An applicant may appeal the denial in writing to the director no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of issuance of denial. The appeal must set forth the grounds for the appeal and include any documents in support of the applicant's appeal. The city administrator shall within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of an appeal rule on the matter based solely upon review of the application, denial, appeal, and all documents related thereto. The parties shall receive written notice of the city administrator's decision. 
(f)  Permit fees. Fees for any permit required by this article shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council, and no permit shall be issued until and unless the fee has been paid. 
(g)  Permit close-out. The stormwater quality permit will not be closed until the site has achieved final stabilization. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-41. - Construction stormwater management plan. 
(a)  Preparation of SWMP. The SWMP shall be prepared in accordance with the engineering, hydrologic and pollution control practices outlined in the city's current standards and specifications for design and construction of public improvements. 
(b)  SWMP required on site. The owner or its representative will be required to have the approved SWMP on site at all times and shall be prepared to respond to maintenance of specific BMPs. 
(c)  Inspection of BMPs. The owner or their representative shall inspect all BMPs at least every fourteen (14) days and within twenty-four (24) hours after any precipitation or snowmelt event that causes surface runoff. Documented inspections of BMPs shall be conducted by an individual who has successfully completed formal training in erosion and sediment control by a recognized organization acceptable to the director. A certification of successful completion of such training shall be provided upon request. 
(d)  Installation of BMPs. The owner or their representative shall ensure erosion, sediment and waste control BMPs are implemented throughout all stages of construction until final stabilization. 
(e)  Maintenance of BMPs. BMPs shall be continuously maintained in operating conditions and repaired immediately when damaged. 
(f)  BMP removal. No person shall maliciously destroy or interfere with any BMPs implemented to protect water quality. 
(g)  Minor modifications to SWMP. Based on inspections performed by the owner or by city personnel, minor modifications to the SWMP will be necessary if at any time the specified BMPs do not meet the objectives of this article or equivalent or better BMPs are implemented. All minor modifications shall be implemented immediately and recorded on the owner's copy of the SWMP. The modified SWMP shall be made available to city personnel during inspections. 
(h)  Major modifications to SWMP. Whenever there is a significant change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the hydrology or potential for discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or receiving waters, a revised SWMP shall be submitted to the city for review and approval. 
(i)  Records of inspection. Records of inspection are to be maintained with the SWMP and are to be available to the city inspector upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-42. - Technical standards and specifications. 
(a)  All BMPs designed to meet the requirements of this article shall, as applicable, comply with the following technical standards: 
(1)  City of Lafayette Drainage Criteria Manual. 
(2)  Any other alternative methodology approved by the city, which is demonstrated to be effective. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-43. - Post-construction requirement of permanent BMPs. 
(a)  Post-construction BMPs. Land development, for both private and public projects, that meets the requirements of this article must address stormwater runoff quality through the use of post-construction BMPs which shall be maintained in perpetuity. 
(1)  Structural BMPs, such as inlet inserts, bioretention, grass swales and buffers, extended detention basins, sand filters, permeable pavement, constructed wetland ponds and channels, and underground BMPs located on private property shall be owned and operated by the owner(s) of the property on which the BMP is located, unless the city in writing agrees that a person other than the owner shall own or operate such BMP. 
(2)  Nonstructural BMPs, such as site operations, employee training, and site planning incorporating low impact development techniques to address stormwater quality shall be implemented in perpetuity. 
(3)  As a condition of approval of the BMP, the owner of a private project shall also agree to maintain the BMP to its design capacity and functionality unless or until the city relieves the property owner of that responsibility in writing. The obligation to maintain the BMP shall be memorialized on the subdivision plat, annexation plat, development agreement or other instrument or in a form acceptable to the city and shall be recorded in the office of the county clerk and recorder. 
(b)  Certification of post-construction BMPs. During construction of post-construction structural BMPs, documented engineering inspections must be conducted at key installation points to ensure proper installation and functionality of the BMP. Upon completion of a project, and before construction acceptance and/or a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the city shall be provided a written certification stating that the completed project is in compliance with the approved final plan and the post-construction structural BMP will function as designed. All applicants are required to submit "as built" plans for any post-construction structural BMP after final construction is completed and must be certified by a Colorado licensed professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(c)  Ongoing inspection and maintenance of permanent BMPs. 
(1)  Maintenance agreements. The owner of a site with privately maintained BMPs must execute an agreement addressing maintenance of BMPs that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the permanent BMPs. Any owner who sells, conveys or otherwise transfers ownership of such site, shall within thirty (30) days of such transfer provide the new owner written notice of the obligation to maintain the BMPs. An owner must also within such thirty (30) day time period provide the city a copy of such notice. Failure of any party to send or receive such notice shall not absolve it of the obligation to meet the BMP maintenance requirement. 
(2)  Publicly owned post-construction BMPs. Publicly owned or maintained post-construction BMPs shall be subject to ongoing inspection to ensure the BMP is functioning properly. 
(3)  Long-term inspection and maintenance of post-construction BMPs. Post-construction BMPs included in a final drainage plan must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and to ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-44. - Security requirement. 
(a)  As a condition for the issuance of a stormwater quality permit, applicants may be required to provide security in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit. The amount of the security will generally be based upon one hundred fifteen (115) percent of the estimated cost of the work required to ensure compliance with the permit's terms and conditions and requirements of this article. After the issuance of construction acceptance and close-out of the stormwater quality permit, the letter of credit shall be released. 
(b)  If the permittee does not successfully complete all required work or violates any requirement of the permit or this article, the city may take corrective measures and charge the cost of such to the permittee. Such costs shall include the actual cost of any work deemed necessary by the city plus reasonable administrative and inspection costs and penalties. If the total of such costs exceeds the security, the permittee shall be responsible for payment of the remaining balance within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of an accounting of such from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Sec. 104-45. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violation. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to one (1) or more of the enforcement actions outlined in this section. 
(b)  Enforcement. All authorized personnel under the supervision of the director shall have the power to conduct inspections, give verbal direction, issue notices of violations and implement other enforcement actions under this section. 
(c)  Determination of violation. Whenever the director has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this article, the director shall have the right to enter the premises at any reasonable time to determine if there exists an actual or potential violation of the requirements of this article. In the event that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from a court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
(d)  Abatement. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the director is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. 
(e)  Cost of abatement of the violation. 
(1)  If the city abates a violation, then within ten (10) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs, by personal delivery or by mail to the last known address of the owner as shown in the records of the county assessor. The notice shall be effective upon the date of mailing or personal delivery. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten (10) days of the effective date of the notice. 
(2)  If no protest is filed, then the charges shall become due and payable on the date set forth in the notice, which date shall be after the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, and such charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(3)  In the event a protest is filed, a hearing on such protest shall be held before the city administrator or its designee within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the written protest. If any charges are upheld upon completion of such hearing, then such charges shall become due and payable ten (10) days after the issuance of the order upon such protest and if not timely paid, such charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(4)  If the amount due is not paid within ten (10) days of the decision of the city administrator or the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal under this section, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(5)  All liens set forth in this section shall accrue penalty and interest at a rate equivalent to that which is assessed upon delinquent general property taxes under state law. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes and shall, upon the city's certification and filing with Boulder County, be collected and paid to the city by the county treasurer in the same manner as delinquent general property taxes. 
(f)  Re-inspection fees. Whenever the director determines that any activity is occurring which is not in compliance with the requirements of this article, the director can issue a re-inspection fee in accordance with the fee schedule established by resolution of the city council. 
(g)  Stop work order. Whenever the director determines that any activity is occurring which is not in compliance with the requirements of this article, the director can order the activity stopped upon service of written notice upon the responsible owner and/or operator. The owner and/or operator shall immediately stop all activity until authorized in writing by the city to proceed. If the owner and/or operator cannot be located, the notice to stop shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the area where the activity is occurring and shall state the nature of the violation. It shall be unlawful for any owner and/or operator to fail to comply with a stop work order. 
(h)  Criminal penalties; enforcement costs. It is unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or permit or cause violation of this article or of the provisions of any discharge permit issued under this article. Violators shall be punishable as provided in section 1-10 of the Code of Ordinances of Lafayette, Colorado; provided, however that in addition to any other punishment there shall be imposed a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation of any provision of this article. Each day, or part of a day, any violation occurs or continues is a separate offense. 
(i)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall enjoin violations of this article, upon proof of such violations. 
(j)  Remedies not exclusive. Except as expressly provided above, the remedies in this article are cumulative and the exercise of any one (1) or more remedies shall not prejudice any other remedies that may otherwise be pursued for a violation of this article. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 6-6-17) 
Chapter 105 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public utility franchises, Ch. XIV. 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 25; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 45; nuisances, Ch. 70; parks, recreation and cemeteries, Ch. 80; public improvements, Ch. 90; sewers, Ch. 95; solid waste, Ch. 100; traffic, Ch. 115; excavating license; § 30-133; curfew, § 75-116 et seq. 
State Law reference- General power of city council as to streets and alleys, C. R. S. § 31-15-702; city highways, C. R. S. § 43-2-101; improvements, C. R. S. § 31-35-303 et seq.; acceptance and improvement of streets, C. R. S. § 31-23-217; public improvements generally, C. R. S. Title 31, Art. 25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 105-1. - Naming streets; subdividing. 
    The city council shall have the power to name or re-name any of the streets or public highways of the city, and the city council shall have the power to divide or subdivide any of the streets, public highways or public lands into streets, roadways, gutters, sidewalks and parks. 
(Code 1963, § 31-31) 
State Law reference- Power of city council to establish, name, rename, alter and improve streets and parks, C. R. S. § 31-15-702. 
Sec. 105-2. - Playing ball on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball or throw any ball to and fro upon any public thoroughfare in the city. 
(Code 1963, § 20-36) 
State Law reference- Power of city council to prevent encroachments or obstructions on streets, C. R. S. § 31-15-702. 
Sec. 105-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 2008-31, adopted Oct. 7, 2008, repealed § 105-3, which pertained to deposits of injurious material, and derived from § 20-8 of the 1963 Code. 
Sec. 105-4. - Windowsills kept clear. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill, porch or other projection above the first story of any building abutting on any sidewalk any article which might do injury by falling upon any person on the sidewalk in front of such building, unless said article is securely fastened or protected by screens. 
(Code 1963, § 20-47) 
State Law reference- Power of city council to require that sidewalks be kept free from obstructions, C. R. S. § 31-15-702. 
Sec. 105-5. - Emergency snow routes. 
(a)  The city administrator, or his/her designated representative, may designate emergency snow routes where parking may be restricted to facilitate rapid snow removal during snow emergencies. 
(b)  The public works director, or his/her designated representative, may declare a snow emergency, when in their exclusive judgment, the rapid removal of snow from designated snow routes is required. 
(c)  Upon the declaration of a snow emergency, temporary signs shall be placed along all areas in the emergency snow route where the public works director determines that vehicles must not be parked in order to allow for snow removal. Such temporary signs shall direct that all parked cars in that area must be removed within twelve (12) hours. 
(d)  The Lafayette Police Department and/or Public Works Department are hereby authorized to relocate, or have relocated at their direction, a vehicle which remains parked in violation of this section to a nearby public parking area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1, § 1, 1-17-17) 
Sec. 105-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 2008-31, adopted Oct. 7, 2008, repealed § 105-6, which pertained to removal of encroachments, and derived from § 31-4 of the 1963 Code. 
Secs. 105-7-105-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- General power of city council as to streets and alleys, C. R. S. § 31-15-702; improvements, C. R. S. § 31-35-303 et seq.; acceptance and improvement of streets, C. R. S. § 31-23-217; public improvements generally, C. R. S. Title 31, Art. 25. 

Sec. 105-21. - Authority. 
    All streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters and curbwalks constructed within the city shall be done only on authority of an ordinance or on authority of a permit issued by the city clerk. 
(Code 1963, § 31-18) 
Sec. 105-22. - Barricades; lights. 
    Every person doing or causing to be done any of the work authorized by this article shall keep the work barricaded at all times, and, between the hours of sunset and sunrise, he shall keep the same properly lighted so as to warn all persons thereof. 
(Code 1963, § 31-23) 
Sec. 105-23. - Permit-Required; rules, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than those under contract with the city, to construct, re-construct, alter or repair any street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter or curbwalk without having first obtained a permit from the city clerk. A complete set of rules and regulations shall be prepared and approved by the city council, describing the procedures, precautions and specifications under which such work shall be done and any other provisions deemed necessary to the best interests of the city in connection therewith. 
(Code 1963, § 31-19) 
Sec. 105-24. - Same-Application. 
    Every person desiring to construct, reconstruct, alter or repair any streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters or curbwalks shall apply to the city clerk for a permit therefor on a form provided by the city, stating the applicant's name, the location, length, dates of commencement and completion of the work and a statement that the work will be performed in strict compliance with the plans, specifications, lines and grades approved or furnished by the city engineer. 
(Code 1963, § 31-20) 
Sec. 105-25. - Same-Bond. 
    Every person applying for a permit authorized by this article and prior to the issuance thereof shall file a surety bond good for one year, in favor of the city in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and conditioned upon the faithful performance of such work in strict compliance with the plans, specifications, rules, regulations and ordinances of the city; that such person will forthwith repair or replace any defective or unskilled work and that such person will indemnify and save harmless the city against and from any and all damages or claims for damages, loss, costs, charges or expenses that may be brought against it by any person by reason of such work. Said bond may be waived by the city engineer, in his sole discretion, in the event of small or minor installations or repairs. 
(Code 1963, § 31-22) 
Sec. 105-26. - Same-Fee. 
    A fee set by resolution of city council shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of a permit under this article, provided, however, that said fee may be waived by the city in the event of small or minor installations or repairs. 
(Code 1963, § 31-21; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 48, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 105-27. - Disturbance of grade stakes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or disturb any grade or line stakes or marks set by the director of public works for the purpose specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1963, § 31-5) 
Sec. 105-28. - Sidewalks mandatory. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner of real property within the city to provide and install a sidewalk, curb and gutter, or curbwalk, in front of or upon his property, and in such location as may be designated by the city. Said sidewalk, curb and gutter, or curbwalk, shall be installed and constructed in strict accordance with specifications to be provided by the director of public works. 
(Code 1963, § 31-6; Ord. No. 1999-48, § 1, 11-2-99) 
State Law reference- Power of city council to provide for the construction and maintenance of sidewalks, C. R. S. § 31-15-702. 
Sec. 105-29. - Installation of mains, etc. 
    It shall be the duty of every person and every utility company to install all mains, conduits, cables, poles and the like which may be deemed necessary for water, gas, sewer, storm drainage, telephone and electricity facilities prior to the installation, construction or paving of any streets, alleys, sidewalks and curbwalks. 
(Code 1963, § 31-8) 
State Law reference- Power of city council to regulate the laying down of pipes in streets and alleys, C. R. S. § 31-15-702. 
Sec. 105-30. - Notice to install sidewalk. 
    Whenever any owner of property within the city shall refuse to install a sidewalk, curb and gutter, or curbwalk, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the director of public works or chief of police, pursuant to authority given by the city council, shall give notice to such person directing him to install same within ninety (90) days after receipt of the notice. In the event such notice shall not be obeyed, the director of public works or chief of police may order the installation, and the costs and expenses thereof shall be assessed against the responsible person. 
(Code 1963, § 31-7) 
State Law reference- Power of city council to assess property for sidewalk construction, C. R. S. § 31-15-302. 
Sec. 105-31. - Maintenance of sidewalks, etc. 
    All sidewalks, curbs, gutters and curbwalks shall be maintained by the city. 
(Code 1963, § 31-1; Ord. No. 1999-48, § 2, 11-2-99) 
State Law reference- Power of city council to provide for the maintenance of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, C. R. S. § 31-15-702. 
Sec. 105-32. - Enterprise created. 
    Pursuant to the authority of section 16.13 of the Charter of the city, there is hereby created and established the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 1999-48, § 3, 11-2-99) 
Sec. 105-33. - Appointment of board. 
    The city council is hereby appointed as the board of the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise. There shall not be appointed any persons other than the city council to serve on the board of the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise nor shall the city council delegate to any other person or entity the powers reserved to the board of the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1999-48, § 4, 11-2-99) 
Sec. 105-34. - Authority to issue revenue bonds. 
    The sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise, acting by and through the city council sitting as the board of the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise, may issue its own revenue bonds or other obligations (including refunding securities) on behalf of the city, which revenue bonds or other obligations shall be payable solely from the net revenue (including special assessments) derived from the operation of the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations may be additionally secured by mortgages on or security interests in any real or personal property of the city used in the operation of the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations shall be issued by ordinance of the board of the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise, adopted in the same manner and subject to referendum to the same extent as ordinances of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1999-48, § 5, 11-2-99) 
Sec. 105-35. - Restrictions on board's authority. 
    The city council shall not authorize the board of the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise to acquire, construct, or install or hold title to or dispose of any city-owned property used in the operation of the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise, to impose or adjust rates, fees, tolls, or charges for the use of any such property or for any service or commodity furnished by the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise, to levy special assessments or to exercise any power reserved to the council or other city officials by the City Charter or otherwise (other than the power to issue revenue bonds and other obligations). 
(Ord. No. 1999-48, § 6, 11-2-99) 
Sec. 105-36. - Sidewalk maintenance and repair, fee and fund. 
(a)  Fee. The cost of constructing and maintaining sidewalks, curbs, gutters, and curbwalks shall be funded by a sidewalk construction and maintenance fee to be charged monthly to the owners or occupants or real property within the corporate limits of the city whose lot(s) or parcel(s) is/are improved with a sidewalk, curb, gutter, or curbwalk. The sidewalk construction and maintenance fee shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(b)  Method of collection. Collection of the fee shall be made by a monthly charge to be added to the city's water or wastewater bill for those property owners that are subject to the sidewalk maintenance and repair fee pursuant to subsection (a) above, and who utilize city water or wastewater services and shall be billed separately for such property owners not using such utilities. In the case of those lots or parcels that are not occupied by the owner thereof, the fee shall be billed with the monthly water or wastewater bill, if any, that is delivered to the resident or occupant of the property. The owner of every lot or parcel subject to the fee is obligated to pay the fee, but in the event a resident or occupant in possession of the property pays the fee, the owner is relieved of the fee obligation. 
(c)  Fees paid into fund. All sidewalk maintenance and repair fees collected by the city shall be paid into a sidewalk maintenance and repair fund ("fund"). Fund revenues shall be separately designated as such and shall be used solely for the purpose of the operation, administration, maintenance, and repair of the city's sidewalks, curbs, gutters, and curbwalks. 
(Ord. No. 1999-48, § 7, 11-2-99; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 49, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 105-37. - Nonpayment; lien. 
(a)  Lien. All sidewalk maintenance and repair fees, or cost-share expenses, shall constitute a lien upon the property against which such fee or expense is charged from the date said fee or expense becomes due until paid. The owner of every lot or parcel subject to the fee or expense shall be obligated to pay the fee or expense, which obligation may be enforced by the city by action at law or suit to enforce the lien. In the event that a resident or occupant in possession of any premises shall pay the fee or expense, such payment shall relieve the owner from such obligation and lien, but the city shall not be required to look to any person whatsoever other than the owner for the payment of such fees or expenses. 
(b)  Enforcement. No change of ownership shall affect the application of these provisions regarding the sidewalk maintenance repair enterprise, and the failure of any owner to learn that he purchased property against which a lien for sidewalk repair fee or expense exists shall not affect his responsibility for such payment. Upon notice to the property owner, any delinquent charges may be certified to the office of the county treasurer for collection in the same manner as general property taxes are collected. 
(Ord. No. 1999-48, § 8, 11-2-99; Ord. No. 2001-24, § 1, 8-7-01) 
Sec. 105-38. - Reasonable access. 
    The employees of the city shall, at all reasonable times, have access to any premises served by the city for inspection, repair, or the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter pertaining to the sidewalk maintenance and repair enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 1999-48, § 9, 11-2-99) 
Sec. 105-39. - Cost-share program. 
(a)  Existing identified sidewalks. Those properties identified by the city in calendar years 1997, 1998, or 1999 as having sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or curbwalks needing repair or replacement must, after receiving written notice from the city, either: (1) complete the sidewalk repairs or replacement within sixty (60) days after the date of the written notice; or (2) request that the city complete the repairs or replacement. In either event, the city shall pay fifty (50) percent of the reasonable expenses incurred in completing the repairs or replacement. If the property owner completes the repair or replacement, the city will reimburse the property owner for half the property owner's reasonable expense. If the city completes the repair or replacement, the property owner will be billed for half the city's reasonable expense. 
(b)  Previously repaired sidewalks. The city shall reimburse those property owners who completed repair or replacement of their sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or curbwalks during or after 1997 and who either: (1) complied with the city's request for repair or replacement and (2) voluntarily completed the repairs or replacement. The reimbursement amount shall be fifty (50) percent of the reasonable expenses incurred by the property owners in completing such sidewalk repairs or replacement. 
(c)  Immediate repair. Those property owners who desire to have their sidewalk, curb, gutter, or curbwalk repair or replacement completed prior to the city's regular maintenance schedule may elect to have the repair or replacement done immediately. For the purposes of this subsection, "immediately" means during the annual concrete repair project for the current calendar year; except that, if the request is made after the annual concrete repair project for the current calendar year has been bid, the repair or replacement will be completed no later than the next calendar year. If the property owner elects to have immediate sidewalk repair or replacement done, the city shall bill the property owner for fifty (50) percent of the reasonable expenses incurred by the city. 
(d)  Administration; subject to lien. The city's public works department shall administer the cost-share program. This administration shall include, but not be limited to: maintaining a record of regularly scheduled maintenance priorities; defining the scope of repair or replacement work to be performed; obtaining bids for repair or replacement; determining the reasonable cost of completing the repairs or replacement; and collecting and/or distributing the proportionate share of expenses or reimbursement. Any property owner failing to pay the required proportionate share of sidewalk repair or replacement expenses shall be subject to the lien and enforcement provisions of section 105-37. 
(Ord. No. 2001-24, § 2, 8-7-01) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 2001-24, adopted Aug. 7, 2001, added provisions designated as § 105-38. Inasmuch as there already exists a section so codified, the new provisions have been redesignated as § 105-39 to avoid duplication. 
Secs. 105-40-105-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2000-27, adopted Oct. 3, 2000, repealed Art. III in its entirety, and reenacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. III contained §§ 105-46-105-55, and derived from the 1963 Code, §§ 31-9-31-17. 
Charter reference- Public utility franchises, Ch. XIV. 
State Law reference- Power of city council to regulate openings in streets, C. R. S. § 31-1-5-702. 

Sec. 105-46. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Purpose. This article provides principles, procedures and associated funding for the placement of structures and facilities, construction excavation encroachments and work activities within or upon any public right-of-way, and to protect the integrity of the road system. To achieve these purposes, it is necessary to require permits of permanent private users of the public rights-of-way, to establish permit procedures and to fix and collect fees and charges. 
(b)  Objectives. Public and private uses of public rights-of-way for location of facilities employed in the provision of public services should, in the interests of the general welfare, be accommodated; however, the city must ensure that the primary purpose of the rights-of-way, passage of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, is maintained to the greatest extent possible. In addition, the value of other public and private installations, roadways, facilities and properties should be protected, competing uses must be reconciled, and the public safety preserved. The use of the rights-of-way by other permanent public and private users is secondary to these public objectives, and the movement of traffic. This article is intended to strike a balance between the public need for efficient, safe transportation routes and the use of rights-of-way for location of facilities by public and private entities. It thus has several objectives: 
(1)  To ensure that the public safety is maintained and that public inconvenience is minimized; 
(2)  To protect the city's infrastructure investment by establishing repair standards for the pavement, facilities, and property in the public rights-of-way, when work is accomplished; 
(3)  To facilitate work within the rights-of-way through the standardization of regulations; 
(4)  To maintain an efficient permit process; 
(5)  To conserve and apportion fairly the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(6)  To establish a public policy for enabling the city to discharge its public trust consistent with the rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development; 
(7)  To promote cooperation among the permittees (as defined herein) and the city in the occupation of the public rights-of-way, and work therein, in order to (i) eliminate duplication that is wasteful, unnecessary or unsightly, (ii) lower the permittee's and the city's costs of providing services to the public, and (iii) minimize street cuts; 
(8)  To assure that the city can continue fairly and responsibly to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-47. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article the following words shall have the following meanings: 
    Access vault means any structure containing one (1) or more ducts, conduits, manholes, handhole or other such facilities in permittee's facilities. 
    City means the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    Conduit. See "Duct." 
    Degradation means a decrease in the useful life of the rights-of-way or damage to any landscaping within the rights-of-way caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct the surface and/or subsurface structure of any such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation or disturbance did not occur. 
    Director means the director of public works of the city or his or her authorized representative. 
    Duct or conduit means a single enclosed raceway for cables, fiber optics or other wires. 
    Emergency means any event that may threaten public health or safety, including, but not limited to, damaged or leaking water or gas conduit systems, damaged, plugged, or leaking sewer or storm drain conduit systems, damaged underground electrical or communications facilities, or downed overhead pole structures. 
    Excavate means to dig into or in any way remove or penetrate any part of a right-of-way. 
    Facilities means, including without limitation, any pipes, conduits, wires, cables, amplifiers, transformers, fiber optic lines, antennas, poles, ducts, and other like equipment, fixtures and appurtenances used in connection with transmitting, receiving, distributing, offering, and providing utility and other services. 
    Fence means any artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal, or any other manufactured material or combination of materials erected to enclose, partition, beautify, mark, or screen areas of land. 
    Infrastructure means any public facility, system, or improvement including without limitation, water and sewer mains and appurtenances, storm drains and structures, streets and sidewalks, and public safety equipment. 
    Landscaping means materials, including without limitation, grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees and non-living natural materials commonly used in landscape development, as well as attendant irrigation systems. 
    Permit means any authorization for use of the public rights-of-way granted in accordance with the terms of this article, and the laws and policies of the city. 
    Permittee means the holder of a valid permit issued pursuant to this article. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, special, metropolitan, or general district, association, corporation, company, public or private utility or organization of any kind. 
    Public right-of-way or right-of-way or public way means any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square, plaza, or city-owned right-of-way dedicated to public use. 
    Specifications means engineering regulations, construction specifications, and design standards adopted by the city. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location below, on, or above grade, including, without limitation, foundations, fences, retaining walls, awnings, balconies, and canopies. 
    Surplus ducts or conduits are ducts or conduits other than those occupied by permittee or any prior permittee, or unoccupied ducts or conduits held by permittee as emergency use spares, or other unoccupied ducts or conduits that permittee reasonably expects to use within four (4) years from the date of a request for use. 
    Work means any labor performed on, or any use or storage of equipment or materials, including but not limited to, construction of streets and all related appurtenances, fixtures, improvements, sidewalks, driveway openings, bus shelters, bus loading pads, street lights, and traffic signal devices. It shall also mean construction, maintenance, and repair of all underground structures such as pipes, conduit, ducts, tunnels, manholes, vaults, buried cable, wire, or any other structure located below surface, and installation of overhead poles or attachments to existing overhead poles used for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-48. - Police powers. 
    The permittee's rights hereunder are subject to the police powers of the city which include the power to adopt and enforce ordinances, including amendments to this article necessary to the safety, health, and welfare of the public. The permittee shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances enacted, or hereafter enacted, by the city or any other legally constituted governmental unit having lawful jurisdiction over the subject matter hereof. The city reserves the right to exercise its police powers, notwithstanding anything in this article and any permit to the contrary. Any conflict between the provisions of this article or any permit and any other present or future lawful exercise of the city's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-49. - Permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No person, except an employee or official of the city or a person exempted by contract with the city shall undertake or permit to be undertaken any construction, excavation, or work in the public rights-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the city as set forth in this article, except as provided in section 105-62. Each permit obtained, along with associated documents, shall be maintained on the job site and available for inspection upon request by any officer or employee of the city. 
(b)  Construction, excavation or work area. No permittee shall perform construction, excavation, or work in an area larger or at a location different from, or for a longer period of time than, that specified in the permit or permit application. If, after construction, excavation, or work is commenced under an approved permit, it becomes necessary to perform construction, excavation, or work in a larger or different area than originally requested under the application or for a longer period of time, the permittee shall notify the director immediately and within twenty-four (24) hours shall file a supplementary application for the additional construction, excavation, or work. 
(c)  Permit transferability or assignability. The applicant may subcontract the work to be performed under a permit provided that the permittee shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under the permit and all insurance and financial security as required. Permits are transferable and assignable if the transferee or assignee posts all required security pursuant to this article and agrees to be bound by all requirements of the permit and this article. 
(d)  New developments. In the city, the physical construction of public infrastructure in new developments is the responsibility of the developer of the land. Ownership of that infrastructure remains with the developer of the land until acceptance by the city. Any developer or owner of land where work is undertaken on infrastructure that is within a public right-of-way, but prior to acceptance by the city, shall obtain a permit from the city. The city will not accept for dedication public rights-of-way, or other property or any improvements therein, where work performed is not in accordance with applicable city specifications and applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person found to be conducting any excavation activity within the public rights-of-way without having first obtained the required permit(s) shall immediately cease all activity (exclusive of actions required to stabilize the area) and shall obtain a permit before work may be restarted. A civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be required in addition to all applicable permit fees and any fines or penalties that may be imposed by the municipal court pursuant to section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-49.5. - Same-Application and contents. 
(a)  Application. An applicant for a permit to allow construction, excavation, or work in the public rights-of-way under this article shall: 
(1)  File a written application on forms furnished by the city which include the following: the date of application; the name and address of the applicant; the name and address of the developer, contractor or subcontractor licensed to perform work in the public rights-of-way; the exact location of the proposed construction, excavation or work activity; the type of existing public infrastructure (e.g., street pavement, curb and gutter, sidewalks or utilities) impacted by the construction, excavation or work; the purpose of the proposed construction, excavation or work; the proposed dates for beginning and ending the construction, excavation or work; proposed hours of work; itemization of the total cost of restoration, based upon R.S. Means Estimating Standards, or at the discretion of the director, other published street repair cost estimating standards, and type of work proposed; 
(2)  Include an affirmative statement that the applicant or its contractor is not delinquent in payments due the city on prior work; 
(3)  Attach copies of all permits or licenses (including required insurance, deposits, bonding, and warranties) required to do the proposed work, and to work in the public rights-of-way, if licenses or permits are required under the laws of the United States, the State of Colorado, or the Code or regulations of the city. If relevant permits or licenses have been applied for but not yet received, provide a written statement so indicating. Copies of any such permits or licenses shall be provided to the city within forty-eight (48) hours after receipt; 
(4)  Provide a plan of work acceptable to the director consistent with city standards, showing protection of the subject property and adjacent properties; 
(5)  Provide a plan for the protection of existing landscaping acceptable to the director consistent with city standards, when the city determines that damage to landscaping may occur; 
(6)  Include evidence that all orders issued by the city to the applicant, requiring the applicant to correct deficiencies under previous permits issued under this article, have been satisfied; 
(7)  Include with the application engineering construction drawings or site plans for the proposed construction, excavation, or work; 
(8)  Include with the application a satisfactory traffic control and erosion protection plan for the proposed construction, excavation, or work; 
(9)  Include a statement generally indicating any proposed joint use or ownership of the facility; any existing facility or permit of the applicant at this location; any existing facility of others with which the proposed installations might conflict; and the name, address and telephone number of a representative of the applicant available to review proposed locations at the site; and 
(10)  Pay the fees prescribed by this article. 
(b)  Update of information. Applicants shall update any new information on permit applications within ten (10) days after any change occurs. 
(c)  Joint applications. Applicants may apply jointly for permits to work in public rights-of-way at the same time and place. Applicants who apply jointly for permits may share in the payment of the permit fee. Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each shall pay. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-50. - Permit fee. 
(a)  Before a permit is issued pursuant to this article, the applicant shall pay to the city a permit fee, which shall be determined in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the city council by resolution from time to time. Fees will be reasonably related to the costs inherent in managing the public rights-of-way. As used in this chapter, these costs include, but are not necessarily limited to, the costs of permitting right-of-way occupants, verifying rights-of-way occupation, mapping rights-of-way occupations, inspecting job sites and rights-of-way restorations, administering this chapter; costs relating to the degradation of the rights-of-way, i.e., the cost to achieve a level of restoration as determined by the city at the time the permit is issued; and disruption costs resulting from traffic disruption and delay. 
(b)  The portion of the permit fee relating to degradation costs shall be reduced by the city in cases where the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that the excavation proposed will be used by two (2) or more entities, legally and financially unrelated, for the installation, maintenance or repair of facilities. The degradation cost portion of the permit fee shall be further reduced in cases where the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that the excavation to be made will be commenced and completed during the twenty-four-month period immediately prior to the scheduled repaving or resurfacing of a street, as indicated in the most recent edition of the city's repaving plan. 
(c)  Any permit for temporary use or occupation of the public rights-of-way, where there is no construction involved, shall not require payment of a degradation fee as part of the permit fee. 
(d)  That portion of any permit fee relating to degradation costs shall be segregated by the city into an account to cover general street maintenance and construction. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-51. - Public rights-of-way rental policy and charges. 
    Reserved for future use. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-52. - Insurance and indemnification. 
(a)  Prior to the granting of any permit, the permittee shall file with the city an insurance policy or certificate in a form satisfactory to the city with coverage as follows: 
(1)  The permittee shall carry and maintain in full effect at all times a comprehensive general liability policy, including broad form property damage, completed operations and contractual liability in the minimum amount of: 
a.  Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage to any one (1) person and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for property damage in any one (1) occurrence; 
b.  One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury to any one (1) person and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for personal injury in any one (1) occurrence. 
(2)  Insurance coverage for special hazards: special hazards coverage, such as, but not limited to, property damage as a result of explosion hazard, collapse hazard, underground property damage hazard, commonly known as XCU, shall all be specifically added by endorsement to the hereinabove required liability policies. 
(3)  Workers' compensation insurance as required by state law. 
(4)  City departments shall be relieved of the obligation of submitting a certificate of insurance. 
(b)  Whenever any person has filed with the city evidence of insurance as required, any additional or subsequent permit holder in the employ of said initial person may, at the discretion of the city, be excused from depositing or filing any additional evidence of insurance if such employee is fully covered by the permittee's insurance policy. 
(c)  Each permittee shall construct, maintain, and operate its facilities in a manner that provides protection against injury or damage to persons or property. 
(d)  The permittee, for itself and its related entities, agents, employees, subcontractors, and the agents and employees of said subcontractors, shall save the city harmless, defend, and indemnify the city, its successors, assigns, officers, employees, agents, and appointed and elected officials from and against all liability or damage and all claims or demands whatsoever in nature, and reimburse the city for all its reasonable expenses, as incurred, arising out of the installation, maintenance, operation or any other work or activity in the public rights-of-way or by the permittee related to its use thereof, including, but not limited to, the actions of the permittee, its employees, agents, contractors, related entities, successors and assigns, or the securing of and the exercise by the permittee of the permit rights granted in the permit, including any third party claims, administrative hearings, and litigation; whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this article or other applicable law. 
(e)  The terms of each contract awarded by the permittee for activities pursuant to a permit shall contain indemnity provisions whereby the contractor shall indemnify the city to the same extent as described above. 
(f)  Following the receipt of written notification of any claim, the permittee shall have the right to defend the city with regard to all third party actions, damages and penalties arising in any way out of the exercise of any rights in the permit. If at any time, however, permittee refuses to defend, and the city elects to defend itself with regard to such matters, the permittee shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the city related to its defense. 
(g)  In the event the city institutes litigation against the permittee for a breach of the permit or for an interpretation of this article and the city is the prevailing party, the permittee shall reimburse the city for all costs related hereto, including reasonable attorney's fees. The permittee shall not be obligated to hold harmless or indemnify the city for claims or demands to the extent that they are due to the negligence, or any intentional and/or willful acts of the city or any of its officers, employees, or agents. 
(h)  In the event the permittee is a public entity, the indemnification requirements of this section shall be subject to the provisions of the Colorado Governmental Immunity Act. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-53. - Warranty time. 
(a)  Any warranty made hereunder shall serve as security for the performance of work necessary to repair the public right-of-way if the permittee fails to make the necessary repairs or to complete the work under the permit. 
(b)  The permittee, by acceptance of the permit, expressly warrants and guarantees complete performance of the work in a manner acceptable to the city and warrants and guarantees all work done for a period of three (3) years after the date of acceptance, and agrees to maintain upon demand and to make all necessary repairs during the three-year period. This warranty shall include all repairs and actions needed as a result of: 
(1)  Defects in workmanship or materials; 
(2)  Settling of fills or excavations; 
(3)  Any unauthorized deviations from the approved plans and specifications; 
(4)  Failure to barricade; 
(5)  Failure to clean up during and after performance of the work; or 
(6)  Any violation of this article or other provision of the city's ordinances or rules and regulations. 
(c)  The three-year warranty period shall run from the date of the city's acceptance of the work pursuant to section 105-54 herein. Any repairs to the work made by the permittee at the end of the three-year warranty period shall be warranted for a period of three (3) years from the date of repair or replacement and an escrow, letter of credit or other financial guarantee acceptable to the city administrator and city attorney shall be provided to the city, in an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the value of such repairs or replacements, for such three-year period. 
(d)  At any time prior to completion of the three-year warranty period, the city may notify the permittee of any needed repairs. Such repairs shall be completed within twenty-four (24) hours if the defects are determined by the city to be an imminent danger to the public health, safety and welfare. Nonemergency repairs shall be completed within thirty (30) calendar days after notice. 
(e)  The warranty described in this section shall cover only those areas of work undertaken by a permittee, and not directly impacted by the work of any other permittee or the city. In the event that a portion of work warranted by permittee is subsequently impacted by work of another permittee or the city, during the warranty period that other permittee or the city shall assume responsibility for repair to the subsequently impacted section of right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-53.5. - Performance guarantee. 
(a)  Before any permit required by this article shall be issued to an applicant, the applicant shall provide to the director a guarantee in the form of an escrow, letter of credit or other financial guarantee acceptable to the city administrator and city attorney, in an amount equal to the total cost of construction, including labor and materials, or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) whichever is greater, ensuring that the applicant will complete the work. Ten (10) percent of the total value of the escrow, letter of credit or other financial guarantee so provided to the city shall be retained by the city during the warranty period. The escrow, letter of credit or other financial guarantee shall be conditioned upon the applicant's fully complying with all provisions of the city's ordinances and rules and regulations, and upon payment of all judgments and costs rendered against the applicant for any material violation of the city ordinances or state statutes that may be recovered against the applicant by any person for damages arising out of any negligent or wrongful acts of the applicant in the performance of work done pursuant to the permit. The city may bring an action on the escrow, letter of credit or other financial guarantee on its own behalf or on behalf of any person so aggrieved as beneficiary. The finance director may, but is not required to, waive the requirements of any such financial guarantee, upon finding that the applicant has financial stability and assets located in the state to satisfy any claims intended to be protected against the security required by this section. 
(b)  A letter of responsibility will be accepted in lieu of the performance guarantee required in subsection (a) of this section 105-53, from all public utilities, all franchised entities, and all metropolitan, water and sanitation districts operating within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-54. - Inspections. 
    A minimum of three (3) inspections shall take place. First, the permittee shall request that the city conduct a pre-construction inspection, to determine any necessary conditions for the permit. Second, the permittee shall notify the city immediately after completion of the work. The director shall inspect the completed work within twenty-one (21) days of permittee's notification. When the director finds that the work meets city standards, the director shall, by way of a written letter to the permittee, acknowledge the acceptance of the work and authorize the reduction of the escrow, letter of credit or other financial guarantee. Third, approximately thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the three-year guarantee, the city shall conduct a final inspection of the completed work. If the work is still satisfactory the remaining escrow, letter of credit or other financial guarantee shall be returned or allowed to expire, with a letter of final acceptance, less any amounts needed to complete work not done by permittee. Upon review of the application for a permit, the director shall determine how many additional inspections, if any, may be required. For work that does not involve material disturbance in the rights-of-way, the director shall waive the final inspection and the financial guarantee. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-55. - Public safety. 
    The permittee shall keep all excavation work barricaded at all times, and shall otherwise maintain a safe work area, free of safety hazards. The city may make any repair necessary to eliminate any safety hazards. Any such work performed by the city shall be completed and actual costs billed to the permittee. The permittee shall pay all such charges within thirty (30) days of the statement date. If the permittee fails to pay such charges within the prescribed time period, the city may, in addition to taking other collection remedies, seek reimbursement through the warranty guarantee. Furthermore, the permittee may be barred from performing any work in the public rights-of-way, and under no circumstances will the city issue any further permits of any kind to said permittee, until all outstanding charges have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-56. - Time of completion. 
    All work covered by the permit shall be completed by the date stated on the application. Permits shall be void if work has not commenced six (6) months after issuance, unless an extension has been granted by the director. An escrow, letter of credit, letter of responsibility or other performance guarantee deposited for an individual permit will be returned after voiding of the permit, with administrative and any other city costs deducted. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-57. - Traffic control. 
(a)  When it is necessary to obstruct traffic, a traffic control plan shall be submitted to the city prior to starting construction. No permit will be issued until the plan is approved by the city. No permittee shall block access to and from private property, block emergency vehicles, block access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water valves, underground vaults, valve housing structures, or any other vital equipment unless the permittee provides the city with written verification of written notice delivered to the owner or occupant of the facility, equipment or property at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance. If a street closing is desired, the applicant will request the assistance and obtain the approval of the director. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to notify and coordinate all work in the public rights-of-way with police, fire, ambulance, other government entities, and transit organizations. 
(b)  When necessary for public safety, the permittee shall employ flag persons whose duties shall be to control traffic around or through the construction site. The use of flag persons may be required by the director. 
(c)  Unless approved by the director, the permittee shall not impede rush hour traffic on arterial or collector streets during the morning or evening rush hours. No construction shall be performed nor shall any traffic lane be closed to traffic during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or 3:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. without the approval of the director. 
(d)  Traffic control devices, as defined in Part VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, must be used whenever it is necessary to close a traffic lane or sidewalk. Traffic control devices are to be supplied by the permittee. If used at night, they must be reflectorized and must be illuminated or have barricade warning lights. 
(e)  Oil flares or kerosene lanterns are not allowed as means of illumination. 
(f)  Part VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices or any successor publication thereto shall be used as a guide for all maintenance and construction signing. The permittee shall illustrate on the permit the warning and control devices proposed for use. At the direction of the director, such warning and control devices shall be modified. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-58. - General rights-of-way use and construction. 
(a)  Right-of-way meetings. Each permittee will make reasonable efforts to attend and participate in meetings of the city, of which the permittee is made aware, regarding right-of-way issues that may impact its facilities, including planning meetings to anticipate joint trenching and boring. Whenever it is possible and reasonably practicable to joint trench or share bores or cuts, permittee shall work with other providers, licensees, permittees, and franchisees so as to reduce so far as possible the number of right-of-way cuts within the city. 
(b)  Minimal interference. Work in the right-of-way, on other public property, near public property, or on or near private property, shall be done in a manner that causes the least interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and residents. Permittee's facilities shall be constructed and maintained in such manner as not to interfere with sewers, water pipes, or any other property of the city, or with any other pipes, wires, conduits, pedestals, structures, or other facilities that may have been laid in the rights-of-way by, or under, the city's authority. The permittee's facilities shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to interfere with new improvements the city may deem proper to make or unnecessarily to hinder or obstruct the free use of the rights-of-way or other public property, and shall not interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public during the construction, repair, operation or removal thereof, and shall not obstruct or impede traffic. 
(c)  Undercutting; width. No opening or excavation shall be undercut or have a greater width at the bottom than at the top. 
(d)  Underground construction and use of poles. 
(1)  Permittee's facilities shall be placed underground at no expense to the city pursuant to Code section 26-19-12 or applicable state or federal law. Placing facilities underground does not preclude the use of ground-mounted appurtenances. 
(2)  Should the city desire to place its own facilities in trenches or bores opened by the permittee, the permittee shall cooperate with the city in any construction by the permittee that involves trenching or boring, provided that the city has first notified the permittee in some manner that it is interested in sharing the trenches or bores in the area where the permittee's construction is occurring. The permittee shall allow the city to place its facilities in the permittee's trenches and bores, provided the city incurs proportionate cost of the trenching and boring. The city shall be responsible for maintaining its respective facilities buried in the permittee's trenches and bores under this paragraph. 
(e)  Use of conduits by the city. Unless otherwise restricted by tariff, the city may install or affix and maintain its own facilities for city purposes in or upon any and all of permittee's ducts, conduits or equipment in the rights-of-way and other public places, at a charge to be negotiated between the parties (but in no event greater than the best price charged by permittee to any other user), to the extent space therein or thereon is reasonably available, and pursuant to all applicable ordinances and codes. For the purposes of this subsection, "city purposes" includes, but is not limited to, the use of the structures and installations for city fire, police, traffic, telephone, and/or signal systems. 
(f)  Common users. 
(1)  The rights-of-way have a finite capacity for containing facilities. Therefore, whenever the city determines it is impracticable to permit construction of an underground conduit system by any other entity that may at the time have authority to construct or maintain conduits or ducts in the rights-of-way, but excluding entities providing services in competition with permittee, and unless otherwise prohibited by federal or state law or regulations, the city may require permittee to afford to such entity the right to use permittee's surplus ducts, if such surplus ducts exist, or conduits in common with permittee, pursuant to the terms and conditions of an agreement for use of surplus ducts or conduits entered into by permittee and the other entity. Nothing herein shall require permittee to enter into an agreement with such entity if, in permittee's reasonable determination, such an agreement could compromise the integrity of the permittee's facilities. 
(2)  Permittee shall give a common user pursuant to this section a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) days' notice of its need to occupy a conduit and shall propose that the common user take the first feasible action as follows: 
a.  Pay revised conduit rent designed to recover the cost of retrofitting the conduit with space-saving technology sufficient to meet permittee's space needs; 
b.  Pay revised conduit rent based on the cost of new conduit constructed to meet permittee's space needs; 
c.  Vacate the needed ducts or conduit; or 
d.  Construct and maintain sufficient new conduit to meet permittee's space needs. 
(3)  When two (2) or more common users occupy a section of conduit facility, the last user to occupy the conduit facility shall be the first to vacate or construct new conduit. When conduit rent is revised because of retrofitting, space-saving technology or construction of new conduit, all common users shall bear the increased cost. 
(4)  All facilities shall meet any applicable local, state, and federal clearance and other safety requirements, be adequately grounded and anchored, and meet the provisions of contracts executed between permittee and the other common user. Permittee may, at its option, correct any attachment deficiencies and charge the common user for its costs. Each common user shall pay permittee for any fines, fees, damages or other costs the common user's attachments cause permittee to incur. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-58.5. - Joint planning and construction-Coordination of excavations. 
(a)  Excavations in city rights-of-way disrupt and interfere with the public use of city streets and damage the pavement and landscaping. The purpose of this section is to reduce this disruption, interference and damage by promoting better coordination among permittees making excavations in city rights-of-way and between these permittees and the city. Better coordination will assist in minimizing the number of excavations being made wherever feasible, and will ensure the excavations in city rights-of-way are, to the maximum extent possible, performed before, rather than after, the resurfacing of the streets by the city. 
(b)  Any permittee owning, operating or installing facilities in city rights-of-way, providing water, sewer, gas, electric, communication, video or other utility services, shall meet annually with the director, at the director's request to discuss permittee's excavation master plan. At such meeting, to the extent not already in possession of the city, permittee shall submit documentation, in a form required by the director, showing a location of the permittee's known existing facilities in the city rights-of-way. Permittee shall discuss with the director its excavation master plan, and identify planned major excavation work in the city. The director may make his own record on a map, drawing or other documentation, of each permittee's planned major excavation work in the city; provided, however, that no such document prepared by the director shall identify a particular entity, or the planned major excavation work of that particular entity. Permittee shall meet with the director to discuss an initial excavation master plan no later than sixty (60) days after submitting its first permit application. Thereafter, each permittee shall submit annually, on the first regular business day of January, and at permittee's expense, a revised and updated excavation master plan. Such revised and updated excavation master plan shall be submitted in both hard copy and digital format. The permittee shall use best efforts to make sure the information provided is capable of integration with the city's GIS data base. As used in this subsection, the term "planned major excavation work" refers to any future excavations planned by the permittee when the excavation master plan or update is submitted that will affect any city right-of-way for more than five (5) days, provided that the permittee shall not be required to identify future major excavations planned to occur more than three (3) years after the date that the permittee's master plan or update is discussed. Between the annual meetings to discuss planned major excavation work, permittee shall use its best efforts to inform the director of any substantial changes in the planned major excavation work discussed at the annual meeting. 
(c)  The director shall prepare a repaving plan showing the street resurfacing planned by the city. For purposes of this section, the repaving plan shall include a landscaping or other right-of-way improvement plan. The repaving plan shall be revised and updated on an annual basis after meeting to discuss the permittee's and city's master plans and updates. The director shall make the city's repaving plan available for public inspection. In addition, after determining the street resurfacing work that is proposed for each year, the director shall send a notice of the proposed work to all permittees that have had an annual meeting with the director. 
(d)  Prior to applying for a permit, any person planning to excavate in the city's rights-of-way shall review the city's repaving plan on file with the director and shall coordinate, to the extent practicable, with the utility and street work shown on such plans to minimize damage to, and avoid undue disruption and interference with the public use of such rights-of-way. 
(e)  In performing location of facilities in the public rights-of-way in preparation for construction under a permit, permittee shall compile all information obtained regarding its or any other facilities in the public rights-of-way related to a particular permit, and shall make that information available to the city in a written and verified format acceptable to the director. 
(f)  Prior to undertaking any work in the rights-of-way or related landscaping, the city may notify all permittees of the city work to be performed. Upon such notification, all permittees shall, within seven (7) days, locate their facilities in the rights-of-way in which the work will be performed, and provide documentation in a format acceptable to the director of the permittee's facilities in that right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-59. - Minimizing the impacts of work in the rights-of-way. 
(a)  Relocation and protection of utilities. Before beginning excavation in any public way, a permittee shall contact the Utility Notification Center of Colorado (UNCC) and, to the extent required by C.R.S. § 9-1.5-102 et seq., make inquiries of all ditch companies, utility companies, districts, local government departments, and all other agencies that might have facilities in the area of work to determine possible conflicts. The permittee shall contact the UNCC and request field locations of all facilities in the area pursuant to UNCC requirements. Field locations shall be marked prior to commencing work. The permittee shall support and protect all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other facilities that may be affected by the work from damage during construction or settlement of trenches subsequent to construction. 
(b)  Noise, dust, debris, hours of work. Each permittee shall conduct work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. In the performance of the work, the permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce noise, dust, and unsightly debris. No work shall be done between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. nor at any time on Saturday or Sunday, except with the written permission of the director, or in case of an emergency. 
(c)  Trash and construction materials. Each permittee shall maintain the work site so that: 
(1)  Trash and construction materials are contained so that they are not blown off of the construction site; 
(2)  Trash is removed from a construction site often enough so that it does not become unsightly or a health, fire, or safety hazard; and 
(3)  Trash dumpsters and storage or construction trailers are not placed in the street without specific approval of the director. 
(d)  Deposit of dirt and material on roadways. Each permittee shall eliminate the tracking of mud or debris upon any street or sidewalk. Equipment and trucks used during construction, excavation, or work activity shall be cleaned of mud and debris prior to leaving any work site. 
(e)  Protection of trees and landscaping. Each permittee shall protect trees, landscape, and landscape features as required by the city. All protective measures shall be provided at the expense of the permittee. 
(f)  Protection of paved surfaces from equipment damage. Backhoe equipment outriggers shall be fitted with rubber pads whenever outriggers are placed on any paved surface. Tracked vehicles with grousers are not permitted on any paved surface unless specific precautions are taken to protect the surface. The permittee will be responsible for any damage caused to the pavement by the operation of such equipment and shall repair such surfaces. Failure to do so will result in the use of the applicant's performance/warranty guarantee by the city to repair any damage, and, if the director deems appropriate, the requirement of additional warranty(ies). 
(g)  Protection of property. Each permittee shall protect from injury any adjoining property by providing adequate support and taking any other necessary measures. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the work, and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property resulting from failure properly to protect and carry out work in the public way. 
(h)  Clean-up. As the work progresses, all public rights-of-way and private property shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess dirt, rock, and other debris. All clean-up operations shall be done at the expense of the permittee. 
(i)  Preservation of monuments. A permittee shall not disturb any surface monuments or survey hubs and points found on the line of work unless approval is obtained from the director. Any monuments, hubs, and points disturbed will be replaced by a Colorado Registered Land Surveyor at the permittee's expense. 
(j)  Each permittee shall make provisions for employee and construction vehicle parking so that neighborhood parking adjacent to a work site is not impacted. 
(k)  Each permittee shall maintain an adequate and safe unobstructed walkway around a construction site or blocked sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-60. - Standards for repairs and restoration. 
(a)  Permittee responsibility. The permittee shall be fully responsible for the cost and actual performance of all work in public rights-of-way. The permittee shall do all work in conformance with any and all engineering regulations, construction specifications, and design standards adopted by the city. These standards shall apply to all work in public rights-of-way unless otherwise indicated in the permit. 
(b)  All restoration shall result in a work site condition equal to that which existed prior to construction. In addition to the regulations, specifications and standards referred to in subsection (a) hereof the following provisions shall apply to work in the public rights-of-way of the city. 
(1)  Pavement cuts shall be filled with compacted select material. Either concrete or asphalt patches will be placed to match the existing street cross section. Select material shall include select fill, stone (CDOT 26 or 57) or controlled density (flowable) fill. 
(2)  Select fill shall be placed in an excavation to the density required by city compaction specifications. 
(3)  Flowable fill backfill material, satisfying design and construction standards of the city, shall be used to restore all trenches that have been excavated in the paved portion of any public street or alley. For trench excavations in excess of five (5) feet in depth, the applicant may utilize granular backfill material in lieu of flowable fill backfill material, provided that all of the following conditions are satisfied. 
(4)  Prior to the issuance of a permit for construction, excavation, or work activity in the public right-of-way, the applicant must request and receive approval for the use of granular backfill material. 
(5)  The type, gradation, placement, compaction, and testing of the granular backfill material shall meet or exceed all requirements specified in design and construction standards of the city. 
(6)  In cases where it is impossible to achieve the compaction required by the city on select fill, the city encourages the use of controlled density fill or flash fill material. When controlled density fill type material is used, steel plate will be placed to cover the opening for the time required to allow the material to set. 
(7)  Once the compacted backfill has been placed, an asphalt cutback shall be made. The cutback will extend six (6) inches minimum on each side of the opening and will be over undisturbed pavement material (one and one-half (11/2) inch deep minimum). All edges of the opening shall be neatly cut with an asphalt saw at ninety (90) degrees to traffic and uniformly tacked. 
(8)  The new asphalt will be placed in lifts (three (3) inches maximum) and compacted upon placement. Asphalt depths will be governed by the existing cross section of the street but not less than four (4) inches of full deep asphalt shall be used to fill a street cut regardless of the existing cross section. Concrete meeting all construction standards of the city shall be used to replace concrete pavement wherever it occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-60.5. - Construction and restoration standards for newly constructed or overlayed streets. 
(a)  Deferment period. No person shall cause an open trench excavation or potholing of utilities in the pavement of any public right-of-way for a period of three (3) years from the completion of construction or resurfacing except as provided herein. 
(b)  Exemptions for emergency operations. Persons with prior authorization from the city to perform emergency maintenance operations within the public rights-of-way shall be exempted from this section. Emergency maintenance operations shall be limited to circumstances involving the preservation of life, property, or the restoration of customer service. Any person commencing operations under this subsection (b) shall submit detailed engineering plans, construction methods and remediation plans no later than three (3) working days after initiating the emergency maintenance operation. 
(c)  Exemptions for nonemergency operations. A permittee may apply to the director for an exemption under this section when the construction is necessary in the public interest or to serve a public service. By way of example, but not by limitation, an exemption could be requested in order to provide services to a part of the city where no service would be available without construction. If a nonemergency exemption is granted to disturb a public way within the three-year period, the director may, in his sole discretion, impose additional restoration requirements, including but not necessarily limited to, repaving of a larger area, such as an entire block in which the construction occurs. 
(d)  Construction and restoration standards for newly constructed or overlayed streets and alleys. The streets shall be restored and repaired in accordance with design and construction standards of the city and guaranteed in accordance with section 105-53.5. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-61. - Relocation of facilities. 
    If at any time the city requests the permittee to relocate its facilities, in order to allow the city to make any public use of rights-of-way, or if at any time it shall become necessary because of a change in the grade or for any other purpose by reason of the improving, repairing, constructing, or maintaining of any rights-of-way, or reason of traffic conditions, public safety or by reason of installation of any type of structure or public improvement of the city or other public agency or special district, and any general program for the undergrounding of such facilities, to move or change the permittee's facilities within or adjacent to rights-of-way in any manner, either temporarily or permanently, the city shall notify the permittee, at least ninety (90) days in advance, except in the case of emergencies, of the city's intention to perform or have such work performed. The permittee shall thereupon, at no cost to the city, accomplish the necessary relocation, removal or change within a reasonable time from the date of the notification, but in no event later than three (3) working days prior to the date the city has notified the permittee that it intends to commence its work or immediately in the case of emergencies. Upon the permittee's failure to accomplish such work, the city or other public agency or special district may perform such work at the permittee's expense and the permittee shall reimburse the city or other public agency or special district within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written invoice. Following relocation, all affected property shall be restored, at a minimum, to the condition that existed prior to construction by the permittee at no cost to the city. Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, a permittee may request additional time to complete a relocation project. The director shall grant a reasonable extension if he determines, in his sole discretion, that the extension will not adversely affect the city's project. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-61.5. - Abandonment and removal of facilities. 
(a)  Certification of operation; notification of abandoned facilities. Each permittee shall provide annual certification to the director, by January 31 of each year, that such facilities remain in operation. Any permittee that intends to discontinue use of any facilities within the public rights-of-way shall notify the director in writing of the intent to discontinue use. Such notice shall describe the facilities for which the use is to be discontinued, and a date of discontinuance of use. The permittee may not remove, destroy or permanently disable any such facilities without written approval of the director. At the director's discretion within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the permittee of a requirement to remove an abandoned facility, permittee shall remove the same. Upon removal, the right-of-way shall be restored to as good a condition as prior removal. If the facility is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the facility shall be considered environmentally blight, and the city's discretion, may be removed in accordance with section 70-15 of the Lafayette Municipal Code. All city costs may be recovered in accordance with section 70-16 of said code. 
(b)  Conveyance of facilities. At the discretion of the city, and upon written notice from the director within thirty (30) days of the notice of abandonment, the permittee may abandon the facilities in place, and shall further convey full title and ownership of such abandoned facilities to the city. The consideration for the conveyance is the city's permission to abandon the facilities in place. The permittee is responsible for all obligations as owner of the facilities, or other liabilities associated therewith, until the conveyance to the city is completed. 
(c)  Constructive abandonment. Failure to provide certification of continued operation as required by this section 105-61.5(a) shall constitute constructive notice of abandonment. In the event of constructive abandonment, the city, in its sole discretion, may thereafter require removal or conveyance of the abandoned facilities as provided in this section 105-61.5. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-62. - Emergency procedures. 
    Any person with facilities in the public way may proceed with repairs upon existing facilities without a permit when emergency circumstances demand that the work be done immediately. The person doing the work shall apply to the city for a permit on or before the third working day after such work has commenced. All emergency work will require prior telephone notification to the Boulder County Communications Center which will alert the appropriate city departments. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-63. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Any permit may be revoked or suspended by the director, after notice to the permittee for: 
(1)  Violation of any material condition of the permit or of any material provision of this article. 
(2)  Violation of any material provision of the city's ordinances or rules and regulations or any state law relating to the work. 
(3)  Existence of any condition or performance of any act that the city determines constitutes or causes a condition endangering life or damage to property. 
(b)  A suspension or revocation by the director, and a stop work order, shall take effect immediately upon notice to the person performing the work in the public right-of-way, or to the permittee's last known address. 
(c)  A stop work order may be issued by the director to any person or persons doing or causing any work to be done in the public right-of-way without a permit, or in violation of any provision of this article, or any material provision of the city's ordinances or rules and regulations. 
(d)  Any suspension or revocation or stop work order may be appealed by the permittee to the city administrator by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of the action. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-64. - Appeals procedure. 
    Any decision rendered by the director pursuant to this article may be appealed within thirty (30) days by the permittee to the city administer in accordance with the rules and procedures established by the city administrator. In lieu of such rules, the city administrator shall follow the procedures used by the personnel board for discharge appeals as set forth in Code sections 85-7 through 85-11. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-65. - Penalty. 
    If any person shall violate or cause the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, that person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which a violation is committed, continues or is permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code for each such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-27, § 1, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 105-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUMBERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city council to regulate the numbering of houses and lots, C. R. S. § 31-15-702. 

Sec. 105-67. - Required. 
    It is the duty of the owner or occupant of every building in the city to number such building in accordance with the provisions of this article and with the numbers assigned by the city. The city shall assign to every building its proper number. The expense of such numbering shall be paid by the owner or occupant of the building. 
(Code 1963, § 31-24) 
Sec. 105-68. - Map of streets. 
    The director of public works shall prepare or cause to be prepared from time to time, when directed by the city council, a map of the streets of the city showing the numbers of all buildings and lots and the names of all streets. 
(Code 1963, § 31-29) 
Sec. 105-69. - System. 
    In numbering the buildings upon the streets of the city, all even numbers shall be on the south and east side of each street or avenue and all odd numbers shall be on the north and west side of each street or avenue, provided, however, that where said street or avenue shall curve or change direction, said street or avenue shall nevertheless be numbered in accordance with the principal direction thereof. 
(Code 1963, § 31-25) 
Sec. 105-70. - Certificate. 
    Upon proper application and payment of a fee of one dollar, the city clerk shall issue to the owner or occupant of any building or lot a certificate designating the proper number for such building or lot. Any certificate so issued shall pertain to the number of only one building or lot. 
(Code 1963, § 31-30) 
Sec. 105-71. - Material. 
    All numerals under this article shall be of some metallic, glass, porcelain or other durable material, or gilt lettering on the inside of a glass transom or door, and shall be distinctly legible and at least three (3) inches in height. 
(Code 1963, § 31-27) 
Sec. 105-72. - Placement. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any building to place assigned numerals in a conspicuous position at the front of each building and, upon notice from the director of public works or the police department, such numerals shall be so placed within thirty (30) days after service of such notice. 
(Code 1963, § 31-26) 
Sec. 105-73. - Unauthorized numbers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any building to use or permit to be used upon any building any number other than the number assigned by the city. 
(Code 1963, § 31-28) 
Secs. 105-74-105-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY MARKINGS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 105-86. - Definitions. 
    Public right-of-way or right-of-way means any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, easement, park, square, plaza, or city owned right-of-way dedicated to public use. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, special, metropolitan, or general district, association, corporation, company, public or private utility or organization of any kind. 
    Utility marking means a mark, made of colored or metallic paint or similar material, or utilizing any adhesive material of whatever description, or a flag or similar removable device or item, used by any person in a public right-of-way to mark the existing or future location of pipelines, cables, poles, wires or other similar features. 
(Ord. No. 2000-30, § 1, 9-19-00) 
Sec. 105-87. - Placement of utility markings required. 
(a)  The following standards shall apply to the placement of utility markings in public rights-of-way by all persons: 
(1)  All persons shall use a reasonable approach to placing utility markings in order to minimize the visual impact of the utility markings to the surface area being marked and still achieve the desired result of identifying underground utilities. 
(2)  Water-based spray paint shall be used at all times to mark utilities located under impervious or hard surfaces. 
(3)  To the extent possible, utility marking flags shall be used to mark utilities located under pervious surfaces. 
(4)  Utility markings made with water-based spray paint shall be minimized by using a single dashed line to identify the approximate center line of the utility. 
(5)  The size of any area of excavation that requires marking of underground utilities shall be kept to a minimum in order to reduce the need for utility markings and minimize the visual impact to the surface. 
(b)  The provisions of this Article V shall not apply to permanent oil and gas pipeline markings required by state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2000-30, § 1, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 2001-5, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 2001-40, § 1, 10-16-01) 
Sec. 105-88. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who is convicted of a violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  As an additional means of enforcement, and not as an alternative to or substitute for prosecution for violation of the provisions of this chapter, the city may remove or eradicate any utility markings which do not comply to the provisions of this chapter and bill to the person responsible the full cost incurred by the city to effect such removal. Any such costs incurred shall be immediately due and payable, and failure to pay such costs in full within thirty (30) days of the billing therefor by the city shall subject the responsible person to interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum, compounded monthly. Such responsible person shall be denied access to their utilities, except in emergencies, in the public right-of-way until all unpaid balances are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2000-30, § 1, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 2001-40, § 2, 10-16-01) 
Secs. 105-89-105-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSE MOVING 

Sec. 105-104. - Supervision; repair of damages. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of public works or the building official to direct and supervise the moving of any building along or across the streets of the city and it shall be the duty of any person so moving any building to forthwith repair any injury done to any sidewalk, alley, street, trees, utility poles, wires or other property. 
(Code 1963, § 31-34) 
Sec. 105-105. - Permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to move any building or house or part thereof along any of the streets of the city without a permit therefor first obtained from the director of public works or the building official. 
(Code 1963, § 31-32) 
Sec. 105-106. - Same-Application. 
    The director of public works or the building official shall issue a permit for the moving of any building upon application therefor and upon payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The permit shall designate the route over which the building may be moved, the time which it may be moved and shall require the applicant to comply with all local and state safety regulations. 
(Code 1963, § 31-33) 
Sec. 105-107. - Bond. 
    Every person applying for a house or building moving permit and prior to the issuance thereof shall file a surety bond, good for one year, in favor of the city in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and conditioned upon the faithful performance of such moving in strict compliance with the specifications, rules, regulations and ordinances of the city and within the specified time limits; that such person will forthwith repair any and all damage caused by reason of such moving and that such person will indemnify and save harmless the city against and from any and all damages or claims for damages, loss, costs, charges or expenses that may be brought against it by any person by reason of such work. 
(Code 1963, § 31-35) 
Chapter 110 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Taxation, Ch. IX. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 5; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 10; amusements, Ch. 20; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 55; improvement district bonds, § 90-28. 
State Law reference- Constitutional powers as to taxation, Art. XX, § 6, Colo. Const.; taxation and finance, C. R. S. Title 31, Art. 20; bonds, C. R. S. Title 31, Art. 21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 110-1-110-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TELEPHONE UTILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Valuation and assessment of public utilities, C. R. S. § 39-4-101 et seq. 

Sec. 110-16. - Levy of tax. 
    There is hereby levied against every telephone utility which is engaged in the business of furnishing local exchange telephone service within the city a tax on the privilege of engaging in such business. The amount of such tax shall be twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) annually. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 1, 9-21-76; Ord. No. 931, § 1, 10-6-81) 
Sec. 110-17. - Payment of tax. 
    The tax shall be payable for years subsequent to 1980 in four (4) equal quarterly installments, to wit: April 1, July 1, October 1 and December 1, each installment to be paid within thirty (30) days after the applicable quarter. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 2, 9-21-76; Ord. No. 931, § 2, 10-6-81) 
Sec. 110-18. - Inspection of record. 
    The city, its officers, agents or representatives shall have the right at any reasonable time to examine the books and records of any telephone utility which is subject to the tax imposed by this article and to make copies of entries or contents thereof. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 3, 9-21-76) 
Sec. 110-19. - Local purpose. 
    The tax provided in this article is upon the affected occupations and businesses in their performance of local functions and is not a tax upon those functions relating to interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 4, 9-21-76) 
Sec. 110-20. - Failure to pay tax. 
    If any telephone utility subject to this article fails to pay the taxes as provided herein, the full amount thereof shall be due and collected from such company, and the same, together with an addition of ten (10) percent of the amount of taxes due, shall be and is hereby declared to be a debt due and owing from such utility to the city. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 5, 9-21-76) 
Sec. 110-21. - Tax in lieu of other occupation taxes. 
    The tax provided in this article shall be in lieu of all other occupation taxes, or taxes on the privilege of doing business within the city, on any telephone utility subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 688, § 7, 9-21-76) 
Sec. 110-22. - Emergency telephone service charge. 
    The city does hereby authorize an emergency telephone charge in an amount not to exceed the maximum charge permitted pursuant to C.R.S. 29-11-102, or any successor provision, as it may from time-to-time be amended, or such lesser rate as the authority board may from time-to-time determine, upon all telephone exchange access facilities and wireless communication access customers residing within the city limit. The authority board created under the intergovernmental agreement is authorized to set the actual charge up to the maximum rate permitted pursuant to C.R.S. 29-11-102. 
(Ord. No. 1986-49, § 2, 1-6-87; Ord. No. 1989-40, § 2, 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1998-30, § 2, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 2003-25, § 1, 8-5-03) 
Secs. 110-23-110-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND USE TAX[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Sales tax, § 9.2. 
State Law reference- Municipal sales or use tax, C. R. S. § 29-2-101 et seq.; state sales and use taxes, Title 39, C. R. S. Title 39, Art. 26. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-34. - Levy of tax on sales of tangible personal property and services. 
    Effective January 1, 2000, there is imposed upon all sales of tangible personal property and services as specified in Article III, Chapter 110, of the Lafayette City Code, a tax at the rate of three and one-half (3.50) percent of the amount of the sale, to be computed in accordance with the schedules or systems set forth in said article. 
(Ord. No. 1992-43, § 1, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 1, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 110-35. - Levy of tax on privilege of storing, using, or consuming any articles of tangible personal property or taxable services. 
    Effective January 1, 2000, there is hereby imposed and shall be collected from every person in this city a use tax at the rate of three and one-half (3.50) percent for the privilege of storing, using, or consuming in the city any articles of tangible personal property or taxable services purchased at retail. Such use tax shall be computed in accordance with schedules or systems set forth in Article III, Chapter 110 of the Lafayette City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1992-43, § 2, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 2, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 110-36. - Title; intent. 
(a)  This article shall be known and cited as the city retail sales and use tax ordinance. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the City of Lafayette that for the purposes of this article, every person who is engaged in business in the city and who shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the purchaser in the city, any property or services taxable hereunder is exercising a taxable privilege and shall collect the tax imposed by this article in the manner hereinafter set forth, on the total purchase price of such tangible personal property or taxable services that are purchased, sold, leased, rented or bartered at any time by or to every customer or buyer. 
(c)  It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the City of Lafayette that for the purposes of this article every person who stores, uses, distributes or consumes in the city any tangible personal property, except as excluded, or taxable services purchased, leased, rented or bartered at retail, as herein defined, is exercising a taxable privilege. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 1, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 1, 12-17-85) 
Sec. 110-37. - Definitions. 
    When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context or by state statute mandatorily applicable to a home rule city, the following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Access services means the services furnished by a local exchange company to its customers who provide telecommunications services which allow them to provide such telecommunications services. 
    Auction means any sale conducted or transacted at a permanent place of business operated by an auctioneer or a sale conducted and transacted at any location where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer when such auctioneer is acting as an agent for the owner of such personal property or is in fact the owner thereof. The auctioneer at any such sale, except when selling only tangible personal property which is exempt under the provisions of this article, is a retailer or vendor and the sale made by him is a retail sale. 
    Audit means the examination of books, records, papers and memoranda bearing upon any matters required to be included in a sales and use tax return, conducted under the authority of the city. 
    Average market rate means the average price of all unprocessed retail marijuana that is sold or transferred from retail marijuana cultivation facilities in the state to retail marijuana product manufacturing facilities, retail marijuana stores, or other retail marijuana cultivation facilities, as determined by the Colorado Department of Revenue on a periodic basis. 
    Engaged in business in the city means selling, leasing or delivering to persons in the city or any activity in the city connected with selling, leasing or delivering to persons in the city tangible personal property and taxable services through a retail sale or lease for purchase, use, storage or consumption in the city. This term includes without limitation, the following acts: 
(1)  Maintaining within the city, directly or indirectly, or by a subsidiary, an office, distributing house, sales room, warehouse or other place of business. 
(2)  Soliciting, by direct or indirect representatives or manufacturers' agents; or by distribution of catalogues or other advertising; or by use of newspaper, radio or television advertising media; or by any other means, business from persons residing in the city and thereby selling, leasing or storing or receiving orders to purchase or lease taxable services from persons residing in the city, when such taxable property has come to rest for any length of time in the city. 
(3)  Extending credit to potential purchasers residing in the city. 
(4)  Collecting debts from persons residing in the city through the use of process or forms in the city. 
(5)  Performing repair, maintenance, installation and inspection of tangible personal property in the city. 
    Fabrication means an operation which changes the form or state of tangible personal property substantially improving an item or making the item operate in a new or different manner. 
    Farm auction closeout sale means a regularly advertised and conducted sale at public auction of all the tangible personal property of a farmer or rancher previously used by him in carrying on his farming or ranching operations. Unless said farmer or rancher in making or attempting to make full and final disposition at the auction sale of all property used in his farming or ranching operations and is abandoning said operations on the premises whereon they were previously conducted, such sale shall not be deemed a "farm auction closeout sale". 
    Gross taxable sales means the total amount received in money, credits or property, excluding the fair market value of exchanged property which is to be sold thereafter in the usual course of the retailer's business or other consideration valued in money from sales and purchases at retail within the city: Excluded from this definition are the following: 
(1)  The sales price of any property returned during the period after the sales price has been included in taxable sales, but only after the full sales price including the tax has been refunded by cash or credit. 
(2)  Sales exempt from sales tax. 
(3)  The fair market value of property taken in exchange by a retailer in the usual course of his business for resale. 
(4)  Any worthless account actually charged off for income tax purposes during the reporting period, to the extent such account has been included in taxable sales, except that a loss from a worthless check in excess of the taxable sale is not allowed as a bad debt deduction for the excess and except any recovery of a bad debt previously deducted from gross sales to determine taxable sales. 
    Industrial hemp means the plant of the genus cannabis and any part of such plant, whether growing or not, with a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that does not exceed three-tenths percent on a dry weight basis. 
    Manufacturing means an operation which results in the creation or production of an article of tangible personal property, or which is a step in a process or series of operations resulting in the creation or production of such an article. 
    Medicine or drug means any substance taken internally or applied directly to the patient for the express purpose of alleviating pain and suffering and is available only with a doctor's prescription. Over-the-counter medicines even if prescribed by a physician will not be considered medicine or drug for the purposes of exemption. 
    Occasional sale means up to two (2) sales of taxable items during a twelve-month period through such means but not limited to garage sales, newspaper advertisements, etc. by residents of the city of previously owned personal property, not regularly used in a business. It also includes sales of taxable items by charitable organizations recognized by the State of Colorado and/or the City of Lafayette as part of their fund-raising efforts. 
    Person means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, corporation, estate or trust, or any group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number. 
    Private communications services means telecommunications services furnished to a subscriber, which entitles the subscriber to exclusive or priority use of any communication channel or groups of channels, or to the exclusive or priority use of any interstate intercommunications systems for the subscriber's stations. 
    Prosthetic device means an artificial part prescribed by a practitioner of the healing arts which aids or replaces a bodily function and which is designed, manufactured or adjusted to fit a particular individual. 
    Purchase or sale means the acquisition for any consideration by any person of tangible personal property or taxable services that are purchased, leased, sold, used, stored, distributed, or consumed, but excludes a bona fide gift of property or services. These terms include capital leases, installment and credit sales and property and services acquired by: 
(1)  The transfer, either conditionally or absolutely, of title or possession or both to tangible personal property. 
(2)  A lease, lease-purchase agreement, rental or grant of a license, including royalty agreements, to use tangible personal property or taxable services. 
(3)  Performance of taxable services. 
(4)  Barter or exchange for other property or services including coupons. 
    These terms exclude: 
(1)  A division of partnership assets among the partners according to their interests in the partnership. 
(2)  The formation of a corporation by the owners of a business and the transfer of their business assets to the corporation in exchange for all the corporation's outstanding stock, except qualifying shares, in proportion to the assets contributed. 
(3)  The transfer of assets of shareholders in the formation or dissolution of a professional corporation. 
(4)  The dissolution and pro rata distribution of the corporation's assets to its stockholders. 
(5)  The transfer of assets from a parent corporation to a subsidiary corporation or corporations that are owned at least eighty (80) percent by the parent corporation, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the subsidiary corporation. 
(6)  The transfer of assets from a subsidiary corporation or corporations that are owned at least eighty (80) percent by the parent corporation to a parent corporation or to another subsidiary that is owned at least eighty (80) percent by the parent corporation, which transfer is solely in exchange for stock or securities of the parent corporation or the subsidiary which received the assets. 
(7)  A transfer of a partnership interest or the formation of a partnership by the transfer of assets to the partnership in exchange for proportionate interest in the partnership. 
    Purchase price means the price to the consumer exclusive of any direct tax imposed by the federal government, by the State of Colorado or by this article. 
    Repairman means any person whose operations return the tangible personal property or depreciable real property belonging to others to its original state and function without increasing its previously estimated service life or capacity. 
    Retail marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or its resin, including marijuana concentrate. "Retail marijuana" does not include industrial hemp, nor does it include fiber produced from the stalks, oil, cake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. 
    Retail marijuana cultivation facility means an entity licensed by the Colorado Department of Revenue to cultivate, prepare, and package retail marijuana and sell retail marijuana to retail marijuana stores, to retail marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other retail marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers. 
    Retail marijuana products means products comprised of concentrated retail marijuana and products that are comprised of retail marijuana and other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, such as, but not limited to, edible products, ointments, and tinctures. 
    Retail marijuana product manufacturing facility means an entity licensed by the Colorado Department of Revenue to purchase retail marijuana; manufacture, prepare, and package retail marijuana products; and sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana products to other retail marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to retail marijuana stores, but not to consumers. 
    Retail marijuana store means an entity licensed by the Colorado Department of Revenue to purchase retail marijuana from retail marijuana cultivation facilities and retail marijuana and retail marijuana products from retail marijuana product manufacturing facilities and to sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana products to consumers. 
    Retailer, vendor means any person selling, leasing, renting or bartering tangible personal property or taxable services to the ultimate user or consumer or to a person operating a retail business known to the trade and public as such, at retail and not for resale in the city or elsewhere, except as provided under the occasional sales rule as herein defined. To prevent evasion and to provide for the more efficient administration, the "retailer" or "vendor" shall also include any salesman, representative, peddler, canvasser, or delivery person, who, individually or as an agent, directly or indirectly, of the dealer, distributor, supervisor or employer under whom he operates or from whom he obtains the tangible personal property sold by him, makes sales of tangible personal property subject to the tax imposed herein. In such event, the agent shall be responsible for the collection and payment of the tax imposed. Whenever the principal of such agent refuses to become licensed as a vendor, he shall be in violation of this article. 
    Retail sale means any sale made within the city except a wholesale sale and includes lease, rental, barter or grant of license to use tangible personal property or taxable service as specified in this article by the ultimate user or consumer. 
    Tangible personal property means corporeal personal property. This shall not be construed to mean newspapers as legally defined by section 24-70-102, C.R.S. 
    Tax means either the tax payable by the purchaser of a commodity or service subject to tax or the aggregate amount of taxes due from the vendor of such commodities or services during the period for which he is required to report his collections, as the context may require. 
    Taxable service means: 
(1)  The transport of signs, signals, writings, images, sounds, messages, data, or other information of any nature by wire, radio, light waves, electromagnetic, digital, or electronic means which transport originates within the city as more specifically set forth in section 100-121(3). 
(2)  Gas, electricity, steam and heat for domestic or commercial consumption and not for resale. 
(3)  Meals or food and cover charge, if any, furnished in or from any restaurant, eating house, hotel, drug store, club, resort, stand or vehicle or other such place at which meals or food are regularly sold to the public. 
(4)  Labor used to render tangible personal property sold or leased into a form usable by the purchaser or lessee and the charge for connecting or installing taxable services for the purchaser or lessee. 
(5)  Computer software contained on cards, tapes, discs, coding sheets or other machine-readable or human-readable form, including software that has been modified. 
(6)  Fabrication labor which results in the creation or production of an article of tangible personal property or which is a step in a process or series of operations resulting in the creation or production of such an article, wherein the article ultimately produced is the true object of the services provided. 
    Taxpayer means any person obligated to account to the city treasurer for taxes collected or to be collected. 
    Telecommunications service means the transmission of any two-way interactive electromagnetic communications including, but not limited to, voice, image, data and any other information, by the use of any means but not limited to wire, cable, fiber optical cable, microwave, radio wave or any combinations of such media. "Telecommunications service" includes, but is not limited to, basic local exchange telephone service, toll telephone service and teletypewriter service, including, but not limited to, residential and business service, directory assistance, cellular mobile telephone or telecommunication service, specialized mobile radio and two-way pagers and paging service, including any form of mobile two-way communication. "Telecommunications service" does not include separately stated nontransmission services which constitute computer processing applications used to act on the information to be transmitted. 
    Transfer means to grant, convey, hand over, assign, sell, exchange, or barter, in any manner or by any means, with or without consideration. 
    Unprocessed retail marijuana means marijuana at the time of the first transfer or sale from a retail marijuana cultivation facility to a retail marijuana product manufacturing facility or a retail marijuana store. 
    WATS/800 service means any outbound or inbound interstate-wide area telecommunications service or other similar service which entitles the subscriber, upon payment of a periodic charge, based upon a flat amount and/or usage, to make or receive a large volume of telephonic communications to or from persons having telephone or radio telephone stations in specified areas which are outside the telephone system area in which the subscriber's station is located. 
    Wholesaler means a person doing a regularly recognized wholesale or jobbing business, and known to the trade as such, and selling to retail merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers, for the purpose of resale. 
    Wholesale sale means a sale by a wholesaler to retail merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for resale and does not include a sale by a wholesaler to users or customers not for resale, such sales shall be deemed retail sales. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 2 (2-1-2-14), 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 2, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 1990-20, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-90; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 1-20-15) 
State Law reference- Definitions relating to state sales and use tax, C. R. S. §§ 39-26-102, 39-26-201. 
Sec. 110-38. - Administration; reporting forms; map. 
(a)  The administration of this article is hereby vested in the city treasurer or city finance director, which terms are synonymous for the purposes of this article, who shall prescribe forms and reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with this article for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of taxes imposed hereunder and for the proper administration and enforcement hereof. 
(b)  The city shall use the standard municipal sales and use tax reporting form and any subsequent revisions thereto adopted by the executive director of the department of revenue by the first full month commencing one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the regulation adopting or revising such standard form. 
(c)  The city finance director shall make available to any requesting vendor a map showing the boundaries of the city. 
(d)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the requesting vendor may rely on such map and any update thereof made available to such vendor in determining whether to collect a sales or use tax. No penalty shall be imposed or action for deficiency maintained against such vendor who in good faith complies with the most recent map available. 
(e)  Additional Information. The finance director may require any person to make additional returns, render statements, furnish records, or make information reports to determine whether or not such person is liable for payment or collection of tax. 
(f)  Subpoenas. The finance director may issue a subpoena to command a person to attend and give testimony or to produce books, accounts and records. 
(1)  Any subpoena issued under the terms of this article shall be served as provided in the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, including the payment of witness fees. When the witness is subpoenaed at the request of the city, such fees shall be paid by the city. When a witness is subpoenaed at the request of the taxpayer, the taxpayer shall pay the cost of service of the subpoena and the fee. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to attend, give testimony or to produce books, accounts and records as commanded in a duly issued and served subpoena. In addition to the imposition of penalties for violation of this section, the municipal court of the city is empowered to issue an order requiring compliance with the subpoena. Such order shall be enforceable by contempt proceedings in municipal court. 
(g)  Oaths. The finance director is authorized to administer oaths and take testimony at any hearing held pursuant to this article. 
(h)  Enforcement. The finance director is empowered to enforce this article and may cause a municipal summons and complaint to be issued against any person for violation of any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 59, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 3, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1, 5-16-06) 
State Law reference- Administration of state sales tax, C. R. S. § 39-26-122. 
Sec. 110-39. - Purpose; disposition of funds. 
    The council of the city hereby declares that the purpose of the levy of the taxes imposed in this article is for the raising of funds for the payment of the expenses of operating the city and for capital improvements; and in accordance with this purpose all of the proceeds of said tax shall be placed in and become a part of the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 60, 4-18-67) 
State Law reference- Disposition of state sales tax receipts, C. R. S. § 39-26-123. 
Sec. 110-39.1. - Use of tax increase; authorization by electors. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1993, the amount of sales and use tax revenue attributable to the levy and collection of one-quarter (0.25) percent of sales and use tax shall be set aside, placed in an open space, park and trail fund, and used only for the following purposes: The acquisition, by the city, at fair market value, of land, and the enhancement and maintenance of land, for use as parks, preservation of open space, establishment of trails, and other similar purposes, the decision as to what particular parcels of land, in what location, and in what priority to be made by the city council. 
(b)  The registered electors of the City of Lafayette hereby authorize the city council to adopt a bracket schedule to reflect the tax increase adopted by Ordinance No. 1992-43 so as to avoid collection of fractions of pennies. The registered electors further authorize the city council to make such other amendments to the Lafayette City Code, and to adopt such other ordinances as may be necessary to implement the intent and purpose of Ordinance No. 1992-43. 
(Ord. No. 1992-43, §§ 10, 11, 11-3-92) 
Editor's note- Codification of §§ 10 and 11 of Ord. No. 1992-43, adopted Nov. 3, 1992, as § 110-39.1(a) and (b) herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference- Sales tax, § 110-116 et seq.; use tax, § 110-146 et seq. 
Sec. 110-39.2. - Authorization by electors for collection, retention and expenditure of increased tax revenues. 
    The registered electors of the City of Lafayette hereby authorize the collection, retention and expenditure of all increased tax revenues generated by the passage of Ordinance No. 1992-43, notwithstanding the passage of any State of Colorado initiative which could limit such collection, retention or expenditure and outside of and apart from any other expenditure of the city which may be so limited. Expenditures of increased tax revenues generated by the passage of Ordinance No. 1992-43 shall not be counted in the base or in the increment for purposes of any such expenditure limitation. If this provision shall be declared invalid for any reason, it shall be severed from Ordinance No. 1992-43, and pro rata adjustments shall be made to all funds to avoid any distortion of spending limits by virtue of the dedications of revenue set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1992-43, § 12, 11-3-92) 
Editor's note- Codification of § 12 of Ord. No. 1992-43, adopted Nov. 3, 1992, as § 110-39.2 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 110-39.3. - Retention and expenditure of revenues notwithstanding spending limitations for library, police and fire protection services. 
    The registered electors of the city hereby authorize, as a revenue change, the retention and expenditure of all tax revenues generated by that portion of the city's three and twenty-five one hundredths (3.25) percent sales and use tax not dedicated to the open space, park and trail fund three (3.00) percent, notwithstanding the provisions of Article X, Section 20 of the Constitution of the State of Colorado and outside of and apart from any other expenditure of the city, which may thereby be so limited without limiting the collection and spending of any other revenues of the city in any year. Revenues generated by said sales and use tax and investment earnings thereon that would otherwise be subject to refund under Colorado Constitution Article X, Section 20, shall be spent exclusively for library, police and fire protection services. 
(Ord. No. 1995-27, § 2, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 110-39.4. - Use of year 2000 tax increase and 2005 and 2015 extension thereof; authorization by election; period of imposition. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2000, through and including December 31, 2004, the amount of sales and use tax revenue attributable to the levy and collection of the one-quarter (0.25) percent increase in sales and use tax shall be set aside, placed in an open space, park and trail fund, and used only for acquisition by the city of land for use as open space, the decision as to what particular parcels of land, in what location, and in what priority being made by the city council. 
(b)  Effective January 1, 2005, the amount of sales and use tax revenue attributable to the levy and collection of the one-quarter (0.25) percent extended increase in sales and use tax shall be set aside, placed in an open space, park and trail fund, and used only for: 
(1)  Acquisition by the city of land for use as open space, the decision as to what particular parcels of land, in what location, and in what priority being made by the city council; and 
(2)  The purpose of maintenance by the city of its open space lands. 
(c)  The eligible electors of the City of Lafayette hereby authorize the city council to adopt a bracket schedule to for the one-quarter (0.25) percent sales and use tax so as to avoid collection of fractions of pennies. The eligible electors further authorize the city council to make such other amendments to the Lafayette City Code, and to adopt such other ordinances as may be necessary to implement to the intent and purpose of Ordinance Nos. 1993-35, 2003-32, and 2012-16. 
(d)  The eligible electors of the City of Lafayette hereby authorize the imposition of such one-quarter (0.25) percent sales and use tax only for the period beginning January 1, 2000, and through and including ending December 31, 2024. The question of extending such one-quarter (0.25) percent sales and use tax may be submitted to the eligible electors of the City of Lafayette at an election held for the purpose during or prior to calendar year 2024. 
(Ord. No. 1999-35, §§ 10-12, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 2003-32, § 6, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 2012-16, § 6, 7-25-12) 
Sec. 110-39.5. - Authorization for collection of year 2000 tax revenues, and 2005 and 2015 extension thereof. 
    The eligible electors of the City of Lafayette hereby authorize the revenue change caused by the collection, retention and expenditure of all increased tax revenues generated by the passage of Ordinance Nos. 1999-35, 2003-32, and 2012-16, without limitation by Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution or any other law, such collection, retention or expenditure being outside of and apart from any other expenditure of the city that may be so limited. The tax revenues generated by the passage of Ordinance Nos. 1999-35, 2003-32, and 2012-16 shall be excluded from the calculation of the increment that may be due on any urban renewal project. 
(Ord. No. 1999-35, § 13, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 2003-32, § 7, 9-2-03; Ord. No. 2012-16, § 7, 7-25-12) 
Sec. 110-40. - Violations: evasion of collection or payment of tax. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, subject to the tax levied by this article, to refuse to make any return required to be made by this article, or to make any false or fraudulent return, or any false statements in any return, or to fail or refuse to make payment to the finance director of any taxes collected or due the city, or in any manner to evade the collection and payment of the tax, or any part thereof, imposed by this article, or for any person to fail or refuse to pay such tax or evade the payment thereof, or to aid or abet another in any attempt to evade the payment of the tax imposed by making a false return or a return containing a false statement or to issue to the city a check in payment of any taxes collected or due the city or in payment of any penalty or interest due the city, which check is dishonored upon presentment by the city or to violate any other requirement set forth in this article. 
(b)  Personal liability. Any taxpayer, or person who executes any form or report required by this article to be submitted to the city, shall be personally responsible for the payment of any taxes required under this article. 
(c)  Prosecution of any person for violation of this article shall not reduce, eliminate or suspend any persons obligation to fulfill the requirements of this article or payment of any taxes, penalties or interest due hereunder. 
(d)  Nothing contained within this article shall preclude the finance director from enforcing the provisions of this article in any manner permitted by law. In any civil proceeding, the city, if it is the prevailing party, shall be entitled to recovery of all costs of litigation, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 63, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 2, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 110-41. - License and tax additional. 
    The license and tax in this article shall be in addition to all other licenses and taxes imposed by law, except as herein otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 58, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-42. - Collection and refund of disputed tax. 
    Should a dispute arise between the purchaser and the seller as to whether or not any sale or commodity or service is exempt from taxation under this article, nevertheless the seller shall collect and the purchaser shall pay such tax, and the seller shall thereupon issue to the purchaser a receipt or certificate, on forms prescribed by the city treasurer, showing the names of the seller and purchaser, the items purchased, the date, price, amount of tax paid and a brief statement of the claim of exemption. The purchaser thereafter may apply to the city treasurer for a refund of such taxes, and it shall be the duty of the city treasurer to determine the question of exemption, subject to review by the courts, as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 22, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-43. - Refunds-Procedure generally. 
    A refund shall be made, or credit allowed, for the tax paid under dispute, as provided in this article, by any purchaser who has an exemption as in this article set out. Such refund shall be made by the city treasurer after compliance with the conditions precedent provided in the following three (3) sections. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 23, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-44. - Same-Application. 
(a)  An application for refund of sales or use tax paid under dispute by a purchaser or user who has an exemption pursuant to this article shall be made within sixty (60) days after the purchase, storage, use or consumption of the goods or services whereon an exemption is claimed. 
(b)  An application for refund of tax monies paid in error or by mistake, shall be made within three (3) years after the date of purchase, storage, use or consumption of the goods for which the refund is claimed. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 23, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 4, 12-17-85) 
Sec. 110-45. - Same-Decision. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a refund under this article, the city treasurer shall examine the same with all due speed and shall give notice to the applicant by an order in writing of his decision thereon. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 23, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-46. - Same-Hearing. 
    An aggrieved applicant for a refund under this article may, within ten (10) days after a decision is mailed to him, petition the city treasurer for a hearing on the claim in the manner provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 23, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-47. - Same-Violation. 
    Any applicant for a refund under the provisions of this article, or any other person, who shall make any false statement in connection with an application for a refund of any tax shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 25, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-48. - Same-Violation as evidence of fraud. 
    If any person is convicted under the provisions of section 110-47, such conviction shall be prima facie evidence that all refunds received by such person during the current year were obtained unlawfully, and the city treasurer is hereby empowered and directed to bring appropriate action for recovery of such refund. A brief summary of the penalties for a violation of this article shall be printed on each application form for a refund. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 26, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-49. - Same-Proof of exemption. 
    The burden of proof that sales and commodities and services, on which tax refunds were claimed, are exempt from taxation under this article, or were not at retail, shall be on the one making such claim under such reasonable requirements of proof as the city treasurer may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 27, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-50. - Information confidential-Generally. 
    Except in accordance with judicial order or as otherwise provided in this article, the city treasurer, his agents, clerks and employees shall not divulge any information gained from any return filed under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 28, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-51. - Same-Exceptions made by court. 
    The officials charged with the custody of returns filed under the provisions of this article shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the city treasurer in an action under the provisions of this article to which he is a party, or on behalf of any party to an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article or to punish a violator thereof when the report of facts shown by such report is directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which event the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of said returns, or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding and no more. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 28, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-52. - Same-Other exceptions. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return or report filed in connection with his tax, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and the items thereof, nor to prohibit the inspection by the city attorney or any other legal representative of the city of the report or return of any person who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action or proceeding is contemplated or has been instituted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 28, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-53. - Wrongfully divulging information. 
    Any city officer or employee, or any member of the office of or officer or employee of the city treasurer, who shall divulge any information classified in this article as confidential, in any manner, except in accordance with proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by law, shall be guilty of a violation hereof. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 30, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-54. - Examination of returns; refunds; credits; deficiencies. 
(a)  As soon as practicable after a return is filed under this article, the city treasurer shall examine it. 
(b)  If it then appears that the correct amount of tax to be remitted is greater or less than that shown in the return, the tax shall be recomputed. 
(c)  If the amount paid exceeds that which is due, the excess shall be refunded or credited against any subsequent remittance from the same person. 
(d)  If any amount of sales or use tax is not paid on or before the last date prescribed for payment, interest on such amount at the rate imposed pursuant to Section 39-21-110-5, C.R.S. shall be paid for the period from such last date to the date paid. The last date prescribed for payment shall be determined without regard to any extension of time for payment and shall be determined without regard to any notice and demand for payment issued, by reason of jeopardy, prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such payment. In the case of a tax in which the last date for payment is not otherwise prescribed, the last date for payment shall be deemed to be the date the liability for the tax arises, and in no event shall it be later than the date notice and demand for the tax is made by the finance director. 
    Interest prescribed by this article shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as the tax to which it is applicable. 
    If any portion of a tax is satisfied by credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed on the portion of the tax so satisfied for any period during which, if the credit had not been made, interest would have been allowed with respect to such overpayment. 
    Interest prescribed by this article on any sales or use tax may be assessed and collected at any time during the period within which the tax to which such interest relates may be assessed and collected. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 31, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 5, 12-17-85) 
Sec. 110-55. - Deficiency caused by disregard of rules. 
    If any part of the deficiency is due to negligence or intentional disregard of authorized rules and regulations with knowledge thereof but without intent to defraud, there shall be added ten (10) percent of the total amount of the deficiency and interest at the rate imposed pursuant to Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S., on the amount of such deficiency from the time the return was due which deficiency, addition and interest shall become due and payable within ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the city treasurer which notice and demand shall conform to the requirements of section 110-84(b) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 32, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 6, 12-17-85) 
Sec. 110-56. - Deficiency caused by fraud. 
    If any part of the deficiency is due to fraud with the intent to evade the tax, then there shall be added one hundred (100) percent of the total amount of the deficiency, and in such case the whole amount of the tax unpaid, including the additions, shall become due and payable ten (10) days after written notice and demand by the city treasurer and an additional three and one-half (3.50) percent per month on said amount shall be added from the date the return was due until paid. The notice and demand shall conform to the requirements of section 110-84(b) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 33, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 7, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 1992-43, § 3, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 3, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 110-57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 2006-12, adopted May 16, 2006, deleted § 110-57, which pertained to investigation of retailer's books, and derived from Ord. No. 422, adopted April 18, 1967. 
Sec. 110-58. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 2006-12, adopted May 16, 2006, deleted § 110-58, which pertained to hearings, subpoenas and witnesses, and derived from Ord. No. 422, adopted April 18, 1967. 
State Law reference- Fees of witnesses, C. R. S. § 13-33-102; service of subpoenas, C. R. S. § 13-90-115. 
Sec. 110-59. - Judge compels attendance. 
    Any judge of the district court of the judicial district of the state in which the city is located, either in term time or vacation, upon the application of city treasurer, may compel the attendance of witnesses, the production of books, papers, records or memoranda and giving of testimony before the city treasurer or any of his duly authorized deputies, by an attachment for contempt, or otherwise, in the same manner as production of evidence may be compelled before said court. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 36, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-60. - Depositions. 
    The city treasurer or any party in an investigation or hearing before the city treasurer may cause the deposition of witnesses residing within or without the state to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions in courts of this state and to that end compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or memoranda. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 37, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-61. - Unpaid tax a prior lien. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be a first and prior lien upon the goods and business fixtures of or used by a retailer under lease, title retaining contract, or other contract arrangement, excepting stock of goods sold or for sale in the ordinary course of business, and shall take precedence on all such property over other liens or claims of whatsoever kind or nature. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 38, 4-18-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. §§ 39-26-117, 39-26-205. 
Sec. 110-62. - Sale of business. 
    Any retailer who shall sell out his business or stock of goods, or shall quit business, shall be required to make out a return as provided in this article within ten (10) days after the date he sold out his business or stock of goods, or quit business, and his successor in business shall be required to withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover the amount of said tax due and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall produce a receipt from the city treasurer showing that the taxes have been paid, or a certificate that no taxes are due. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 39, 4-18-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S.§ 39-26-117. 
Sec. 110-63. - Purchases subject to tax lien. 
    If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods shall fail to withhold the purchase money as provided in this article, and the tax shall be due and unpaid after the ten (10) day period allowed, he, as well as the vendor, shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes unpaid by the former owner. Likewise, anyone who takes any stock of goods or business fixtures of or used by any retailer under lease, title retaining contract or other contract arrangement, by purchase, foreclosure sale or otherwise, takes same subject to the lien for any delinquent sales taxes owned by such retailer, and shall be liable for the payment of all delinquent sales taxes of such prior owner, not, however, exceeding the value of the property so taken or acquired. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 40, 4-18-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 39-26-117. 
Sec. 110-64. - Status of unpaid tax in bankruptcy and receivership. 
    Whenever the business or property of any taxpayer subject to this article shall be placed in receivership, bankruptcy or assignment for the benefit of creditors, or seized under distraint for property taxes, all taxes, penalties and interest imposed by this article and for which said retailer is in any way liable shall be a prior and preferred lien against all the property of said taxpayer, except as to pre-existing claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledgee, judgement creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filing of the notice as provided in this article on the property of the taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade and business fixtures of such taxpayer, and no sheriff, receiver, assignee or other officer shall sell the property of any person subject to this article under process of order of any court, without first ascertaining from the city treasurer the amount of any taxes due and payable, and if there are any such taxes due, owing and unpaid, it shall be the duty of such officer to first pay the amount of said taxes out of the proceeds of such sale before making payment of any moneys to any judgment creditor or other claimants of whatsoever kind or nature, except the costs of the proceedings and other preexisting claims or liens as above provided. For the purpose of this article the term "taxpayer" shall include "retailer." 
(Ord. No. 422, § 41, 4-18-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 39-26-117. 
Sec. 110-65. - Trust status of tax in possession of retailer. 
    All sums of money paid by the purchaser to the retailer as taxes imposed shall be and remain public money, the property of the city, in the hands of such retailer, and he shall hold the same in trust for the sole use and benefit of the city until paid to the city treasurer as provided in this article, and for failure to so pay to the city treasurer such retailer shall be punished for a violation hereof. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 42, 4-18-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 39-26-118 
Sec. 110-66. - Delinquencies; penalties; interest. 
(a)  If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in the payment of the sales tax or to pay any tax as required, the finance director shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent and shall add thereto a penalty equal to the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) or ten (10) percent thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under subsection (c) of this section plus one-half percent per month from the date when due, not exceeding eighteen (18) percent in the aggregate. 
(b)  If a person neglects or refuses to make a return in the payment of the use tax as required, the finance director shall make an estimate, based upon such information as may be available, of the amount of taxes due for the period for which the taxpayer is delinquent and shall add thereto a penalty equal to ten (10) percent thereof and interest on such delinquent taxes at the rate imposed under subsection (c) of this section, plus one-half of one (1) percent per month from the date when due. 
(c)  The annual rate of interest on delinquent taxes under subsections (a) and (b) above shall be that established by the State Commissioner of Banking pursuant to Section 39-21-110.5, C.R.S. 
(d)  Promptly after making such estimate, the city finance director shall give to the delinquent taxpayer written notice of such estimated taxes, penalty and interest which notice must be served personally or by certified or registered mail. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 43, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 8, 12-17-85) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 39-26-118. 
Sec. 110-67. - Estimate payable as assessment. 
    The estimate provided for in the preceding section shall thereupon become an assessment, and such assessment shall be final and due and payable from the taxpayer to the city treasurer ten (10) days from the date of service of the notice or the date of mailing by certified or registered mail; provided, however, that within said ten (10) day period such delinquent taxpayer may petition the city treasurer for a revision or modification of such assessment, and shall, within such ten (10) day period, furnish the city treasurer the facts and correct figures showing the correct amount of such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 43, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-68. - Submission of petition; action by director. 
    A petition for revision or modification of assessment shall be in writing and the fact and figures submitted shall be submitted either in writing or orally, and shall be given under oath of the taxpayer. 
    Thereupon, the city treasurer shall modify such assessment, in accordance with the facts submitted, which facts he deems correct. Such assessment shall be considered the final order of the city treasurer and may be reviewed under Rule 106 (a) (4) of the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure, provided that the taxpayer gives written notice to the city treasurer of such intention within five (5) days after receipt of the final order of assessment. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 43, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-69. - Notice of tax lien. 
(a)  If any taxes, penalty or interest imposed by this article shown due by returns filed by the taxpayer, or as shown by assessments duly made as provided herein, are not paid within five (5) days after the same are due, the city treasurer shall issue a notice setting forth the name of the taxpayer, the amount of the tax, penalties and interest, the date of the accrual thereof and that the city claims a first and prior lien therefor on the real and tangible personal property of the taxpayer except as to the pre-existing claims or liens of a bona fide mortgagee, pledge, judgment creditor or purchaser whose rights shall have attached prior to the filing of the notice as hereinafter provided on property of the taxpayer, other than the goods, stock in trade and business fixtures of such taxpayer. 
(b)  Such notice shall be on forms prepared by the city treasurer and shall be verified by him or his duly qualified deputy, or any duly qualified agent of the city treasurer, whose duties are the collection of such tax, and may be filed in the office of the clerk and recorder of the county in this state in which the taxpayer owns real or tangible personal property, and the filing of such notice shall create such lien on such property in that county and constitute a notice thereof. 
(c)  After said notice has been filed, or concurrently therewith, or at any time when taxes due are unpaid, whether such notice is filed or not, the city treasurer may issue a warrant under his official seal directed to any duly authorized revenue collector, or the sheriff of any county in this state, commanding him to levy upon, seize and sell sufficient of the real and personal property of the tax debtor found within his county for the payment of the amount due, together with interest, penalties and costs, as now or hereafter provided by ordinance, subject to valid pre-existing claims or liens as above provided. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 44, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-70. - Satisfaction of lien by levy, sale and garnishment. 
    The revenue officer or the sheriff shall forthwith levy upon sufficient of the property of the taxpayer, or any property used by such taxpayer, in conducting his retail business, and said property so levied upon shall be sold in all respects, with like respect to executions against property upon judgment of a court of record, and the remedies of garnishments shall apply. The sheriff shall be entitled to such fees, in executing such warrant, as are allowed by law for similar services. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 45, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-71. - Release of lien. 
    Any lien for taxes as shown on the records of the county clerk and recorders as provided in this article, shall, upon the payment of all taxes, penalties and interest covered thereby, be released by the city treasurer in the same manner as mortgages or judgments are released. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 46, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-72. - Recovery of unpaid tax by action at law. 
(a)  The city treasurer may, in addition to other remedies, treat any taxes under this article, penalties or interest due and unpaid, as a debt due the city from the vendor retailer. 
(b)  In case of failure to pay the taxes, or any portion thereof, or any penalty or interest, thereon, when due, the city treasurer may recover at law the amount of such taxes, penalties and interest in any county or district court of the county wherein the taxpayer resides or has his principal place of business having jurisdiction of the amounts sought to be collected. 
(c)  The return of the taxpayer or the assessment made by the city treasurer, as herein provided, shall be prima facie proof of the amount due. 
(d)  Such actions may be actions in attachments, and writs of attachment may be issued to the sheriff, and in any such proceeding no bond shall be required of the city treasurer, nor shall any sheriff require of the city treasurer an indemnifying bond for executing the writ of attachment, or writ of execution upon any judgement entered in such proceedings; and the city treasurer may prosecute appeals or writs of error in such cases without the necessity of providing bond therefor. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the city attorney, when requested by the city treasurer, to commence action for the recovery of taxes due, and this remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 47, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-73. - City a party to title actions for determination of lien. 
    In any action affecting the title to real estate or the ownership or rights to possession of personal property, the city may be made a party defendant for the purpose of obtaining a judgment or determination of its lien upon the property involved therein. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 48, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-74. - Waiver of penalty and interest. 
    The city finance director is hereby authorized to waive, for good cause shown, any penalty or interest assessed and as is provided by this article. No request for a waiver of penalty and/or interest will be considered unless it is in writing and made timely; nor is the grant of any such waiver to be deemed automatic, but rather is at the sole discretion of the city finance director. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 49, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 9, 12-17-85) 
Sec. 110-75. - Petitions by aggrieved taxpayers. 
    If any person feels aggrieved by the assessment or notice and demand made upon him by the city finance director, he may, by petition in writing, within ten (10) days after the notice is mailed to him, ask for a hearing and a correction of the amount of the tax so assessed in which petition he shall set forth the reasons why such hearing should be granted, and the amount by which such tax should be reduced. The city finance director shall notify the petitioner in writing of the time and place fixed by him for such hearing. After such hearing, the city finance director shall make such order in the matter as is just and lawful and shall furnish a copy of such order to the petitioner. The hearing procedure shall be recorded and guided, but not bound by, the Colorado Rules of Civil Procedure and formal rules of evidence. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 50, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 10, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 5, 5-16-06) 
Sec. 110-76. - Decisions of city treasurer; notice; when final. 
    Every decision of the city treasurer following a hearing under this article shall be in writing, and notice thereof shall be mailed to the vendor within ten (10) days, and all such decisions shall become final upon the expiration of thirty (30) days unless proceedings are begun within said time for review thereof as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 51, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-77. - Review of city treasurer's decision. 
(a)  Should any taxpayer be aggrieved by a final decision of the finance director, such taxpayer may appeal to the municipal court in accordance with its judicial appeals procedure. 
(b)  Duties of the city treasurer herein provided may be performed by any qualified deputy. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 52, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-35, § 11, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 8, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 110-78. - Final decision; appeals; posting of bonds. 
(a)  Within fifteen (15) days of filing an appeal before the municipal court, the taxpayer shall file a surety bond with the municipal court in an amount equaling twice the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges as set forth in the final decision of the finance director. The taxpayer may, at his option, satisfy the surety bond requirement by a savings account or deposit in or a certificate of deposit issued by a state or national bank or by a state or federal savings and loan association, in accordance with the provisions of Section 11-35-101(1), C.R.S., equal to twice the amount of the taxes, interest and other charges stated in the final decision by the city finance director. 
(b)  The taxpayer may, at his option, deposit the disputed amount with the city finance director in lieu of posting a surety bond. If such amount is so deposited, no further interest shall accrue on the deficiency contested during the pendency of the action. At the conclusion of the action, or after the time for such appeal has expired, the funds deposited shall be, at the direction of the court, either be retained by the city finance director and applied against the deficiency or returned in whole or in part to the taxpayer with interest at the rate imposed pursuant to section 110-66 of this article. No claim for refund of amounts deposited with the city finance director need be made by the taxpayer in order for such amounts to be repaid in accordance with the direction of the court. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 53, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 12, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 2004-21, §§ 9, 10, 11-16-04) 
Secs. 110-79, 110-80. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1985-38, § 13, adopted Dec. 17, 1985, repealed §§ 110-79, 110-80 which pertained to review and decision by district and supreme courts as derived from Ord. No. 422, §§ 54, 55, adopted Apr. 18, 1967. 
Sec. 110-81. - Mailing of notice. 
    All notices required to be given to the retailer or vendor under this article shall be in writing and, if mailed postpaid by certified or registered mail "return receipt requested" to him at his last known address, shall be sufficient. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 56, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-82. - Hearing held in city. 
    Every hearing under this article before the city treasurer shall be held in the city. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 57, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-83. - Limitation of actions. 
(a)  No sales or use tax or interest thereon or penalties with respect thereto, shall be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant issued, or suit for collection be instituted, nor any other action to collect the same be commenced more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which case such liens shall continue only for one (1) year after the filing of notice thereof. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the tax together with interest and penalties thereof, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may begin at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the city finance director may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(b)  In the case of failure to file a return, the sales tax, use tax, or both may be assessed and collected at any time. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 61, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 14, 12-17-85) 
Sec. 110-84. - Alternative dispute resolution procedure; deficiency notice or claim for refund. 
    For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, in lieu of the procedures heretofore provided for dispute resolution and appeal, the taxpayer may elect a hearing on the city finance director's final decision on a deficiency notice or claim for refund pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section. 
(1)  As used in this section "state hearing" means a hearing before the executive director of the department of revenue or delegate thereof as provided in Section 29-2-106.1(3), C.R.S. 
(2)  When the city asserts that sales or use taxes are due in an amount greater than the amount paid by a taxpayer, the city shall mail a deficiency notice to the taxpayer by certified mail. The deficiency notice shall state the additional sales and use taxes due. The deficiency notice shall contain notification, in clear and conspicuous type, that the taxpayer has the right to elect a state hearing on the deficiency pursuant to Section 29-2-106.1(3), C.R.S. The taxpayer shall also have the right to elect a state hearing on the city's denial of such taxpayer's claim for a refund of sales or use tax paid. 
(3)  The taxpayer shall request the state hearing within thirty (30) days after the taxpayer's exhaustion of local remedies. The taxpayer shall have no right to such hearing if he has not exhausted local remedies or if he fails to request such hearing within the time period provided for in this subsection. For the purposes of this subsection "exhaustion of local remedies" means: 
a.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the city and such city has held such hearing and issued a final decision thereon. Such hearing shall be informal and no transcript, rules of evidence or filing of briefs shall be required; but the taxpayer may elect to submit a brief, in which case the city may submit a brief. The city shall hold such hearing and issue the final decision thereon within ninety (90) days after the city's receipt of the taxpayer's written request therefor, except the city may extend such period if the delay in holding the hearing or issuing the decision thereon was occasioned by the taxpayer, but, in any such event, the city shall hold such hearing and issue the decision thereon within one hundred eighty (180) days of the taxpayer's request in writing therefor; or 
b.  The taxpayer has timely requested in writing a hearing before the city and the city has failed to hold such hearing or has failed to issue a final decision thereon within the time periods provided in subparagraph a. above. 
(4)  If a taxpayer has exhausted his local remedies as provided in subsection (3) above, the taxpayer may request a state hearing on such deficiency notice or claim for refund, and such request shall be made and such hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as provided in Section 29-2-106.1(3) through (7), C.R.S. 
(5)  If the deficiency notice or claim for refund involves only the city, in lieu of requesting a state hearing, the taxpayer may appeal such deficiency or denial of a claim for refund to the district court of the County of Boulder as provided in Section 29-2-106.1(8), C.R.S., provided the taxpayer complies with the procedures set forth in subsection (3) of this section. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the taxpayer from pursuing judicial relief of a final decision of the city as otherwise provided in this article. 
(7)  If the city reasonably finds that the collection of sales and/or use tax shall be jeopardized by delay, the city may utilize the procedures set forth in 39-21-111, C.R.S. 
(Ord. No. 1985-38, § 15, 12-17-85) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to state sales taxes, C. R. S. § 39-26-125. 
Secs. 110-85-110-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 110-96. - Mandatory for retail sellers; duration. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling at retail, as the same is defined in this article, without first having obtained a license therefor, which license shall be granted and issued by the city treasurer and shall be in force and effect until revoked. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 3, 4-18-67) 
State Law reference- License required under state sales tax, C. R. S. § 39-26-103. 
Sec. 110-97. - Application; contents. 
    A license under this article shall be granted only upon application stating the name and address of the persons desiring such license, the name of such business and the location including the street number of such business and such other facts as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 3, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-98. - Two or more places of business. 
    In case business is transacted at two (2) or more separate places by one person, a separate license for each place of business shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 4, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-99. - Form. 
    Each license under this article shall be numbered and shall show the name, residence and place and character of business of the licensee and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 5, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-100. - Transfer. 
    No license under this article shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 5, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-101. - Sale at retail without license. 
    Any person engaged in the business of selling at retail in the city without having secured a license therefor, except as specifically provided in this article, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 6, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-102. - Revocation. 
    The city treasurer may, on a reasonable notice and after full hearing, revoke the license of any person found by the city treasurer to have violated any provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 7, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-103. - Appeal from revocation. 
    Any finding and order of the city treasurer revoking the license of any person may be appealed to the municipal court in accordance with its judicial appeals procedure. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 8, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 11, 11-16-04) 
Sec. 110-104. - When not required. 
    No license shall be required for any person engaged exclusively in the business of selling commodities which are exempt from taxation or making sales which qualify as occasional sales as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 9, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 16, 12-17-85) 
Sec. 110-105. - Duty to keep books and records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person engaged or continuing in business in the city for the transaction of which a license is required by this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of all sales made by him, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of sales tax and use tax, the collection and payment for which he is liable pursuant to this article. If such person cannot produce records suitable, in the judgment of the sales tax auditor/city finance director, to support his actual sales/use tax liability, the sales tax auditor/city finance director may establish such liability by use of generally acceptable accounting principles including the making of estimates. Furthermore, when suitable records are available but, in the judgment of the sales tax auditor/city finance director, are so voluminous that excessive and undue time would be required to conduct an actual audit thereof, the sales tax auditor/city finance director may use a test-period audit or other appropriate sampling techniques to compute the sales/use tax liability. It shall be the duty of every such person to keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years all invoices of goods and merchandise purchased for resale or use in the business, and all such books, invoices and other records shall be opened for examination at any time by the city finance director or his duly authorized agent at a location within the city. The taxpayer may elect to pay the expenses involved with an audit conducted at a location outside the city if it is not possible for the taxpayer to provide the necessary records within the city. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 29, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 17, 12-17-85) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 39-26-116. 
Secs. 110-106-110-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SALES TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Use of tax increase, § 110-39.1. 

Sec. 110-116. - Limitations on gross taxable sales. 
(a)  The taxpayer may take credit in his report of gross sales for an amount equal to the sales price of property returned by the purchaser when the full sales price, including the sales tax previously charged, is refunded, either in cash or by credit, but only if the sale was originally subject to sales tax. 
(b)  On all sales at retail valued in money, when such sales are made under conditional sales contracts, or under other forms of sale, where the payment of the principal sum thereunder is extended over a period longer than sixty (60) days from the date of sale thereof, only such portion of the sale amount thereof may be counted for the purpose of imposition of the tax imposed by this article as has actually been received in cash by the taxpayer during the period for which the tax imposed by this article is due and payable. 
(c)  Taxes paid on gross sales represented by accounts found to be worthless and actually charged off for income tax purposes may be credited upon a subsequent payment of the tax herein provided, but if any such accounts are thereafter collected by the taxpayer, a tax shall be paid upon the amounts so collected. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 2, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 18, 12-17-85) 
Sec. 110-117. - Sales of tangible personal property to manufacturers generally. 
    Sales to and purchases of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing, compounding for sale, profit or use, any article, substance or commodity which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product which is manufactured, compounded or furnished or the container, label or the furnished shipping case thereof, shall be deemed to be wholesale sales and shall be deemed to be exempt. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 2, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-118. - Sales of electricity and fuel to manufacturers, etc. 
    Sales and purchases of electricity, gas, coal, fuel, oil or coke for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, telegraph, telephone and radio communication, street and railroad transportation services and all industrial uses, and newsprint and printers ink for use by publishers of newspapers and commercial printers shall be deemed to be wholesale sales and shall be exempt from taxation, except that electricity, gas, coal, fuel oil or coke used for lighting or space heating in these operations shall not be exempt. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 2, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-119. - Transfer other than sale. 
    When the right to continuous possession or use of any article of tangible personal property is granted under a lease, rental, barter or contract and such transfer or possession would be taxable if an outright sale of such article were made, the tax shall be computed as each payment is made and paid in the case of an outright sale taxable under this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 2, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 19, 12-17-85) 
Sec. 110-120. - Tax based on purchase price. 
    The sales tax is imposed on the full purchase price of articles sold after manufacture or after having been made to order and includes the full purchase price of materials used and service performed in connection therewith, excluding, however, such articles as are otherwise exempted. The sales price is the gross value of all the materials, labor, service and the profit thereon included in the price charged to the user or consumer. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 2, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-121. - Matters taxed. 
    There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax in the amount stated in section 110-26, et seq., of this article, as follows: 
(1)  On the purchase price paid or charged upon all sales, transfers other than sales, and purchases of tangible personal property at retail. 
(2)  Upon the amount paid for the use of facilities and accommodations of a hotel, apartment hotel, cottage camp, motor court, trailer park or camp-operated for the accommodation of the general public, when occupied for thirty (30) days or less. 
(3)  Telecommunications services: 
a.  Upon telecommunications services, except carrier access services, interstate or international WATS/800 service and interstate or international private communications service, for all international, interstate and intrastate telecommunications service originating from or received on telecommunications equipment in the city if the charge for the service is billed to an apparatus, telephone, or account in this city, without regard to where the bill for such services is actually received. If a taxpayer presents to the city written proof of double taxation of the telecommunication services, the city shall credit against the tax accruing under this article the amount of tax actually paid by the taxpayer to the other taxing entity. If the tax accruing under this article exceeds the amount of the tax actually paid by the taxpayer to the other taxing entity, the taxpayer shall pay the difference to the city. The credit provided for in this subsection shall not be allowed if the tax actually paid by the taxpayer to the other taxing entity was not by law required to be paid. 
b.  Upon telecommunications services sold for resale to other persons for purposes of providing telecommunications services to the final end user will not be subject to the sales tax. 
(4)  For gas and electric service, for gas and electricity furnished and sold for domestic or commercial consumption and not for resale. 
(5)  Upon the amount paid for all meals or food and cover charge, if any, furnished in or from any restaurant, eating house, hotel, drug store, club, resort, stand or vehicle or other such place at which meals or food are regularly sold to the public. 
(6)  Sales of alcoholic beverages whether sold for consumption on the premises or off the premises of the retailer. 
(7)  For steam or other heating service furnished and sold for domestic or commercial use. 
(8)  On computer software contained on cards, tapes, discs, coding sheets or other machine-readable or human-readable form, including software that has been modified, but excluding custom-designed software. 
(9)  On labor used to render tangible personal property sold or leased into a form usable by the purchaser or lessee and the charge for connecting or installing tangible services for the purchaser or lessee. 
(10)  Fabrication labor which results in the creation or production of an article of tangible personal property, or which is a step in a process or series of operations resulting in the creation or production of such an article, wherein the article ultimately produced is the true object of the services provided. 
(11)  Upon the purchase of all lumber, fixtures, materials and other supplies purchased within the city which are used for the improvement of any building, dwelling, other structure, or realty within or without the city which improvement does not require a building permit pursuant to city ordinance and/or code. 
(12)  Upon installation in the city of equipment required to receive or transmit telecommunication service. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 10, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, §§ 20, 21, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 1990-20, §§ 3, 4, 11-6-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 39-26-104. 
Sec. 110-122. - Items exempt from taxation. 
    The following classes of tangible personal property are exempt from taxation: 
(1)  Class 1-Motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers registered outside of the city. 
CAVEAT: The purchase of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer outside the city by a resident of the city for use in Lafayette shall be subject to tax under this article, which tax shall be payable at the time the registration license is issued by the county clerk and recorder of Boulder County. If any resident of the city shall register his motor vehicle trailer, or semitrailer in any other county of Colorado, he shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(2)  Sales under conditional sales contracts made prior to the effective date of this article. 
(3)  Sales of tangible personal property shall be exempted if both the following conditions exist: (1) The sales are to those who are residents of or doing business in the state outside the city; and, (2) The articles purchased are to be delivered to the purchaser outside the city by common carrier or by the conveyance of the seller or by mail. 
(4)  Sales of fuel used for the operation of internal combustion engines. All commodities which are taxed under the provisions of the Colorado Motor Fuel Tax of 1933, shall be exempt from taxation hereunder. 
(5)  Sales of tangible personal property shall be exempted from the operation of this article if all the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The sales are made to a purchaser engaged in manufacturing processing, mining, construction or railroading; 
(2)  The articles sold are to be used by the purchaser in the conduct of his manufacturing, processing, mining, construction or railroading business outside the city; 
(3)  Delivery of the articles sold is to be made to the purchaser at a point outside the city or to a carrier for delivery of the articles to a purchaser at a point outside the city or the railroad, in case the railroad is the purchaser, or to a truck of the construction company in case of a sale to a construction company. 
(6)  Medicine and prosthetic devices sold under prescription of a physician. 
(7)  Sales to the United States government; to the state, its departments or institutions and the political subdivisions thereof, in their governmental capacities only; and all sales to the city and any department thereof. 
(8)  Sales to religious, charitable and eleemosynary corporations, in the conduct of their regular religious, charitable and eleemosynary functions and activities. 
(9)  Sales which the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States, or the State, shall be exempt under this article. 
(10)  Sales and purchase of cattle, sheep, lambs, swine and goats; all sales and purchases of mares and stallions for breeding purposes; and all farm auction close-out sales shall be exempt from taxation hereunder. 
(11)  Sales and purchase of feed for commercial feeding of livestock or poultry, and all sales and purchases of commercial seeds shall be exempt from taxation hereunder. 
(12)  Sale of all cigarettes. 
(13)  Sales of newspapers as defined by Section 24-70-102, C.R.S., and including those publications considered by the general public to be newspapers, including every newspaper printed and published daily or daily except Sundays and legal holidays, or which shall be printed on each of any five (5) days in every week excepting legal holidays and including or excluding Sundays which shall be considered and held to be a daily newspaper; every newspaper printed and published at regular intervals three (3) times each week shall be considered and held to be a tri-weekly newspaper; every newspaper printed and published at regular intervals twice weekly shall be considered and held to be a semi-weekly newspaper, and every newspaper printed and published at regular intervals once each week shall be considered and held to be a weekly newspaper. 
(14)  Sales of tangible personal property to a public utility doing business both within and without the city, for use in its said business operations outside of the city, even though delivery is made within the city. 
(15)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the following is exempt from the city's sales tax: The sale of construction and building materials, as the term is used in Section 29-2-109, C.R.S., if such materials are picked up by the purchaser and if the purchaser of such materials presents to the retailer a building permit or other documentation acceptable to the city evidencing that a local use tax has been paid or is required to be paid. 
(16)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 2000, the city's sales tax shall not apply to the sale of tangible personal property at retail or the furnishing of services if the transaction was previously subjected to a sales or use tax lawfully imposed on the purchaser or user by another statutory or home rule municipality equal to or in excess of three and one-half (3.50) percent. A credit shall be granted against the city's sales tax with respect to such transaction equal in amount to the lawfully imposed local sales or use tax previously paid by the purchaser or user to the previous statutory or home rule municipality. The amount of the credit shall not exceed three and one-half (3.50) percent. 
(17)  All sales of food purchased with food stamps. For the purposes of this subsection (17), "food" shall have the same meaning as provided in 7 U.S.C., Section 2012(g), as such section exists on October 1st, 1987, or is thereafter amended; except that "food" does not include carbonated water marketed in containers; chewing gum; seeds and plants to grow food; prepared salads and salad bars; cold sandwiches; deli trays; and food or drink vended by or through machines on behalf of a vendor. 
(18)  All sales of food purchased with funds provided by the Special Supplemental Food Program for women, infants and children as provided for in 42 U.S.C., Section 1786. For the purposes of this subsection (18), "food" shall have the same meaning as provided in 42 U.S.C., Section 1786, as such section exists on October 1, 1987, or is thereafter amended. 
(19)  Carrier access services. 
(20)  Private communications services. 
(21)  WATS/800 service. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 11, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, §§ 22-24, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 1987-15, § 1, 8-4-87; Ord. No. 1988-26, § 1, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 1990-29, § 5, 116-90; Ord. No. 1992-43, § 4, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 4, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 110-123. - Retailer responsible for payment. 
    Every retailer (also herein called "vendor") shall, irrespective of the provisions of sections 110-126 and 110-127, be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equivalent to three and one-half (3.50) percent of all sales made by him of commodities or services specified in section 110-121, and shall before the twentieth day of each month make a return to the city treasurer for the preceding calendar month, and remit an amount equivalent to three and one-half (3.50) percent of such sales to said city treasurer, less two and one-half (2.50) percent of such tax to cover the vendor's expense in the collection and remittance of said tax. The two and one-half (2.50) percent shall be known as the "vendors fee". The maximum vendors fee that may be deducted from the vendor's sales and use tax return shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per return. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 6-15-76; Ord. No. 903, § 1, 2-3-81; Ord. No. 1988-26, § 2, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 1992-43, § 5, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 5, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 2005-21, § 1, 7-5-05) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 39-26-105. 
Sec. 110-124. - Return; content, form, etc. 
    Returns of the taxpayer or his duly authorized agent under this article shall contain such information and be made in such manner and upon such forms as the city treasurer may prescribe, and said city treasurer may extend the time for making returns and paying the taxes due under such reasonable rules and regulations as he may prescribe, but no such extension shall be for a greater period that is provided in section 110-130. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 12, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-125. - Exemption; burden of proof. 
    The burden of proof that any retailer is exempt from collecting a tax upon any goods sold and paying same to the city treasurer, or from making such returns shall be on the retailer or vendor under such reasonable requirement of proof as the city treasurer may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 12, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-126. - Schedule. 
    There are hereby imposed upon all sales of commodities and services specified in section 110-121 taxes in accordance with the schedule attached hereto as Exhibit A. The schedule shall not be reprinted in this Code; rather, the finance director is hereby directed to provide copies of the schedule to all sales and use tax licensees within the city, and any other person requesting a copy of the schedule. 
(Ord. No. 464, § 2, 11-4-69; Ord. No. 1988-26, § 3, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 1994-18, § 1, 7-5-94) 
State Law reference- Schedule of state sales tax, C. R. S. § 39-26-106. 
Sec. 110-127. - Procedure by retailers. 
    Retailers shall add the tax imposed by this article, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sale price or charge, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item, and when added such tax shall constitute or be a part of such price or charge and shall be a debt from the consumer or user to the retailer until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 13, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-128. - Rules. 
    To provide uniform methods of adding the tax imposed under this article, or the average equivalent thereof, to the selling price, it shall be the duty of the city treasurer to formulate and promulgate, after hearing, appropriate rules and regulations to effectuate the purpose of this article. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 14, 4-18-67) 
State Law reference- State rules and regulations, C. R. S. § 39-26-107. 
Sec. 110-129. - Tax cannot be absorbed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any retailer to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof imposed by this article will be assumed or absorbed by the retailer, or that it will not be added to the selling price of the property sold or, if added, that it or any part thereof will be refunded. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to the penalties herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 15, 4-18-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 39-26-108. 
Sec. 110-130. - Accounting basis for remittance. 
    If the accounting methods regularly employed by the vendor in the transaction of his business, or other conditions, are such that reports of sale made on a calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the city treasurer may, upon request of the vendor, accept reports at such intervals as will, in his opinion, better suit the convenience of the taxpayer, and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 16, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-131. - Consolidation of returns. 
    A retailer doing business in two (2) or more places or locations taxable under this article, may file one (1) return covering all such business activities in the city. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 17, 4-18-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 39-26-110. 
Sec. 110-132. - Credit sales, etc. 
    In case of a sale upon credit, a contract for sale wherein it is provided that the price shall be paid in installments and title does not pass until a future date, a chattel mortgage or a conditional sale, there shall be paid upon each payment, upon the account of purchase price, that portion of the total tax which the amount paid bears to the total purchase price. The city treasurer may authorize a retailer doing business wholly or partly on a credit basis to make returns and pay taxes on that basis until further order of the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 18, 4-18-67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 39-26-111. 
Sec. 110-133. - Excess collections; failure to remit collections. 
    If any vendor shall, during any reporting period under this article, collect as a tax an amount in excess of three and one-half (3.50) percent of his total taxable sales, he shall remit to the city the full net amount of the tax herein imposed and also such excess. The retention by the retailer or vendor of any excess tax collections over three and one-half (3.50) percent of the total taxable sales of such retailer or vendor, or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the city finance director the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this article, is hereby declared to be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 19, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 25, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 1988-26, § 4, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 1992-43, § 6, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 6, 8-17-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 39-26-112. 
DIVISION 3.1. - SPECIAL MARIJUANA SALES TAX 

Sec. 110-134. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The retail marijuana tax imposed pursuant to this division shall be administered and enforced in accordance with the provisions of divisions 1, 2, and 3, of this article, and in a manner consistent with the administration and enforcement of other city taxes, including, without limitation, any penalties for failure to make any return or to collect or pay any tax; except that, in the event of a conflict between the provisions of this division and the provisions of divisions 1, 2, or 3 of this article, the provisions of this division shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 110-135. - Retail marijuana sales tax. 
(a)  In addition to any other taxes imposed pursuant to this article there is imposed upon all sales of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products a tax at the rate of five (5) percent of the amount of the sale, to be computed in accordance with schedules or forms prescribed by the city treasurer. 
(b)  The maximum tax rate that may be imposed pursuant to this section is ten (10) percent. The city council may, by ordinance: 
(1)  Establish another tax rate to be imposed pursuant to this division that is equal to or less than the maximum ten (10) percent tax rate provided in this section; or 
(2)  After establishing a tax rate that is lower than ten (10) percent, increase the tax rate to be imposed pursuant to this section; except that, in no event shall the city increase the tax rate above ten (10) percent of the sale of retail marijuana or retail marijuana products. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax on the sale of marijuana or marijuana products to any person by a medical marijuana center licensed by the Colorado Department of Revenue to sell medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, article 43.3 of title 12, C.R.S. To the extent any retail marijuana store exists at the same location and under common ownership with a licensed medical marijuana center, the retailer shall strictly segregate and account for sales of retail marijuana distinct from medical marijuana in accordance with all applicable state and city laws and regulations governing collocation of retail marijuana stores and medical marijuana centers. 
(d)  The city treasurer may require retail marijuana stores to file tax returns and remit payments due pursuant to this division electronically. The city treasurer shall promulgate rules governing electronic payment and filing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 110-136. - Revenue and spending limitations. 
    Notwithstanding any limitations on revenue, spending, or appropriations contained in Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution or any other provision of law, any revenues generated by the retail marijuana sales tax imposed pursuant to this division, as approved by the voters at the municipal election on November 4, 2014, may be collected and spent as a voter-approved revenue change and shall not require further voter approval to modify the tax rate as provided for in this division, or to collect and spend any revenue derived from a modified tax rate. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 1-20-15) 
Secs. 110-137-110-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Use of tax increase, § 110-39.1. 

Sec. 110-146. - Levy, collection, schedule. 
    There is hereby levied and there shall be collected from every person, firm or corporation in the city a tax or excise for the privilege of storing, using or consuming in this city any articles of tangible personal property purchased at retail from sources outside of the corporate limits of Lafayette, subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived [February 1, 1989]. Such tax shall be payable to and shall be collected by the city treasurer in accordance with the schedule attached hereto as Exhibit A. The schedule shall not be reprinted in this Code; rather, the finance director is hereby directed to provide copies of the schedule to all sales and use tax licensees within the city, and any other person requesting a copy of the schedule. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 20, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 472, § 1, 5-5-70; Ord. No. 1988-26, § 5, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 1994-18, § 2, 7-5-94) 
State Law reference- Amount of state use tax, C. R. S. § 39-26-202. 
Sec. 110-147. - Exempt items. 
    The tax or excise imposed in this article on the storage, consumption and use of tangible personal property the sale of which is subject to the city retail sales tax as provided herein shall not apply: 
(1)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property the sale of which is subject to the city retail sales tax as provided herein. 
(2)  To the storage, use or consumption of any tangible personal property purchased for resale in this city, either in its original form or as an ingredient of a manufactured or compounded product, in the regular course of business. 
(3)  To the storage, use or consumption of motor fuel upon which there has accrued or has been paid the motor fuel tax prescribed by the Colorado Motor Fuel Tax Law of 1933. 
(4)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property brought into this state by a nonresident thereof for his own storage, use or consumption while temporarily within this state. 
(5)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property of the United States government or the state or its institutions or its political subdivisions in their governmental capacities only; or by religious or charitable corporations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions. 
(6)  To the storage, use or consumption of tangible personal property by a person engaged in the business of manufacturing or compounding for sale, profit or use, any article, substance or commodity, which tangible personal property enters into the processing of or becomes an ingredient or component part of the product or service which is manufactured, compounded or furnished and the container, label or the furnished shipping case thereof. 
(7)  To the storage, use or consumption of electricity, coal, coke, fuel oil or gas for use in processing, manufacturing, mining, refining, irrigation, telegraph, telephone and radio communication, street and railroad transportation services and all industrial uses, except that electricity, gas, coal, fuel oil or coke used for lighting or space heating in these operations shall not be exempt. 
(8)  To the storage and use of cattle, sheep, lambs, swine and goats, within this city; or to the storage and use within this city of mares and stallions kept, held and used for breeding purposes only. 
(9)  Tangible personal property purchased from a nonresident vendor by a resident common carrier, resident public utility or resident construction company, which tangible personal property is stored in this city but not used or consumed in this city. 
(10)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's use tax shall riot apply to the storage of construction and building materials. 
(11)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 2000, the city's use tax shall not apply to the storage, use or consumption of any article of tangible personal property the sale or use of which has already been subjected to a sales or use tax of another statutory or home rule municipality legally imposed on the purchaser or user equal to or in excess of three and one-half (3.50) percent. A credit shall be granted against the city's use tax with respect to the person's storage, use or consumption in the city of tangible personal property, the amount of the credit to be equal to the tax paid by him by reason of the imposition of a sales or use tax of the previous statutory or home rule municipality on his purchase or use of the property. The amount of the credit shall not exceed three and one-half (3.50) percent. 
(12)  For transactions consummated on or after January 1, 1986, the city's use tax shall not be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of tangible personal property within the city which occurs more than three (3) years after the most recent sale of the property if, within the three (3) years following such sale, the property has been significantly used within the state for the principal purpose for which it was purchased. 
(13)  The sale and lease of machinery and machine tools used in manufacturing, processing, compounding, producing, mining or quarrying are exempt from use tax subject to the conditions contained herein: Purchases of machinery or machine tools that do not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per item are not exempt. The one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) limit applies to each specific item purchased and not to aggregate purchases. For a lease to be exempt, the total value of the lease must exceed the one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) limit. The exemption does not apply to office equipment or other equipment not used in the manufacturing process. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 20, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, §§ 26-28, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 1987-01, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 1988-26, § 6,12-6-88; Ord. No. 1992-43, § 7, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 7, 8-17-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, C. R. S. § 29-2-109; motor fuel and special fuel tax, C. R. S. § 39-27-101 et seq. 
Sec. 110-148. - Proration as applied to certain construction equipment. 
(a)  Construction equipment which is located within the boundaries of the city for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days shall be subjected to the full applicable use tax of the city. 
(b)  With respect to transactions consummated on or after January 1, 2000, construction equipment located within the boundaries of the city for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less shall be subjected to the city's use tax in an amount which does not exceed the amount calculated as follows: The purchase price of the equipment shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is one (1) and the denominator of which is twelve (12), and the result shall be multiplied by three and one-half (3.50) percent. 
(c)  Where the provisions of subsection (b) are utilized, the credit provisions of section 110-147(11) shall apply at such time as the aggregate sales and use taxes legally imposed by and paid to another statutory or home rule municipality on any such equipment equal two (2) percent. 
(d)  In order to avail himself of the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the taxpayer shall comply with the following procedure: 
(1)  Prior to or on the date the equipment is located within the boundaries of the city, the taxpayer shall file with the city finance director an equipment declaration on a form provided by the city. Such declaration shall state the dates on which the taxpayer anticipates the equipment will be located within and removed from the boundaries of the city, shall include a description of each such anticipated piece of equipment, shall state the actual or anticipated purchase price of each such anticipated piece of equipment, and shall include such other information as reasonably deemed necessary by the city. 
(2)  The taxpayer shall file with the city an amended equipment declaration reflecting any changes in the information contained in any previous equipment declaration no less than once every ninety (90) days after the equipment is brought into the boundaries of the city or, for equipment which is brought into the boundaries of the city for a project less than ninety (90) days' duration, no later than ten (10) days after substantial completion of the project. 
(3)  The taxpayer need not report on any equipment declaration any equipment for which the purchase price was under twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
(e)  If the equipment declaration is given as provided in subsection (d) above, then as to any item of construction equipment for which the customary purchase price is under twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) which was brought into the boundaries of the city temporarily for use on a construction project, it shall be presumed that the item was purchased in a jurisdiction having a local sales or use tax as high as three and one-half (3.50) percent and that such local sales or use tax was previously paid. In such case, the burden of proof in any proceeding before the city, the executive director of the department of revenue, or the district court, shall be on the city to prove such local sales or use tax was not paid. 
(f)  If the taxpayer fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section, the taxpayer may not avail himself of the provisions of subsection (b) and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (a). However, substantial compliance with the provisions of subsection (d) shall allow the taxpayer to avail himself of the provisions of subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 422, § 21, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 29, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 1988-26, § 7, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 1992-43, § 8, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 8, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 110-149. - Motor vehicles and trailers. 
    Any resident person, who shall purchase any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, whether new or used, outside the corporate limits of the city for use within this city, shall immediately, and prior to registering and obtaining a license therefor, make a return showing such transaction to the city treasurer and thereupon pay to him the use tax applicable thereto as provided in section 110-146 of this article, and failure so to do shall constitute a violation of this article. All of such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers, purchased outside the corporate limits of Lafayette for use in this city, shall be registered with the county clerk and recorder of the county, and any person who shall register any such motor vehicle or semitrailer in any other county in this state or elsewhere shall be deemed in violation of this article; and any such registration shall constitute prima facie evidence of an attempt to evade payment of such tax. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 21, 4-18-67) 
Sec. 110-150. - Building materials and supplies. 
(a)  Any person who shall build, construct or improve any building, dwelling or other structure or improvement to realty within the city, which building, constructing or improving requires the issuance of a City of Lafayette building permit, and who shall purchase the necessary lumber, fixtures, materials or any other supplies, shall keep and preserve all invoices and statements showing such purchases and shall, on or before the twentieth day of each succeeding month following the start of such construction or improvement, file a return with the city treasurer for the lumber, fixtures, materials and other supplies purchased the previous month and shall thereupon pay to the city treasurer the full amount of the use tax due thereon for the preceding month. In the alternative, any person may, at the time a building permit is issued, pay to the city as use tax a sum equal to three and one-half (3.50) percent of sixty (60) percent of the value of the construction or improvement for which the building permit is issued as determined by the building inspection department. If the use tax collected with the issuance of the building permit exceeds the tax due, the person so paying the tax may request and shall receive a refund of the excess use tax paid. 
(b)  The city, as authorized pursuant to this article, reserves the right to determine through an audit the actual amount of use tax due. The full amount of any use tax due and not paid, together with penalties and interest as provided in this article, shall constitute a lien upon the real property benefited by the construction or improvement and the city treasurer is hereby authorized to file a notice of such lien with the Boulder County Clerk and Recorder's Office. 
(c)  The time of payment of use taxes set forth within this section may be deferred pursuant to Article XIV of Chapter 30 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 1, 10-3-78; Ord. No. 1985-38, § 30, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 1988-26, § 8, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 1990-17, § 22, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 1992-43, § 9, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 9, 8-17-99) 
Sec. 110-151. - Filing of return; payment of tax. 
    Every person who shall become subject to the payment of an excise tax for the privilege of storing, using or consuming within the city any articles of tangible personal property purchased at retail from sources outside the corporate limits of the city shall, unless a different time is otherwise specifically provided herein, promptly file a return with the city treasurer and pay to him the full amount of the tax due thereon; or, if the payment of such tax is deferred pursuant to Article XIV of Chapter 30 of this Code, said person shall file such return as provided herein; however, said person shall pay such tax at the time specified pursuant to Article XIV of Chapter 30 of this Code; and any undue delay, or effort to evade the payment of such tax, shall subject such person to such penalties and punishment as provided for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 21, 4-18-67; Ord. No. 1990-17, § 20, 8-21-90) 
Secs. 110-152-110-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RETAIL MARIJUANA EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 110-160. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The retail marijuana excise tax imposed pursuant to this division shall be administered and enforced in accordance with the provisions of divisions 1, 2, and 3 of this article III, and in a manner consistent with the administration and enforcement of other city taxes, including, without limitation, any penalties for failure to make any return or to collect or pay any tax; except that, in the event of a conflict between the provisions of this division and the provisions of divisions 1, 2, or 3 of this article III, the provisions of this division shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 3, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 110-161. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  In addition to any other taxes imposed by this article, there is levied, and shall be collected, an excise tax on the first sale or transfer of unprocessed retail marijuana by a retail marijuana cultivation facility, at a rate of five (5) percent of the average market rate of the unprocessed retail marijuana. The tax shall be imposed at the time when the retail marijuana cultivation facility first sells or transfers unprocessed retail marijuana from the retail marijuana cultivation facility to a retail marijuana product manufacturing facility, a retail marijuana store, or another retail marijuana cultivation facility. 
(b)  The maximum tax rate that may be imposed pursuant to this section is ten (10) percent. The city council may, by ordinance: 
(1)  Establish another tax rate to be imposed pursuant to this division that is equal to or less than the maximum ten (10) percent tax rate provided in this section; or 
(2)  After establishing a tax rate that is lower than ten (10) percent, increase the tax rate to be imposed pursuant to this section; except that, in no event shall the city increase the tax rate above ten (10) percent of the sale of retail marijuana or retail marijuana products. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax on the sale of marijuana or marijuana products to any person by a medical marijuana center licensed by the Colorado Department of Revenue to sell medical marijuana and medical marijuana-infused products pursuant to the Colorado Medical Marijuana Code, article 43.3 of title 12, C.R.S. To the extent any retail marijuana store exists at the same location and under common ownership with a licensed medical marijuana center, the retailer shall strictly segregate and account for sales of retail marijuana distinct from medical marijuana in accordance with all applicable state and city laws and regulations governing collocation of retail marijuana stores and medical marijuana centers. 
(d)  The city treasurer may require retail marijuana stores to file tax returns and remit payments due pursuant to this division electronically. The city treasurer shall promulgate rules governing electronic payment and filing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 3, 1-20-15) 
Sec. 110-162. - Books and records to be preserved. 
(a)  Every retail marijuana cultivation facility shall keep at each licensed place of business complete and accurate electronic records for that place of business, including itemized invoices of all retail marijuana grown, held, shipped, or otherwise transported or sold to retail marijuana product manufacturing facilities, retail marijuana stores, or other retail marijuana cultivation facilities in the state. 
(b)  The records required by subsection (a) of this section shall include the names and addresses of retail marijuana product manufacturing facilities, retail marijuana stores, or other retail marijuana cultivation facilities to which unprocessed retail marijuana is sold or transferred, the inventory of all unprocessed retail marijuana on hand, and other pertinent papers and documents relating to the sale or transfer of unprocessed retail marijuana. 
(c)  A retail marijuana cultivation facility shall keep itemized invoices of all unprocessed marijuana transferred to retail marijuana stores owned or controlled by the owners of the retail marijuana cultivation facility. 
(d)  Every retail marijuana store shall keep at its place of business complete and accurate records to show that all retail marijuana received by the retail marijuana store was purchased from a retail marijuana cultivation facility. The retail marijuana store shall provide a copy of such records to the department if so requested. The city treasurer may establish the acceptable form of such records. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 3, 1-20-15( 
Sec. 110-163. - Revenue and spending limitations. 
    Notwithstanding any limitations on revenue, spending, or appropriations contained in Section 20 of Article X of the Colorado Constitution or any other provision of law, any revenues generated by the retail marijuana sales tax imposed pursuant to this division 5, as approved by the voters at the municipal election on November 4, 2014, may be collected and spent as a voter-approved revenue change and shall not require further voter approval to modify the tax rate as provided for in this division or to collect and spend any revenue derived from a modified tax rate. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 3, 1-20-15) 
Secs. 110-164, 110-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOTOR VEHICLE REGISTRATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1987-12, § 1, adopted July 21, 1987, provided for the inclusion of provisions designated as Art. IV, § 110-166, to read as herein set out. Formerly, Art. IV had contained §§ 110-166-110-170, which established a property tax refund for elderly taxpayers as derived from Ord. No. 552, §§ 1-4, adopted Feb. 6, 1972; and Ord. No. 936, § 1, adopted Dec. 14, 1981. Such provisions were repealed by Ord. No. 977, § 1, adopted April 19, 1983. 

Sec. 110-166. - Incorrect registration of a motor vehicle. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Penalty assessment means a written notice of the city treasurer's determination that a violation of C.R.S. Section 426-137(2) has occurred and assessment and demand for payment of the civil penalty provided for in subsection (3) of section 110-166. 
(2)  Notice of deficiency means the notice issued by the city treasurer pursuant to section 110-69 of this chapter for failure, neglect or refusal to pay any sales or use tax or any penalty or interest thereon. 
(b)  It is unlawful to register a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of C.R.S. Section 42-6-137(2). 
(c)  Any person who causes a motor vehicle to be registered in violation of the provisions of C.R.S. Section 42-6-137(2) shall be assessed a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) pursuant to the authority granted in C.R.S. Section 42-6-137(4). The procedure for the assessment of such civil penalty shall be as follows: 
(1)  When the city treasurer determines on such information as is available that a person has caused a motor vehicle to be registered in violation of the provisions of C.R.S. Section 42-6-137(2), the city treasurer shall provide to such person a penalty assessment. If the city treasurer also has determined pursuant to section 110-69 that sales or use taxes are due to the city on the purchase of such motor vehicle, such penalty assessment may be included in a notice of deficiency. 
(2)  Such person shall pay such penalty assessment within the same time period provided pursuant to section 110-69 for payment of any amount due pursuant to a notice of deficiency, unless such person requests a hearing in the manner provided in subsection (3) of this paragraph (c). 
(3)  If such person desires to protest such penalty assessment, such person shall request in writing a hearing from the city treasurer pursuant to section 110-75 within the same period as provided pursuant to section 110-75 for requesting a hearing on a notice of deficiency. The request for hearing shall set forth the facts which show that a violation of C.R.S. Section 42-6-137(2) did not occur. The city treasurer shall issue a written decision affirming or withdrawing such penalty assessment within the same time period and in the same manner as provided pursuant to section 110-76 after a hearing on a notice of deficiency. If the decision affirms the penalty assessment, such person shall pay such civil penalty within thirty (30) days of the date of the mailing of the decision. 
(4)  Such person may seek judicial review of the finance director's decision before the municipal court in accordance with its judicial appeals procedure. 
(5)  The city treasurer may enforce collection of such penalty assessment in the same manner as provided pursuant to section 110-72 for the collection of unpaid sales or use taxes, penalties or interest. 
(Ord. No. 1987-12, § 1, 7-21-87; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 12, 11-16-04) 
Secs. 110-167-110-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LODGING TAX 

Sec. 110-200. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    City administrator shall mean the city administrator of the city of Lafayette, or his/her authorized designee. 
    City shall mean the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    District court shall mean the 20th Judicial District Court of Colorado. 
    Finance director or city treasurer shall mean the finance director of the City of Lafayette, also known as the city treasurer, or his/her authorized designee. 
    Lodging customer shall mean any person who, through a taxable lodging transaction, acquires lodging services from a lodging provider. 
    Lodging price shall mean the gross price paid, exclusive of other taxes paid, or value given by the customer for the provision of lodging services. 
    Lodging provider shall mean any person furnishing lodging services or such provider's authorized agent. 
    Lodging services means the providing of rooms or accommodations, except meeting rooms, by any person, partnership, association, corporation, estate, representative capacity or any other combination of individuals by whatever name known to a person, who for consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room, except a meeting room, in a hotel, inn, bed and breakfast residence, apartment, motel, lodging house, motor hotel, guesthouse, guest ranch, trailer coach, mobile home, automobile camp or trailer court and park, or similar establishment, for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
    Lodging tax shall mean an excise tax payable by the purchaser of lodging services or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a lodging provider during the period for which such person is required to report the collections of lodging tax as herein specified. 
    Lodging transaction shall mean the providing of lodging services. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by the court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit, and includes the plural as well as the singular number. 
    State shall mean the State of Colorado. 
    Taxpayer shall mean any person obligated to account to the finance director for taxes collected or to be collected under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-201. - Tax levied. 
    There is levied and shall be paid and collected an excise tax of two (2) percent on the lodging price paid for the leasing, rental or providing of any lodging services located in the city. This tax shall be in addition to the sales and use tax as established pursuant to chapter 110 of this Code. It shall be a violation of this Code for any lodging customer of a hotel room, motel room or other accommodation located in the city to fail to pay, or for any lodging provider of such accommodation to fail to collect, the tax levied pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-202. - Transactions exempt from tax. 
    The following lodging transactions are exempt from taxation under this article: 
(a)  All lodging services provided to the United States Government; to the state, its departments or institutions and political subdivisions in their governmental capacities only, including the city and any department thereof; 
(b)  All lodging services provided to religious and charitable organizations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions and activities; 
(c)  All lodging services provided to persons that the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States or the state; 
(d)  All lodging services provided to any person for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days; 
(e)  Any lodging transaction, if the price of such lodging services is paid in advance on a weekly basis and does not exceed the total sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per week. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-203. - Rules and regulations; administration; enforcement; collection and refund; confidentiality; deficiency; delinquencies; penalties and interest; assessment; lien; recovery; notice; hearings; subpoenas; oaths, etc. 
(a)  Formulation and promulgation of rules and regulations. The administration of this article is hereby vested in the finance director, who shall prescribe forms and reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with this article for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of taxes imposed hereunder and for the proper administration and enforcement hereof. 
(b)  Application of provisions of division 1 of article III of chapter 110 to this article V. The finance director is empowered to enforce this article. The provisions of division 1 of article III of chapter 110 of this Code shall govern and apply to the administration, enforcement procedures, collection and refund procedures, confidentiality, deficiency, delinquencies, penalties, interest, assessments, liens, recovery, notice, and hearings under this article. To the extent that any provisions of this article V conflict with the terms and provisions of division 1 of article III of chapter 110 of this Code, the provisions of this article V shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-204. - License required to provide lodging services. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of providing lodging services without first having obtained a Lafayette sales and use tax license pursuant to and subject to the provisions of division 2 of article III of this chapter 110. Such license shall be granted, and issued by the finance director, and upon an application form provided by the finance director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-205. - Lodging provider responsible for payment of tax. 
    Every lodging provider shall be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equal to two (2) percent of all proceeds derived from the providing of lodging services as established pursuant to section 110-201, and shall before the twentieth day of each month make a return to the city finance director for the preceding calendar month, and remit an amount equivalent to two (2) percent of such proceeds to said city finance director, less two and one-half (2.50) percent of such tax to cover the lodging provider's expense in the collection and remittance of said tax. The two and one-half (2.50) percent shall be known as the "vendors fee". The maximum vendors fee that may be deducted from the lodging provider's lodging tax return shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per return. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-206. - Procedure by lodging providers. 
    The lodging provider shall add the tax imposed to the lodging price, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item and, when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price and shall be a debt from the lodging customer to the lodging provider until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-207. - Return; content, form, etc. 
    The returns filed by the lodging provider shall contain such information and be made in such manner upon any such forms as the city finance director may prescribe. The finance director may, upon request of the lodging provider, extend the time for making returns and paying the taxes due under such reasonable rules and regulations as the finance director may prescribe, but no such extension shall be for a greater period than is provided in section 110-130 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-208. - Exemption; burden of proof. 
    The burden of proving any exemption from collection of the lodging tax and paying the same to the city finance director or from making such returns shall be on the lodging provider under such reasonable requirements of proof as the city finance director may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-209. - Absorbing or refunding of tax by lodging provider prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any lodging provider to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part of the tax imposed by this chapter will be assumed or absorbed by the lodging provider or that it will not be added to the lodging price of the accommodations provided or, if added, that it or any part will be refunded. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-210. - Remittance of tax on other than monthly basis. 
    If the accounting method regularly employed by the lodging provider in the transaction of business, or other conditions are such that reports of lodging transactions made on a calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the finance director may, upon request of the lodging provider, accept reports at such intervals as will, in the finance director's opinion, better suit the convenience of the lodging provider and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-211. - Consolidation of returns. 
    A lodging provider doing business in two (2) or more places or locations taxable under this chapter may file one (1) return covering all such business activities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-212. - Bad debts. 
    Lodging taxes paid on the amount of lodging price which are represented by accounts which are found to be worthless and are actually and properly charged off as bad debts for the purpose of the income tax imposed by the laws of the state may be credited upon a subsequent payment of the tax as provided in this chapter, but if any such accounts are thereafter collected by the lodging provider, a tax shall be paid upon the amounts so collected. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-213. - Limitation of actions. 
(a)  No lodging tax or interest thereon or penalties with respect thereto, shall be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant issued, or suit for collection be instituted, nor any other action to collect the same be commenced more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which case such liens shall continue only for one (1) year after the filing of notice thereof. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the tax together with interest and penalties thereof, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may begin at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the city finance director may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(b)  In the case of failure to file a return, the lodging tax may be assessed and collected at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Sec. 110-214. - Excess collections; failure to remit collections. 
    If any lodging provider shall, during any reporting period under this article, collect as a tax an amount in excess of two (2) percent of his total taxable lodging transactions, the lodging provider shall remit to the city the full net amount of the tax herein imposed and also such excess. The retention by the lodging provider of any excess tax collections over two (2) percent of the total taxable lodging transactions of such lodging provider, or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the city finance director the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this article, is hereby declared to be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 2-2-10) 
Secs. 110-115-110-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORAGE AND STORAGE SERVICE TAX 

Sec. 110-220. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    City administrator shall mean the city administrator of the City of Lafayette, or his/her authorized designee. 
    Finance director or city treasurer shall mean the finance director of the City of Lafayette, also known as the city treasurer, or his/her authorized designee. 
    City shall mean the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
    District court shall mean the 20th Judicial District Court of Colorado. 
    Person shall mean any individual, association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, estate or trust, receiver, trustee, assignee, lessee or any person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by the court or otherwise, or any group or combination acting as a unit, by whatever name known, and includes the plural as well as the singular number. 
    Storage services shall mean the providing, by any person, for consideration, under any concession, permit, right of access, license to use, other agreement, or otherwise, of the rental, use, possession, or the right to rent, use or possess any indoor or outdoor space for the purpose of storage or storing of tangible personal property. 
    Storage or storing shall mean any possession, keeping, or retention of, or the exercise of dominion or control over, tangible personal property. 
    Storage customer shall mean any person who, through a taxable storage transaction, acquires storage services from a storage provider. 
    Storage price shall mean the gross price paid, exclusive of other taxes paid, or value given by the customer for the provision of storage services. 
    Storage provider shall mean any person furnishing storage services or such provider's authorized agent. 
    Storage tax shall mean an excise tax payable by the purchaser of storage services or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a storage provider during the period for which such person is required to report the collections of storage tax as herein specified. 
    Storage transaction shall mean the providing of storage services. 
    State shall mean the State of Colorado. 
    Tangible personal property shall mean corporeal personal property. 
    Taxpayer shall mean any person obligated to account to the finance director for taxes collected or to be collected under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-221. - Tax levied. 
    There is levied and shall be paid and collected an excise tax of three and one-half (31/2) percent on the price paid for the provision of storage services located in the city. This tax shall be in addition to the sales and use tax as established pursuant to chapter 110 of this Code. It shall be a violation of this Code for any storage customer of a storage provider located in the city to fail to pay, or for any storage provider to fail to collect, the tax levied pursuant to this section. The proceeds of this tax shall be used to fund programs of the city that promote and advance cultural arts, historic preservation and local history museums. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-222. - Transactions exempt from tax. 
    The following storage transactions are exempt from taxation under this article: 
(a)  All storage services provided to the United States Government; to the state, its departments or institutions and political subdivisions, in their governmental capacities only, including the city and any department thereof; 
(b)  All storage services provided to religious and charitable organizations in the conduct of their regular religious or charitable functions and activities; 
(c)  All storage services provided to persons that the city is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States or the state; 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-223. - Rules and regulations; administration; enforcement; collection and refund; confidentiality; deficiency; delinquencies; penalties and interest; assessment; lien; recovery; notice; hearings; subpoenas; oaths, etc. 
(a)  Formulation and promulgation of rules and regulations. The administration of this article is hereby vested in the finance director, who shall prescribe forms and reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with this article for the making of returns, for the ascertainment, assessment and collection of taxes imposed hereunder and for the proper administration and enforcement hereof. 
(b)  Application of provisions of division 1 of article III of chapter 110 to this article VI. The finance director is empowered to enforce this article. The provisions of division 1 of article III of chapter 110 of this Code shall govern and apply to the administration, enforcement procedures, collection and refund procedures, confidentiality, deficiency, delinquencies, penalties, interest, assessments, liens, recovery, notice, and hearings under this article. To the extent that any provisions of this article VI conflict with the terms and provisions of division 1 of article III of chapter 110 of this Code, the provisions of this article VI shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-224. - License required to provide storage services. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of providing storage services without first having obtained a Lafayette sales and use tax license pursuant to and subject to the provisions of division 2 of article III of this chapter 110. Such license shall be granted, and issued by the finance director, and upon an application form provided by the finance director. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-225. - Storage provider responsible for payment of tax. 
    Every storage provider shall be liable and responsible for the payment of an amount equal to three and one-half (31/2) percent of all proceeds derived from the providing of storage services as established pursuant to section 110-221, and shall, before the twentieth day of each month, make a return to the city finance director for the preceding calendar month, and remit an amount equivalent to three and one-half (31/2) percent of such proceeds to said city finance director, less two and one-half (21/2) percent of such remitted tax to cover the storage provider's expense in the collection and remittance of said tax. The two and one-half (21/2) percent shall be known as the "vendor's fee." The maximum vendor's fee that may be deducted from the storage provider's storage tax return shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per return. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-226. - Procedure by storage providers. 
    The storage provider shall add the tax imposed to the storage price, showing such tax as a separate and distinct item and, when added, such tax shall constitute a part of such price and shall be a debt from the storage customer to the storage provider until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-227. - Return; content, form, etc. 
    The returns filed by the storage provider shall contain such information and be made in such manner upon any such forms as the city finance director may prescribe. The finance director may, upon request of the storage provider, extend the time for making returns and paying the taxes due under such reasonable rules and regulations as the finance director may prescribe, but no such extension shall be for a greater period than is provided in section 110-130 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-228. - Exemption; burden of proof. 
    The burden of proving any exemption from collection of the storage tax and paying the same to the city finance director or from making such returns shall be on the storage provider under such reasonable requirements of proof as the city finance director may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-229. - Absorbing or refunding of tax by storage provider prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any storage provider to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part of the tax imposed by this chapter will be assumed or absorbed by the storage provider or that it will not be added to the storage price of the storage service provided or, if added, that it or any part will be refunded. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-230. - Remittance of tax on other than monthly basis. 
    If the accounting method regularly employed by the storage provider in the transaction of business, or other conditions are such that reports of storage transactions made on a calendar month basis will impose unnecessary hardship, the finance director may, upon request of the storage provider, accept reports at such intervals as will, in the finance director's opinion, better suit the convenience of the storage provider and will not jeopardize the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-231. - Consolidation of returns. 
    A storage provider doing business in two (2) or more places or locations taxable under this chapter may file one (1) return covering all such business activities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-232. - Bad debts. 
    Storage taxes paid on the amounts of the storage price that are represented by accounts that are found to be worthless and are actually and properly charged off as bad debts for the purpose of the income tax imposed by the laws of the state may be credited upon a subsequent payment of the tax as provided in this chapter, but if any such accounts are thereafter collected by the storage provider, a tax shall be paid upon the amounts so collected. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-233. - Limitation of actions. 
(a)  No storage tax or interest thereon or penalties with respect thereto, shall be assessed, nor shall any notice of lien be filed, or distraint warrant issued, or suit for collection be instituted, nor any other action to collect the same be commenced more than three (3) years after the date on which the tax was or is payable; nor shall any lien continue after such period, except for taxes assessed before the expiration of such period, notice of lien with respect to which has been filed prior to the expiration of such period, in which case such liens shall continue only for one (1) year after the filing of notice thereof. In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade tax, the tax together with interest and penalties thereof, may be assessed, or proceedings for the collection of such taxes may begin at any time. Before the expiration of such period of limitation, the taxpayer and the city finance director may agree in writing to an extension thereof, and the period so agreed on may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing. 
(b)  In the case of failure to file a return, the storage tax may be assessed and collected at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Sec. 110-234. - Excess collections; failure to remit collections. 
    If any storage provider shall, during any reporting period under this article, collect as a tax an amount in excess of three and one-half (31/2) percent of his/her total taxable storage transactions, the storage provider shall remit to the city the full net amount of the tax herein imposed and also such excess. The retention by the storage provider of any excess tax collections over three and one-half (31/2) percent of the total taxable storage transactions of such storage provider, or the intentional failure to remit punctually to the city finance director the full amount required to be remitted by the provisions of this article, is hereby declared to be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-58, § 1, 12-5-17) 
Chapter 115 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ambulance service, Ch. 15; animals and fowl, Ch. 25; disaster emergency services, Ch. 35; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 45; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 105; house and building mover's license, § 30-131; traffic cases in municipal court, § 65-50 et seq. 
State Law reference- Vehicles and traffic, C. R. S. Title 42. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 115-1. - Title. 
    This chapter and the code hereby adopted shall be known and cited as the "Municipal Traffic Code of Lafayette, Colorado," and all references throughout this chapter to the said code or this chapter shall be construed to include the code adopted herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 770, § 2, 5-2-78) 
State Law reference- Ordinance codes adopted by reference, C. R. S. § 31-16-201 et seq. 
Sec. 115-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2010-18, adopted Aug. 17, 2010, repealed § 115-2, which pertained to penalties, and derived from Ord. No. 770, adopted May 2, 1978; Ord. No. 1988-16, adopted Aug. 16, 1988; Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994; and Ord. No. 1997-22, adopted Oct. 7, 1997. 
State Law reference- Adoption of penalty clauses by reference prohibited, C. R. S. § 31-16-204. 
Sec. 115-3. - Application generally. 
    This chapter shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk area, driveway, park and to every other public place or public parking area, either within or outside of the corporate limits of this city, the use of which this city has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. 
(Ord. No. 770, § 6, 5-2-78; Ord. No. 1997-22, § 2, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1, 11-3-04) 
Sec. 115-4. - Application in mobile home parks, etc.-Generally. 
    All provisions of the Model Traffic Code, including all regulations contained therein, shall apply to all highways, streets and/or roadways which are contained within privately maintained mobile home parks and/or other private areas approved by the council within the city limits of the city upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 770, § 6, 5-2-78) 
Sec. 115-5. - Same-Notice. 
    There shall be posted at each entrance to any mobile home park in the city a sign giving notice of such enforcement in the following language: 
" Notice. All state and city traffic regulations will be enforced by the Lafayette Police Department within this mobile home park." 
Sec. 115-6. - Same-Cost of sign. 
    The enforcement notice sign mentioned in this article shall be erected by and at the cost of production or manufacture of such signs and shall be placed by the owner of such mobile home park according to specifications provided by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 770, § 6, 5-2-78) 
Sec. 115-7. - Same-Traffic regulation signs. 
    Any and all traffic regulation signs as requested by the chief of police shall be posted within a participating mobile home park at the sole cost and expense to the owner of said mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 770, § 6, 5-2-78) 
Sec. 115-8. - Interpretation. 
    This chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to conform with the state's uniform system for the regulation of vehicles in traffic. Article and section headings of the adopted model traffic code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of the provisions of any article or section thereof. 
(Ord. No. 770, § 9, 5-2-78) 
Secs. 115-9-115-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MODEL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 2010-18, adopted Aug. 17, 2010, repealed Art. II, which derived from Ord. No. 2004-23, adopted Nov. 3, 2004; Ord. No. 2005-9, adopted March 1, 2005; Ord. No. 2005-20, adopted July 5, 2005; Ord. No. 2005-27, adopted Oct. 4, 2005; Ord. No. 2006-49, adopted Oct. 3, 2006; and Ord. No. 2007-51, adopted Nov. 27, 2007. Section 2 further enacted similar provisions designated as §§ 115-21-115-67. Inasmuch as §§ 115-50-115-67 already exist, to avoid duplicate numbers, §§ 115-50-115-67 have been redesignated as §§ 115-49.1-115-49.17, and the original designations have been retained in the history note to each section. 

Sec. 115-21. - Adoption. 
    The Model Traffic Code for Colorado, promulgated and published by the Colorado Department of Transportation, Safety and Traffic Engineering Branch, 4201 East Arkansas Avenue, EP 700, Denver, Colorado, 80222, including all appendices, but excluding in its entirety Part 18, Vehicles Abandoned on Public Property, is hereby adopted by reference as the Model Traffic Code for the City of Lafayette as if fully set out in this codification with, however, the amendments set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-22. - Scope and effect of code-Exceptions to provisions. 
    Section 103(2) and 103(2)(b) of the Model Traffic Code are repealed in their entirety and reenacted to provide: 
(2)  The provisions of this code relating to the operation of vehicles and the movement of pedestrians shall apply to every street, alley, sidewalk, driveway, park and to every other public way or public place or public parking area within or outside the corporate limits of the city, the use of which the city has jurisdiction and authority to regulate except: 
(b)  Sections 1401, 1402 and 1413 of this code pertaining to reckless driving, careless driving and eluding a police officer shall apply to all land, areas, and property (including private) within or outside the corporate limits of the city, the use of which the city has jurisdiction and the authority to regulate. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-23. - Section 103, Scope and effect of Model Traffic Code-Exceptions to provisions. 
    Section 103(3) and (4) of the Model Traffic Code are enacted to provide: 
(3)  All references in this code to "official sign(s)," "official signal(s)," "official traffic control device(s)," "official device(s)," or "official marking(s)," shall be construed to refer to any and all signs, signals, devices or markings that have been placed on or about roadways, highways and other public property within the city by authority of the city, or other proper governmental official or agency, whether or not the city or such other proper governmental official or agency exercised such authority by resolution or ordinance. It is the intent of this section that the "official" nature of any sign, signal, device or marking not be construed to be an element of any traffic offense or other provision or violation of this code. Any and all references in this code to acts of a municipality "by resolution," "by ordinance," or "by local ordinance," and any requirement within this code that a municipality act "by resolution," "by ordinance," or "by local ordinance," shall be repealed and to have been construed only to guide administrative action and not as an element of any traffic offense or violation of this code. 
(4)  All provisions in this code establishing offenses as a Class A or B traffic infraction or Class 1 or 2 misdemeanor offense, and establishing fines and other sentencing conditions in relation to such offenses, shall be repealed in their entirety, it being the intent that any violation of this code be subject to the city's general penalty provision as set forth in Section 1-10 of the Code of Ordinances of Lafayette. To the extent any notice or other procedures set forth in this code's Appendices conflict with the requirements or procedures set forth in the City's Home Rule Charter or the Code of Ordinances of Lafayette, the Charter and Code of Ordinances shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-24. - Section 104, Authority of police and fire department officials of the Model Traffic Code. 
    Section 104 of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all traffic regulations of the city and all of the State laws applicable to the city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department, or such special officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with State traffic laws and this code; provided that, in the event of fire or emergency, or to expedite traffic or protect pedestrians, officers of the department, and other special officers as are assigned by the chief of police, may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the state traffic laws or this code. 
(c)  Subject to the provisions of Section 45-31 of the Code of Ordinances of Lafayette, members of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire or other emergency, may direct traffic or assist the police in directing traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-25. - Section 106, Who may restrict right to use highways. 
    Section 106(4) of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
The use of certain streets and roadways by motor driven vehicles, trucks, or other commercial vehicles, bicycles and horse drawn vehicles or other non-motorized vehicles shall be restricted or prohibited when official signs giving notice thereof are erected thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-26. - Section 108, Public officers to obey provisions-Exceptions for emergency vehicles. 
    Section 108(2) of the Model Traffic Code is amended by inserting the phrase "or sworn police officers using police department bicycles while in the performance of an officer's duties" after the phrase, "the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle" in the section's first and second sentences. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-27. - Section 110, Provisions uniform throughout jurisdiction. 
    Section 110(4) of the Model Traffic Code is amended by deleting the phrase "City or Town Council or Board of County Commissioners" and replacing it with the phrase "the city." 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-28. - Section 114, Removal of traffic hazards. 
    Section 114(4) of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
If the city is not reimbursed within forty-five days after the property owner has been provided a demand for payment, the amount due shall become a lien against the property and certified by the city's finance director and recorded with the office of the Boulder County Treasurer. Such lien shall have priority over all other liens except general taxes. The Boulder County Treasurer shall collect and pay over to the city such charges in the same manner as the Treasurer is authorized to collect delinquent general property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-29. - Section 115, Traffic engineer. 
    Section 115 of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
(a)  The office of the traffic engineer is hereby established. The traffic engineer shall be the public works director or the director's authorized representative and shall exercise the power and duties provided in this code. The public works director shall be directly responsible to the city administrator for the performance of the duties and responsibilities of the traffic engineer. 
(1)  In the absence of such appointment or at such times as the traffic engineer may be absent from the municipality or unable to perform his/her duties, said duties shall be vested in the chief of police or other municipal employee as may be designated by the city administrator. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer or the official vested with the responsibility for traffic as provided herein to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of official traffic control devices, to conduct analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial or corrective measures, to conduct investigation of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this municipality, and to cooperate with other municipal offices in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out such additional powers and duties as are imposed by this code. 
(1)  By way of example, but not of limitation, the traffic engineer or the official vested with the office as provided herein is hereby empowered and authorized, consistent with the provisions of this code, to act as follows: 
(i)  Install, maintain, and remove traffic control devices; 
(ii)  Designate and mark medians and traffic islands; 
(iii)  Conduct speed limit surveys and investigations; 
(iv)  Designate maximum speed limits throughout the city and post said limits as provided in this code; 
(v)  Designate minimum speed limits as provided by this code; 
(vi)  Regulate speed and traffic movement by traffic signals and provide for the synchronization of such signals as provided by this code. 
(vii)  Designate one-way streets or roadways; 
(viii)  Designate through streets or roadways and control entrances thereto; 
(ix)  Designate stop or yield intersections and erect stop or yield signs thereto; 
(x)  Establish restrictions, prohibitions and regulations for the parking, standing, or stopping of vehicles; 
(xi)  Designate special parking zones for taxicabs, press, television, radio cars, and the like; 
(xii)  Designate parking meter zones and establish time limitations thereon based on an engineering and traffic investigation; 
(xiii)  Establish tow-away zones; 
(xiv)  Designate upon what streets, if any, angle parking shall be permitted; 
(xv)  Designate and sign intersections at which drivers shall not make a right or left turn, a U turn, or any turn at all times or during certain times; 
(xvi)  Designate and sign intersections where multiple turns shall be allowed: 
(xvii)  Mark centerlines and lane lines and place other pavement markings necessary for the regulation and control of traffic; 
(xviii)  Install and maintain crosswalks at intersections or other places where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway; 
(xix)  Establish safety zones at such places where necessary for pedestrian protection; 
(xx)  Install pedestrian-control signals and designate those crossings where angle crossing by pedestrians shall be permitted; 
(xxi)  Establish truck routes and truck loading zones; establish bus stops and taxicab stands; 
(xxii)  Designate and sign those streets and roadways where pedestrians, bicyclists or other non-motorized vehicles, or persons operating a motor-driven cycle shall be excluded as provided by law; 
(xxiii)  Designate and sign those streets upon which vehicles or loads of a certain weight shall be prohibited; 
(xxiv)  Provide for temporary street or alley closures by the erection of barricades; 
(xxv)  Issue special permits for curb loading operations, for the movement of vehicles having excess size or width, for parades or processions, and 
(xxvi)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned to the traffic engineer by the city administrator consistent with the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-29.1. - Section 135, Driving under restraint-Penalty. 
    Section 135 of the Model Traffic code is enacted to provide: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle or off-highway vehicle upon any highway of this state with knowledge that the person's license or privilege to drive, either as a resident or a non-resident, is under restraint for an outstanding judgment. 
(2)  The municipal court shall not waive or reduce the offense's three-point penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53, § 1, 11-27-17) 
Sec. 115-30. - Section 203, Unsafe vehicles-Spot inspections. 
    Section 203(3) and (4) of the Model Traffic Code are repealed in their entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-31. - Section 225, Mufflers-Prevention of noise. 
    Section 225(3) of the Model Traffic Code is repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-32. - Section 227, Windows unobstructed-Certain materials prohibited, windshield wiper requirements. 
    Section 227(3) of the Model Traffic Code is repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-32.5. - Section 235, Minimum standards for commercial vehicles-Spot inspections. 
(1)  A police officer may, at any time, require the driver of any commercial vehicle, as defined in section 42-4-235, C.R.S., to stop so that the officer may inspect the vehicle and all required documents for compliance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Public Safety, Colorado Code of Regulations Volume 8, 1507-1 "Minimum Standards for the Operation of Commercial Vehicles." 
(2)  A police officer may immobilize, impound, or otherwise direct the disposition of a commercial vehicle when it is determined that the motor vehicle or operation thereof is unsafe and when such immobilization, impoundment, or disposition is appropriate under the rules and regulations promulgated by the Colorado Department of Public Safety, Colorado Code of Regulations Volume 8, 1507-1 "Minimum Standards for the Operation of Commercial Vehicles." 
(Ord. No. 2011-34, § 1, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 115-33. - Section 237, Safety belt systems-Mandatory use-Exemptions penalty. 
    Section 237(4) of the Model Traffic Code is repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-33.1. - Section 239, Misuse of wireless telephone-Definitions-Penalty preemption. 
    Section 239(2), (3), (5)(Deleted) and (6)(b) of the Model Traffic Code are enacted to provide: 
(2)  A person under eighteen years of age shall not use a wireless telephone while operating a motor vehicle. This subsection (2) does not apply to acts specified in subsection (3) of this section. 
(3)  A person shall not use a wireless telephone for the purpose of engaging in text messaging or other similar forms of manual data entry or transmission while operating a motor vehicle. 
(5)  (Deleted) 
(6)  (b)  An operator of a motor vehicle shall not be cited for a violation of subsection (3) unless a law enforcement officer saw the operator use a wireless telephone for the purpose of engaging in text messaging or other similar forms of manual data entry or transmission in a manner that causes the operator to drive in a careless and imprudent manner without due regard for the width, grade, curves, corners, traffic, and use of the streets and highways and all other attendant circumstances, as prohibited by Section 1402. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53, § 2, 11-27-17) 
Sec. 115-33.2. - Section 314, Nuisance exhibition of motor vehicle exhaust prohibited. 
    Section 314 of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
(1)  (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a nuisance exhibition of motor vehicle exhaust, which is the knowing release of soot, smoke, or other particulate emissions from a motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of fourteen thousand pounds or less into the air and onto roadways, other motor vehicles, bicyclists, or pedestrians, in a manner that obstructs or obscures another person's view of the roadway, other users of the roadway, or a traffic control device or otherwise creates a hazard to a driver, bicyclist, or pedestrian. 
(b)  The prohibition set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section does not apply to: 
1.  A commercial vehicle, as defined in Appendices Definitions (16); 
2.  A common carrier, as defined in C.R.S. Section 40-1-102(3)(a)(I); 
3.  A motor carrier, as defined in C.R.S. Section 40-10.1-101(10); 
4.  A motor carrier of passengers, permitted pursuant to C.R.S. Section 40-10.1-302; 
5.  A motor carrier of towed motor vehicles, permitted pursuant to C.R.S. Section 40-10.1-401; 
6.  A motor carrier of household goods, permitted pursuant to C.R.S. Section 40-10.1-502; 
7.  A motor vehicle used for agricultural purposes; or 
8.  Any other vehicle used for commercial activities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53, § 3, 11-27-17) 
Sec. 115-34. - Section 501 of the Model Traffic Code. 
    Section 501 of the Model Traffic Code is amended by addition of the following: 
Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary, when official signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a weight limit in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof or upon any of the bridges or viaducts posted as heretofore provided. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-35. - Section 509, Vehicles weight excess removed. 
    Section 509(3) of the Model Traffic Code is repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-36. - Section 510, Permits for excess size and weight and for manufactured homes-Rules. 
    Section 510(b)(1) of the Model Traffic Code is amended by deleting the phrase, "All local permits shall be issued in the discretion of the local authority pursuant to ordinances or resolutions adopted in accordance with section 511. Any ordinances or resolutions of local authorities shall not conflict with this section." 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-37. - Section 511, Permit standards. 
    Section 511 of the Model Traffic Code is repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-38. - Section 604, Traffic control signal legend. 
    Sections 604(1)(c)(I)(A) and (B) of the Model Traffic Code are repealed and reenacted to provide: 
(A)  Such vehicular traffic, after coming to a stop and yielding the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection, may make a right turn unless an official sign has been erected prohibiting such right turn. Such right turn shall be made only into the nearest (right-most) lane of traffic of the road onto which the turn is made. 
(B)  Such vehicular traffic, when proceeding on a one-way street, and after coming to a stop, may make a left turn onto a one-way street upon which traffic is moving to the left of the driver. Such turn shall be made only after yielding the right-of-way to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed. No turn shall be made pursuant to this sub-paragraph at an intersection where an official sign has been erected prohibiting such left turn. Such left turn shall be made only into the nearest (left-most) lane of traffic of the road onto which such turn is made. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-39. - Section 607, Interference with official devices. 
    Section 607(2)(b) of the Model Traffic Code is deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-40. - Section 615, School zones-Increase in penalties for moving traffic violations. 
    Section 615(1) of the Model Traffic Code is repealed in its entirety and reenacted to provide: 
(1)  Any person convicted of a moving traffic violation in a school zone shall be subject to increased penalties and surcharges as established by the city or presiding municipal court judge. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
    Section 705(2)(a), (b), (c), and (3)(a) of the Model Traffic Code are is amended to provide: 
(2)  (a)  A driver in a vehicle shall exhibit due care and caution and proceed as described in subsections (2) (b) and (2) (c) of this section when approaching or passing: 
1.  A stationary authorized emergency vehicle that is giving a visual signal by means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating red, blue, or white lights as permitted by section 213 or 222. 
2.  A stationary towing carrier vehicle that is giving a visual signal by means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating yellow lights; or 
3.  A stationary public utility service vehicle that is giving a visual signal by means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating amber lights. 
(b)  On a highway with at least two adjacent lanes proceeding in the same direction on the same side of the highway where a stationary authorized emergency vehicle, stationary towing carrier vehicle, or stationary public utility service vehicle is located, the driver of an approaching or passing vehicle shall proceed with due care and caution and yield the right-of-way by moving into a lane at least one moving lane apart from the stationary authorized emergency vehicle, stationary towing carrier vehicle, or stationary public utility service vehicle unless directed otherwise by a peace officer or other authorized emergency personnel. If movement to an adjacent moving lane is not possible due to weather, road conditions, or the immediate presence of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the driver of the approaching vehicle shall proceed in the manner described in subsection (2) (c) of this section. 
(c)  On a highway that does not have at least two adjacent lanes proceeding in the same direction on the same side of the highway where a stationary authorized emergency vehicle, stationary towing carrier vehicle, or stationary public utility service vehicle is located, or if movement by the driver of the approaching vehicle into an adjacent moving lane, as described in subsection (2) (b) of this section is not possible, the driver of an approaching vehicle shall reduce and maintain a safe speed with regard to the location of a stationary authorized vehicle, stationary towing carrier vehicle, or stationary public utility service vehicle; weather conditions; road conditions, and vehicular or pedestrian traffic and proceed with due care and caution, or as directed by a peace office or other authorized emergency personnel. 
(3)  (a)  Except where a person violates subsection (2) of this section, and such person's actions are the proximate cause of bodily injury or death to another person, any person who violates subsection (2), (2.5), or (2.6) of this section commits careless driving as described in Section 1402. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 2017-53, § 4, 11-27-17) 
Sec. 115-42. - Section 712, Driving in highway work area. 
    Section 712(3) of the Model Traffic Code is amended by deleting the phrase "district attorney" and replacing it with "city's police department." 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-43. - Section 804, Staying on medians prohibited. 
    Section 804 of the Model Traffic Code is repealed in its entirety and reenacted to provide: 
(1)  No person shall stand or be upon a median of any road, street, or highway for longer than is reasonably necessary to cross the road, street, or highway. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, "median" means: 
(a)  The area of a road, street, or highway, generally in the middle, which separates traffic traveling in one direction from traffic traveling in another direction, or which, at intersections, separates traffic turning left from traffic proceeding straight. Such an area is physically defined by curbing, landscaping, or other physical obstacles to the area's use by motor vehicles, or by traffic control markings which prohibit use of a portion of the pavement of a road, street, or highway by motor vehicles other than to drive generally perpendicularly across the markings, or to wait there awaiting the opportunity to cross or merge with the opposing lanes of traffic (also known as painted medians, which are wider than a double yellow line); or 
(b)  The area of a road, street, or highway at an intersection that is between the road, street, or highway and a right-turn-only lane, roughly triangular in shape, and separated from the motor vehicular traffic lanes by curbing, landscaping, or other physical obstacles to the area's use by motor vehicles (also known as a right-turn island). 
(3)  This section does not apply to persons maintaining the median or working in the median if such work or maintenance activity has been authorized by the city or by the owner of the underlying road, street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 2011-28, § 1, 8-2-11) 
Sec. 115-43.1. - Section 805, Pedestrians walking or traveling in a wheelchair on highways. 
    Section 805(5) of the Model Traffic Code is repealed in its entirety and reenacted to provide: 
Local authorities may regulate the use by pedestrians of streets and highways under its jurisdiction to the extent authorized under subsection (6) of this section but no regulation differing from this section shall be effective until official signs or devices giving notice thereof have been placed at such location. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 2011-28, § 1, 8-2-11) 
Sec. 115-44. - Section 901, Required position and method of turning. 
    Section 901(a) and (b) of the Model Traffic Code are repealed in their entirety and reenacted to provide: 
(a)  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and the right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. Unless double turn lanes are clearly marked by official signs, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make a right turn into any traffic lane other than the right-most lane of traffic of the road onto which the turn is made. 
(b)  Left turns. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left shall approach the turn in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. Unless double turn lanes are clearly marked by official signs, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to make a left turn into any traffic lane other than the left-most lane of traffic lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-45. - Section 1010, Driving on divided or controlled access highway. 
    Section 1010(3) of the Model Traffic Code is amended by deleting the phrase "by ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-46. - Section 1101, Speed limits. 
    Section 1101(1) of the Model Traffic Code is amended by deleting the phrase "is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing" and replacing with the phrase "the maximum lawful speed limit." 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-47. - Section 1101, Speed limits. 
    Section 1101(2)(b)(c) and (d) of the Model Traffic Code are repealed in their entirety and reenacted to provide: 
(b)  Twenty-five miles per hour in any business district as defined in Chapter 26 of the Code of Ordinances of Lafayette; 
(c)  Twenty-five miles per hour in any residential district as defined in Chapter 26 of the Code of Ordinances of Lafayette; 
(d)  Fifteen miles per hour in any alley. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-48. - Section 1101, Speed limits. 
    Section 1101(5) of the Model Traffic Code is amended by deleting the phrase "alleged reasonable and prudent speed" and replacing it with the phrase "maximum lawful speed limit." 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49. - Section 1102, Altering of speed limits-When. 
    Section 1102(1) and (2) and (3) of the Model Traffic Code are amended by deleting the phrases "is reasonable or safe" and replacing it with the phrase "the maximum lawful speed limit" and deleting the phrases "a reasonable and safe" and replacing it with the phrase "the maximum lawful." 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.1. - Section 1102(6), Altering of speed limits-When. 
    Section 1102(6) of the Model Traffic Code is amended by deleting the phrase "by ordinance, or a county by resolution of the board of county commissioners" and adding the phrase "apartment complex, condominium complex or townhouse complex" after the phrase "in mobile home parks" in the section's first sentence. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-50), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.2. - Section 1203, Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    Section 1203 of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle upon any highway or roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Greasing, painting or repairing any vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency; 
(2)  Displaying advertising. 
(b)  No truck tractor with a total gross vehicle weight of twenty-five thousand (25,000) pounds or more or any truck tractor shall be parked on any street within the city for more than thirty (30) minutes between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except on streets that are fronted on both sides by an industrial zone. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any semitrailer in or upon any public street or highway in the city when such semitrailer is not attached to a truck tractor. 
(d)  No trailer, utility trailer, or camper trailer shall be parked on any street between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless either: 
(1)  The trailer is attached to a towing vehicle; or 
(2)  The trailer is associated with and appurtenant to an adjacent construction worksite for which a building permit has been issued; or 
(3)  The trailer is parked by the City of Lafayette in connection with traffic operations. 
(e)  If shall be unlawful for any person to park or store a motor home or camper coach, the overall height of which exceeds eight (8) feet, on a street for more than a seventy-two-hour period. For the purposes of this subsection, parking of the vehicle on the same block for more than a seventy-two-hour period shall constitute prima facie evidence of storage in violation of this subsection. 
(f)  Vehicles for sale. 
(1)  No person shall park a vehicle upon private property belonging to another for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property located within the city to allow vehicles owned by others to be parked on such property for the principal purpose of being offered for sale. 
(3)  Whenever a parked vehicle displays a sign or message indicating that [it] is being offered for sale, such display shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is parked for the principal purpose of being displayed for sale. 
(4)  For purposes of this Section 1203(e)[(f)] only, the term "vehicle" shall include any device capable of being moved from place to place upon wheels or tracks, as well as devices capable of being moved on or through water or air, such as boats and airplanes. 
(5)  The provisions of this Section 1203(e)[(f)] shall not apply upon land zoned by the city to permit the commercial sale of vehicles. 
(6)  No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway, street, alley, sidewalk or sidewalk area, in a park or in any publicly owned parking area within the city for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(7)  A person may park a maximum of one vehicle owned by that person on private property belonging to that person for the principal purpose of being offered for sale. 
(8)  A person may park a maximum of one vehicle owned by that person on the public street immediately adjacent to that person's principal place of residence, for the principal purpose of offering that vehicle for sale. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-52), 8-17-10; Ord. No. 2016-21, § 2, 6-20-16) 
Sec. 115-49.3. - Section 1204, Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
    Section 1204(8) of the Model Traffic Code is repealed in its entirety and enacted to provide: 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any private property without the consent of the owner, lessee or person in possession of such property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-53), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.4. - Section 1205, Parking at curb or edge of roadway. 
    Section 1205 (2) and (3) are amended by deleting the phrase "by ordinance" in both sections. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-54), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.5. - Section 1209, Owner liability for parking violations. 
    Section 1209 of the Model Traffic Code is amended by the addition of the following: 
In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision of this Part 12 governing the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute an evidentiary prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the location where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-55), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.6. - Section 1210, Designated areas on private property for authorized vehicles within unincorporated areas of a county. 
    Section 1210 of the Model Traffic Code is repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-56), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.7. - Section 1212, Buses and taxicabs regulated. 
    Section 1212 of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street or at any place other than a bus stop so designated by an official sign. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street or at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at bus stop so designated by an official sign, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and with the bus substantially parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of traffic. 
(d)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street or at any place other than at a taxicab stand so designated by an official sign. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other parking, standing or stopping regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers or baggage. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-57), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.8. - Section 1213, Immobilization of vehicles. 
    Section 1213 of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
(a)  When an operator, owner or person in charge of a vehicle has failed to respond to a summons and complaint for illegal stopping, standing or parking and received all applicable notices as provided herein, officers of the police department and other authorized city employees may for a period up to and including seventy-two (72) hours, immobilize such vehicle by installing on, or attaching to such vehicle, a device designed to restrict the normal movement of such vehicle, and if such vehicle is so immobilized, the city employee or police officer so installing or attaching such device shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice, in writing, on a form provided by the police department, advising the owner, driver or person in charge of such vehicle, that such vehicle has been immobilized by the city for violation of the stopping, standing or parking provisions of this code and that release from such immobilization may be obtained at a designated place; that unless arrangements are made for the release of such vehicle within seventy-two (72) hours, the vehicle will be removed from the streets at the direction of the city employee, or by a police officer, and that removing or attempting to remove the device before a release is obtained as herein provided, or to move any such vehicle before a release is obtained is unlawful, and containing such other information as the police department shall deem necessary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove any such device before a release is obtained as herein provided, or to move any such vehicle before the same is released by the police department, clerk of the municipal court or any municipal judge, and where such vehicle has been properly immobilized in such manner, a fee as established by resolution of city council shall be charged by the police department or clerk of the municipal court before releasing such vehicle, and the parking restrictions, if any, otherwise applicable shall not apply while such vehicle is so immobilized. 
(c)  If a vehicle has remained immobilized for a period of seventy-two (72) hours and release has not been obtained, the police officer or city employee causing such immobilization may have the vehicle impounded. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the city from immediately removing any vehicle deemed to constitute a traffic hazard, obstruction to emergency vehicle(s) or lawful access to property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-58), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.9. - Section 1305, Open alcoholic beverage container in motor vehicle prohibited. 
    Section 1305 of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
(1)  Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(a)  "Alcoholic beverage" means a beverage as defined in C.R.S. 44-3-103(2). 
(b)  "Motor vehicle" means a vehicle driven or drawn by mechanical power and manufactured primarily for use on public highways but does not include a vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails. 
(c)  "Open alcoholic beverage container" means a bottle, can, or other receptacle that contains any amount of alcoholic beverage, and: 
(I)  That is open or has a broken seal; or 
(II)  The contents of which are partially removed. 
(d)  "Passenger area" means the area designed to seat the driver and passengers while a motor vehicle is in operation and any area that is readily accessible to the driver or a passenger while in his or her seating position, including, but not limited to, the glove compartment. 
(2)  (a)  Except as otherwise permitted in paragraph (b) of this subsection (2), a person while in the passenger area of a motor vehicle that is on a public roadway or highway of this state or the right-of-way of a public roadway or highway of this state may not knowingly: 
(I)  Drink an alcoholic beverage; or 
(II)  Have in his or her possession an open alcoholic beverage container. 
(b)  The provisions of this subsection (2) shall not apply to: 
(I)  Passengers, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, located in the passenger area of a motor vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of persons for compensation; 
(II)  The possession by a passenger, other than the driver or a front seat passenger, of an open alcoholic beverage container in the living quarters of a house coach, house trailer, motor home or trailer coach as defined in Appendices, Definitions, (58) and (114(a)); 
(III)  The possession of an open alcoholic beverage container in the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk; or 
(IV)  The possession of an open alcoholic beverage container in an area not normally occupied by the driver or a passenger in a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-59), 8-17-10; Ord. No. 2018-25, § 11, 8-21-18) 
Sec. 115-49.9.1. - Section 1412(14), Operation of bicycles and other human-powered vehicles. 
    Section 1412(14) of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide as follows: 
(14)  Except for law enforcement personnel, including code enforcement and emergency service personnel in the performance of their official duties, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate an electrical assisted bicycle upon any bike or pedestrian path. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53, § 5, 11-27-17) 
Sec. 115-49.10. - Section 1416, Regulation of traffic across private property. 
    Section 1416 of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle from a public highway or roadway or any public way of this city over, across or through any private property to avoid traffic control signals or traffic control devices or as a route or shortcut from one public highway or roadway or any public way to another. 
(b)  As used in this section, "private property" includes, but is not limited to, any property not designated as a public roadway, highway, street or public way, alley, right-of- way or easement. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge of violation of this section that the person charged is the owner of the property or the owner of a leasehold, possessory interest or easement in or to the property through or across which the motor vehicle is driven. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-60), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.11. - Section 1417, Permits required for parades or processions. 
    Section 1417 of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
No funeral procession or parade except that of the armed forces of the United Services, the military forces of this State, and the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any highway or roadway within the city except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police in compliance with such other regulations of this code or requirements of the city which may apply. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-61), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.12. - Part 17, Penalties and procedure-Preface. 
    Part 17, Penalties and Procedures, Preface of the Model Traffic Code is deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-62), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.13. - Section 1701, Traffic offenses and infractions classified-Penalties-Penalty and surcharge schedule-Repeal. 
    Section 1701 of the Model Traffic Code is deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-63), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.14. - Section 1702, Counties traffic offenses classified schedule of fines. 
    Section 1702 of the Model Traffic Code is repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-64), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.15. - Section 1709, Penalty assessment notice for traffic offense. 
    Section 1709(1) of the Model Traffic Code is amended by inserting the phrase "or code provision" after the phrase "citation of the statute" and by inserting the phrase "or municipal" after the phrase "county court at a specified time." 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-65), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.16. - Section 1710, Failure to pay penalty for traffic offenses. 
    Section 1710(3) of the Model Traffic Code is amended by adding the phrase "or Rule 248(b) of the Colorado Municipal Court Rules" after the phrase "in section 18-1-405, C.R.S." 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-66), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.17. - Section 1710, Failure to pay penalty for traffic offenses. 
    Section 1710(5) of the Model Traffic Code is enacted to provide: 
(a)  Upon the date and at the time for appearance, if the defendant fails to appear and if the municipal judge determines that venue is proper and that defendant was served a summons and complaint at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the appearance date, the judge may, for traffic offenses of not more than four (4) points (except for compulsory insurance), or a six (6) point offense of speeding, not more than twenty-four (24) miles over the posted speed limit, enter judgment and impose sentence, including costs against the defendant. 
(b)  Failure to appear on any date scheduled for trial shall constitute cause for entering a default judgment for all traffic offenses of not more than four (4) points (except for compulsory insurance) or a six (6) point offense of speeding not more than twenty-four (24) miles over the posted speed limit, and upon entry of such default, the judge may impose sentence including costs against the defendant. 
(c)  On the grounds of excusable neglect, the judge may by motion of the defendant set aside an entry of default and the judgment entered thereon. Such motion must be filed with the court within seven (7) calendar days of the entry of judgment for such matter. A motion under this section shall not affect the finality of a judgment or suspend its operation. 
(d)  Any default entered in accordance with this section shall be certified to the State Motor Vehicle Division for enforcement. 
(e)  The court shall not issue a warrant for the arrest of any defendant against whom a default is entered and upon which a sentence is imposed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2(115-67), 8-17-10) 
Sec. 115-49.18. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, disobey, omit, neglect, refuse or fail to comply with or resist the enforcement of any provision of this Code, the City Charter or any other ordinance of the city, or to commit any act or omission declared to be a misdemeanor, except that unless conduct is specifically designated criminal herein, any offense which is not punishable by imprisonment in jail is not criminal and is deemed decriminalized and unless a specific lesser penalty is specifically provided for the violation or any specific portion of this Code, the City Charter or any other ordinance of the city, the violation of any provision of this Code, the City Charter or any other ordinance of the city shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code, the City Charter or any ordinance of the city, except as above stated, who is eighteen (18) years of age or more on the date of said violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code, the City Charter or any ordinance of the city, except as above stated, who is under the age of eighteen (18) years at the time of said violation, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(3)  Except as hereinafter provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Model Traffic Code of Lafayette, Colorado, and/or the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities as adopted and set forth in Articles I and II of Chapter 115 of this Code, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) except any person convicted of violating Section 4-6, Speed Contest, Section 5-1, Reckless Driving, Section 19-12, Compulsory Insurance, or Section 21-13, Eluding a Police Officer, all being violations of the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities as adopted by the city, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  In addition to the above penalties and fines, the city may obtain enforcement of its ordinances by seeking injunctive or other appropriate relief in a court of proper jurisdiction. 
(c)  Each day or portion thereof, during which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-18, § 8, 8-17-10) 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1986-24, § 1, adopted June 17, 1986, provided for the repeal of former Art. III, §§ 115-56-115-61, which pertained to abandoned motor vehicles as derived from Ord. No. 696, Art. II, §§ 1-5, adopted Nov. 16, 1976, and enacted in lieu thereof new provisions relative to the same subject matter designated as Art. III, §§ 115-50-115-58, as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Abandoned property generally, § 75-71 et seq. 
State Law reference- Abandonment of motor vehicle as misdemeanor, C. R. S. § 18-4-512; abandonment as petty offense, C. R. S. § 18-13-106. 

Sec. 115-50. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means: 
(a)  Any motor vehicle left unattended on private property for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or longer without the consent of the owner or lessee of such property or his legally authorized agent. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle left unattended on public property, including any portion of a highway right-of-way, within the limits of Lafayette, Colorado, for a period of seventy-two (72) hours or longer. 
(c)  Any motor vehicle stored in an impound lot at the request of its owner or the owner's agent or the Lafayette Police Department and not removed from the impound lot according to the agreement with the owner or agent or within seventy-two (72) hours of the time the Lafayette Police Department notifies the owner or agent that the vehicle is available for release upon payment of any applicable charges or fees. If the Lafayette Police Department requested the storage, the provisions governing public tows of this article shall apply as of the time of abandonment. Otherwise, the private tow provisions of this article shall apply as of the time of abandonment. 
    Appraisal means a bona fide estimate of reasonable market value made by any motor vehicle dealer licensed in this state or by an employee of the Colorado State Patrol, Boulder County Sheriff's Department or Lafayette Police Department whose appointment for such purpose has been reported to the Executive Director of the Department of Revenue of the State of Colorado. 
    Disabled motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which is stopped or parked, either attended or unattended, upon a public right-of-way and which is, due to any mechanical failure or any inoperability because of a collision, a fire or any other such injury, temporarily inoperable under its own power. 
    Impound lot means a parcel of real property which is owned or leased by the City of Lafayette, Colorado, or an operator at which motor vehicles are stored under appropriate protection. 
    Operator means a person or firm licensed by the public utilities commission as a towing carrier. 
    Private property means any real property which is not public property. 
    Private tow means any tow of an abandoned motor vehicle not requested by the Lafayette Police Department. 
    Public property means any real property having its title, ownership, use, or possession held by the federal government, the State of Colorado, any county, any municipality, or other governmental entity of this state. 
    Public tow means any tow of an abandoned motor vehicle requested by the Lafayette Police Department. 
    Responsible law enforcement agency means: 
(a)  In the case of a public tow, the Lafayette Police Department, whether or not the vehicle is towed to another law enforcement agency's jurisdiction. 
(b)  In the case of a private tow, the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the private property where the motor vehicle becomes abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 1986-24, § 1, 6-17-86) 
Sec. 115-51. - Abandonment on public property prohibited; towing. 
(a)  No person shall abandon any motor vehicle upon public property in the City of Lafayette, Colorado. Any Lafayette Police Officer who finds a motor vehicle which he has reasonable grounds to believe has been abandoned shall require such motor vehicle to be removed or cause the same to be removed and placed in storage in any impound lot designated or maintained by the City of Lafayette, Colorado. 
(b)  Whenever any Lafayette Police Officer finds a motor vehicle, attended or unattended, standing upon any portion of a highway right-of-way or public street in such a manner as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or proper highway/street maintenance, such officer is authorized to cause the motor vehicle to be moved to eliminate any such obstruction and neither the officer nor anyone acting under his direction shall be liable for any damage to such motor vehicle occasioned by such removal. 
(Ord. No. 1986-24, § 1, 6-17-86) 
Sec. 115-52. - Report; owner's opportunity to request hearing. 
(a)  (1)  Upon having an abandoned motor vehicle towed, the Lafayette Police Department shall ascertain, if possible, whether or not the motor vehicle has been reported stolen, and, if so reported, the Lafayette Police Department shall recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner and terminate the abandonment proceedings under this article. The Lafayette Police Department shall have the right to recover from the owner its reasonable costs to recover and secure the motor vehicle. 
(2)  As soon as possible, but in no event later than three (3) working days after having an abandoned motor vehicle towed, the Lafayette Police Department shall report the same to the department of revenue on such forms as prescribed and supplied by the department of revenue. 
(b)  The Lafayette Police Department, upon receiving a report from the Department of Revenue, shall determine, from all available information and after reasonable inquiry, whether or not the abandoned motor vehicle has been reported stolen, and, if so reported, the Lafayette Police Department shall recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner and terminate the abandonment proceedings under this article. The Lafayette Police Department shall have the right to recover from the owner its reasonable costs to recover and secure the motor vehicle. 
(c)  The Lafayette Police Department, within five (5) working days of the receipt of the report from the Department of Revenue, shall notify by certified mail the owner of record, if ascertained, and any lienholder if ascertained, of the fact of such report and the claim, if any, of a lien pursuant to C.R.S. 42-4-1607 and shall send a copy of such notice to the operator. The notice shall contain information that the identified motor vehicle has been reported abandoned to the Department of Revenue, the location of the motor vehicle and the location from which it was towed, and that, unless claimed within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the notice was sent as determined from the postmark on the notice, the motor vehicle is subject to sale. Such notice shall also inform the owner of record of his opportunity to request a hearing concerning the legality of the towing of his abandoned motor vehicle, and the fact that said owner must contact the Lafayette Police Department in order to obtain a hearing. Such request for a hearing shall be made in writing to the Lafayette Police Department within ten (10) days of the postmarked date of sending such notice. 
(Ord. No. 1986-24, § 1, 6-17-86) 
Sec. 115-53. - Conduct of hearing. 
    Any requested hearing shall be conducted before the Lafayette Municipal Judge or a hearing officer appointed by the Lafayette Municipal Judge within seventy-two (72) hours excluding Saturdays, Sundays and city holidays of receipt of a written demand for such hearing unless the person requesting the hearing waives the right to a speedy hearing. The sole issue before the municipal judge or hearing officer shall be whether there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. "Probable cause to impound" shall mean such a state of facts as would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that there was a sufficient breach of municipal, state or federal law to grant legal authority for the removal of the vehicle. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and shall not be governed by technical rules of evidence. The person demanding the hearing shall carry the burden of establishing that such person has the right to possession of the vehicle. The Lafayette Police Department shall carry the burden of establishing that there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. The municipal judge or hearing officer shall only determine that as to the vehicle in question (a) there was probable cause to impound the vehicle, or (b) there was not such probable cause to impound the vehicle. Upon a finding of no probable cause, towing and storage fees shall be paid by the city in accordance with arrangements made between the city and the operator. If the possessor of the vehicle fails to claim the vehicle from the operator within six (6) hours of a finding of no probable cause, excluding such days when the operator is not open for business, the possessor shall assume liability for all subsequent storage charges. It shall be the responsibility of the Lafayette Police Department to notify the operator in writing of a finding of no probable cause immediately after such finding is made. Failure of the owner of the vehicle in question to request a hearing or attend a scheduled post-seizure hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1986-24, § 1, 6-17-86) 
Sec. 115-54. - Abandonment on private property prohibited; towing. 
(a)  No person shall abandon any motor vehicle upon private property other than his own. Any owner or lessee, or his agent authorized in writing, may have an abandoned motor vehicle removed from his property by having it towed and impounded by an operator. However, any such person prior to requesting a tow and impound of an abandoned motor vehicle upon private property in the City of Lafayette shall first notify the Lafayette Police Department that such person is going to make such request. 
(b)  Any operator having in his possession any abandoned motor vehicle from a private tow shall immediately notify the Lafayette Police Department as to the name of the operator and the location of the impound lot where the vehicle is located and a description of the abandoned motor vehicle, including the make, model, color and year, the number, issuing state, and expiration date of the license plate and the vehicle identification number. Upon such notification, the Lafayette Police Department shall ascertain, if possible, whether or not the vehicle has been reported stolen, and, if so reported, the Lafayette Police Department shall recover and secure the motor vehicle and notify its rightful owner and terminate the abandonment proceedings under this article. The Lafayette Police Department shall have the right to recover from the owner its reasonable costs to recover and secure the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1986-24, § 1, 6-17-86) 
Sec. 115-55. - Appraisal of abandoned motor vehicles; sale. 
(a)  Public tow abandoned motor vehicles or motor vehicles abandoned in an impound lot subsequent to a public tow shall be appraised and sold by the Lafayette Police Department at a public or private sale held not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days after the date the notice required by section 115-52(c) was mailed. 
(b)  If the appraised value of an abandoned motor vehicle sold pursuant to this section is two hundred dollars ($200.00) or less, the sale shall be made only for the purpose of junking, scrapping, or dismantling such motor vehicle, and the purchaser thereof shall not, under any circumstances, be entitled to a Colorado Certificate of Title. The Lafayette Police Department shall cause to be executed and delivered a bill of sale, together with a copy of the report described in C.R.S. 42-4-1604 to the person purchasing such motor vehicle. The bill of sale shall state that the purchaser acquires no right to a certificate of title for such vehicle. The Lafayette Police Department shall promptly submit a report of sale, with a copy of the bill of sale, to the department of revenue and shall deliver a copy of such report of sale to the purchaser of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  If the appraised value of an abandoned motor vehicle sold pursuant to this section is more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), the sale may be made for any intended use by the purchaser thereof. The Lafayette Police Department shall cause to be executed and delivered a bill of sale, together with a copy of the report described in C.R.S. 42-4-1604 and an application for a Colorado Certificate of Title signed by the Lafayette Police Department to the person purchasing such motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1986-24, § 1, 6-17-86) 
Sec. 115-56. - Proceeds of sale. 
(a)  If the sale of any motor vehicle under the provisions of this article produces an amount less than or equal to the sum of all charges of the operator who has perfected a lien pursuant to C.R.S. 42-4-1607, then the operator shall have a valid claim against the owner of record for the full amount of such charges, less the amount received upon the sale of such motor vehicle. Such charges shall be assessed in the manner provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(b)  If the sale of any motor vehicle under the provisions of this article produces an amount greater than the sum of all charges of the operator who has perfected his lien pursuant to C.R.S. 42-4-1607: 
(1)  The proceeds shall first satisfy the operator's charges as follows: The cost of towing the abandoned motor vehicle with a maximum charge of fifty dollars ($50.00); the mileage for tows of greater than twenty-five (25) miles one way, to be computed at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per mile for each mile in excess of twenty-five (25) miles one way; and the storage of the abandoned motor vehicle to be charged at the rate of four dollars ($4.00) per day for a maximum of sixty (60) days. In the case of an abandoned motor vehicle weighing in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds, the provisions of this subsection (b)(1) shall not apply, and the operator's charges shall be determined by negotiated agreement between the operator and the Lafayette Police Department. 
(2)  Any balance then remaining shall be paid to the Lafayette Police Department to satisfy the cost of mailing notices, having an appraisal made, advertising and selling the motor vehicle and any other costs of the Lafayette Police Department including administrative costs, taxes, fines and penalties due. 
(3)  Any balance then remaining shall be forwarded to the department of revenue, and the department of revenue may recover from such balance any taxes, fees and penalties due and payable to it with respect to such motor vehicle. 
(4)  Any balance then remaining shall be paid by the department of revenue pursuant to C.R.S. 42-4-1601(d). 
(Ord. No. 1986-24, § 1, 6-17-86) 
Sec. 115-57. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to include or apply to the driver of any disabled motor vehicle who temporarily leaves such vehicle on the paved or improved and main travel portion of a highway subject, when, applicable, to the emergency lighting requirements set forth in C.R.S. 42-4-227. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to include or apply to authorized emergency vehicles while such vehicles are actually and directly engaged in, coming from, or going to an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1986-24, § 1, 6-17-86) 
Sec. 115-58. - Authority to impound vehicles. 
(a)  In addition to such authority as is provided in this article concerning abandoned motor vehicles, members of the Lafayette Police Department are hereby authorized to remove or have removed at their direction a vehicle, as that term is defined in the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities," to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or maintained by the Lafayette Police Department or by the city, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  Any vehicle failing to display number plates or failing to display the proper number plate or plates assigned to such vehicle under the provisions of Chapter 42 C.R.S. 1973, or displaying number plates in such a manner as to reasonably indicate a violation of any provision of said Chapter 42 or any other provision of state law with respect to motor vehicle number plates while parked, attended or unattended or traveling upon the streets, highways or roadways of the city. 
(2)  Any vehicle within the city limits if probable cause is established that such vehicle is in violation, or has been used in connection with a violation, of the Charter, this Code, the Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities, as adopted by the city, or any other ordinance of the city. 
(b)  Whenever a Lafayette police officer removes and impounds or stores a vehicle or causes the same to be done as authorized in this section, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  If the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle is present at the time the vehicle is removed, the Lafayette police officer responsible for the removal shall provide to such owner or person written notice of (i) the date and time the vehicle was removed, (ii) the location of the vehicle at the time of removal and its current location, (iii) the subsection or subsections(s) hereof pursuant to which the vehicle was removed, and (iv) the manner in which the vehicle may be claimed. 
(2)  The Lafayette Police Department shall return, or cause to be returned, any vehicle removed pursuant to this section after such owner or person provides reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and reimburses the Lafayette Police Department or any other person having a similar claim for all charges for removal and storage of the vehicle and for all other reasonable charges and expenses incurred by the Lafayette Police Department in connection with the removal of the vehicle. 
(3)  If the vehicle is not claimed within three (3) days following its impoundment, the Lafayette Police Department shall send notice and dispose of the vehicle as follows: 
a.  If the vehicle is a motor vehicle, as that term is defined in the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities," the Lafayette Police Department shall follow the procedures set out in sections 115-52, 115-53, 115-55 and 115-56 of this Code. 
b.  If the vehicle is not a motor vehicle, as that term is defined in the "Model Traffic Code for Colorado Municipalities," the Lafayette Police Department shall follow the procedures set out in section 75-75 of this Code. 
(c)  No person or agency, including the Lafayette Police Department or its agents, shall be responsible for consequential damages to another occasioned by an act or omission in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1994-15, § 2, 6-21-94) 
Sec. 115-59. - Penalty. 
    Any person who knowingly violates any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). This offense is not punishable by imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1986-24, § 1, 6-17-86; Ord. No. 1994-6, § 11, 4-19-94; Ord. No. 1994-15, § 3, 6-21-94) 
Secs. 115-60-115-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNK AUTOMOBILES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, Ch. 100. 

Sec. 115-76. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article: 
    Antique automobile is defined as and regulated by 1973 C.R.S. 42-15-101, as amended. 
    Junk automobile is defined as any self-propelled motor vehicle which does not bear a current and valid Colorado license plate unless the owner or possessor thereof can establish said vehicle as being capable of travel under its own power in its existing condition; or is totally dismantled, or is wrecked or damaged to the extent that it would be unlawful to use or operate said vehicle on a public street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 3, 8-15-72; Ord. No. 961, 10-19-82) 
Sec. 115-77. - Kept in enclosed structure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any junk automobiles or parts thereof on any premises not zoned for such storage under the ordinances of the city unless in a fully enclosed structure, except as specifically provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 2, 8-15-72; Ord. No. 960, 10-19-82) 
Sec. 115-78. - License required to store antique automobile. 
    Upon submitting an application upon a form prescribed by the City Clerk and paying a seventy-five dollar ($75.00) fee, a property owner who owns an antique automobile may be granted a revocable nonrenewable license for a period of six (6) months, to store or keep his antique automobile on his premises in the open for repairs or renovation. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 4, 8-15-72) 
Sec. 115-79. - Proof of registration and inspection. 
    After the expiration of six (6) months the licensee must submit to the city clerk proof of current registration and a current safety inspection sticker; and fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be refunded to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 5, 8-15-72) 
Sec. 115-80. - Violation by licensee. 
    After the expiration of the license period if the licensee is in violation of the provisions of this article, his automobile shall be deemed a junk automobile and he will be subject to prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 6, 8-15-72) 
Sec. 115-81. - Persons responsible for violation. 
    In the event of the storage or keeping of junk automobile parts, accessories or junk automobiles on a residential premises or any zoning district specified in this article, the persons responsible for the violation of this section shall include the owner of the automobile parts, accessories or junk automobiles and the occupant of the premises where stored, and the owner of such premises. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 7, 8-15-72) 
Secs. 115-82-115-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 2004-23, adopted Nov. 3, 2004, deleted Art. V, Sale of Motor Vehicles Prohibited in Certain Places, which derived from Ord. No. 1986-20, adopted June 3, 1986; Ord. No. 1987-14, adopted July 21, 1987; and Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994. 

Secs. 115-91-115-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 2004-23, adopted Nov. 3, 2004, deleted Art. V, Parking on Private Property, which derived from Ord. No. 1986-31, adopted Sept. 2, 1986; and Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted April 19, 1994. 

Secs. 115-100-115-105. - Reserved. 
Chapter 120 - WATER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal utilities, Ch. XIII; authority of city to acquire water, water rights and water storage rights, § 16.8. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 45; nuisances, Ch. 70; sewers, Ch. 95; connection to utilities, § 90-32. 
State Law reference- Municipal water utility, C. R. S. § 31-15-707, 708; C. R. S. Title 31, Art. 35. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 120-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Accessory dwelling unit: A detached dwelling unit located on the same lot as the principal dwelling unit, and regulated by Chapter 26 of this Code. 
    Apartment: A multiunit dwelling under a common ownership consisting of one (1) or more rental units. 
    Building: "Building" as used herein for purposes of applying the schedule of charges means an independent structure standing alone, excluding fences. To qualify as one (1) building, all portions, additions or extensions shall be connected by an attachment that is an enclosed part of the building and which is usable by the occupants thereof. 
    Combined uses: Developments with combined residential and other than residential uses in the same structure or building. 
    Commercial: Any nonresidential use of water. 
    Condominium: Any multiunit dwelling consisting of separate estates in individual air space units, each of which has an undivided interest in the common elements, if any. 
    Consumer: Any person, firm or corporation receiving water from the city waterworks. 
    Irrigation service: A metered water service within the city limits that supplies potable water and which water is used solely for irrigation purposes and consequently does not contribute effluent into the city's water reclamation system by supplying such water to a structure capable of or currently housing water reclamation facilities. 
    Mains: The main pipes; and connections forming a part of the city waterworks. 
    Multiunit dwelling: A building used by two (2) or more families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units. This definition does not include motels or hotels but does include trailer courts with each trailer space considered as one (1) dwelling unit. 
    Multiunit residential structures: This term includes multiunit dwellings, townhouses, apartments and condominiums. 
    Other than residential: All utility customers not included under the classifications in this section as single-family or multiunit dwellings shall be categorized as "other than residential," which includes but is not limited to business, commercial and industrial connections, and recreational facilities appurtenant to residential developments. 
    Service pipe: A branch pipe with its fittings and connections through which water is taken. 
    Single-family dwelling: A detached principal building other than a mobile home, designed for or used as a dwelling exclusively by one (1) family. 
    Street: Any street, avenue, alley, land or other thoroughfare. 
    Townhouse: A multiunit dwelling in which the ownership of each dwelling unit consists of a separate fee simple estate on an individually platted lot, together with an undivided fee simple interest in the common elements, if any. 
    Water district: A duly formed and existing water district which is formed and existing pursuant to applicable statutes of the State of Colorado. 
    Water service: A connection to the city waterworks and the ability to be served by the city waterworks. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1(a-f), 4-24-74; Ord. No. 1997-6, § 1, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 1999-50, § 1, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 1, 7-15-03) 
State Law reference- Definitions relating to water system, C. R. S. § 31-35-401. 
Sec. 120-2. - Policies and procedures. 
    The director of public works and/or the director of finance may establish policies and procedures for any matters not addressed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1999-50, § 2, 1-4-2000) 
Sec. 120-3. - Extensions-Subdivisions. 
(a)  The developer of any subdivision desiring water service from the city shall pay the entire cost of extending the city water service to his subdivision and shall deed to the city all mains and service connections required to serve his subdivision. The city shall pay for any oversizing of pipe which is required as a result of any master plan adopted by the city for service of water to any area either within or outside of the existing city limits. All extensions shall conform to city specifications. 
(b)  For subdivisions inside or outside the city limits, the city's main extension policy shall be as follows: 
(1)  The city will extend or require the subdivider to extend the required water main to the subdivision to be served. If the subdivider is required to extend the main, then the city will negotiate a repayment agreement with the subdivider which will allow said subdivider to recoup as much of the cost of the extension between the boundary of his subdivision and the nearest properly sized city water main as can be agreed upon. It shall be the city's policy that the subdivider shall pay for the extensions of any water line for his subdivision. 
(2)  In the event no agreement can be made between the city and the subdivider, then the city shall not be responsible to extend the main. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 7, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 1997-6, § 3, 5-20-97) 
State Law reference- Construction of water mains, C. R. S. § 31-35-301 et seq. 
Sec. 120-4. - Same-Individuals. 
    Any individual desiring an extension of the city water system to serve his private property shall pay the entire cost of extending the city water service to his property and shall deed to the city all water lines and improvements necessary to extend the service to his property. The city shall pay the cost of any oversizing of pipe which the city requires to serve any individual property as a result of any master plan which is adopted by the city for water service within or outside of the existing city limits. All extensions shall be approved by the city and conform to city specifications. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 8, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 1997-6, § 4, 5-20-97) 
State Law reference- Construction of water mains, C. R. S. § 31-35-301. 
Sec. 120-5. - Oversize line. 
    If the size line required to serve a subdivision or individual is smaller than the size line the city wishes installed for sound future planning, then the city will participate in the oversizing of the pipe from a minimum of six (6) inches to the size the city desires to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 17, 4-24-74) 
Sec. 120-6. - Water line modifications. 
(a)  The city recognizes its responsibilities as relates to water service to existing, developed, platted property within the city which is already served by water mains and fire hydrants which may be inadequate for conformance with sound engineering and public safety standards. When necessity arises for enlarging or replacing or otherwise upgrading the water distribution system in an existing, platted, developed area already served by city water, the improvements will be made by the city. If such improvements are made necessary by the development of a new subdivision which is to be served by a water main passing through an area described above, then the city may require the developer to negotiate a participation agreement with the city for the cost of the improvements. 
(b)  For an individual property owner desiring water service on an undeveloped, unplatted area of the city, where city water mains do not exist, the city's policy will be the same for the individual as for a subdivision in the same circumstance. 
(Ord. No. 621, §§ 15, 16, 4-24-74) 
Sec. 120-7. - Meters generally. 
    All water meters shall be set in place and kept in repair by the city, and shall be and remain the property of the city and under its control. The size and type of meter will be determined by calculations and criteria set by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 9, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 1997-6, § 5, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 1999-50, § 3, 1-4-2000) 
Sec. 120-7.1. - Independent metering. 
(a)  As of the effective date of this ordinance [October 10, 2001], all new consumers of city water services shall be independently metered, with the following consumers exempted: 
(1)  Water service customers who, prior to the effective date of this ordinance [October 10, 2001], live in multiunit dwellings and multiunit residential structures on a single master meter where an agent acts for the payment of water bills and water maintenance charges for the consumer owners are exempt from independent water metering, as long as the agent carries out all responsibilities of the owners in a timely manner; and 
(2)  Water service consumers in "other than residential" uses, as that term is defined in section 120-36 of this Code. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to require that consumers exempted in subsection (a) of this section be independently metered should those consumers or their agents not fill their responsibilities under this chapter in a timely or effective manner. 
(Ord. No. 1996-16, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-37, § 1, 10-2-01) 
Sec. 120-7.2. - Requirement for conversion. 
(a)  Except where water service consumers are exempted from the requirement of independent metering pursuant to sections 120-7.1 or 120-7.3 of this Code, the city shall convert all shared water meters to independent water meters, on such schedule as the city administrator shall determine to be in the best interests of the city. 
(b)  All consumers of city water services who are not independently metered as of the date of enactment of this ordinance, and who are not exempted from the requirement of an independent meter pursuant to section 120-7.1(a) of this Code, shall reimburse the city for the cost of installation of an independent meter, including materials, labor and any other expense necessary to the installation. 
(c)  The city's cost of converting a shared meter into two (2) or more independently metered systems shall be either divided equally between or among those consumers who share the meter, or divided between or among them based on actual individual consumers' conversion costs. The director of public works, based on the particular situation, will determine the appropriate method of cost allocation. 
(d)  An exempted consumer, as described in section 120-7.1 of this Code, who the city determines must be independently metered pursuant to section 120-7.1(b) of this Code, shall reimburse the city for the cost of installation of an independent meter, including materials, labor and any other expense necessary to the installation. 
(Ord. No. 1996-16, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 1999-50, § 4, 1-4-2000) 
Sec. 120-7.3. - Requirement for conversion; separation of properties. 
(a)  Where two (2) or more dwelling units are owned by one (1) party, either separated by a common wall or as separate buildings, and are served through one (1) service pipe or water meter, upon severing of ownership of the dwelling units, each dwelling unit severed shall thereafter be served by an independent meter. 
(b)  All costs for the service measured by the new meter will be the responsibility of the new owner. 
(c)  The city's cost of converting a shared meter into two (2) or more independently metered systems shall be divided equally between or among the owners of the dwelling units that shared the common meter; said owners shall reimburse the city for the cost of installation of the independent meters, including materials, labor and any other expense necessary to the installation. 
(d)  This section does not apply to the following types of properties existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance [October 10, 2001]: 
(1)  Water service customers in multiunit dwellings and multiunit residential structures on a single master meter where an agent acts for the payment of water bills and water maintenance charges for the consumer owners, as long as the agent carries out all responsibilities of the owners in a timely manner. 
(e)  The city reserves the right to require that the consumers exempted in subsection (d) of this section be independently metered should those consumers or their agents not fulfill their responsibilities under this chapter in a timely or effective manner. 
(Ord. No. 1996-16, § 1, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-37, § 2, 10-2-01) 
Sec. 120-7.4. - Payment of costs of conversion. 
    The city administrator may, in his discretion, authorize that the costs of conversion to an independent meter be paid by the water service consumer in installments, without interest, over such period of time as the city administrator may deem appropriate or necessary. The city administrator may, in his discretion, authorize that a discount of the costs of conversion be given to any water service consumer who pays the costs of conversion in a lump sum at the time of conversion. The costs of conversion to an independent meter shall constitute a water service charge which shall be paid and shall be subject to collection pursuant to Code section 120-61. 
(Ord. No. 1996-16, § 1, 9-3-96) 
Sec. 120-8. - Protection, maintenance, repair, and replacement of water meter and service pipe. 
(a)  Meters. It shall be the duty of the water consumer, the fee owner of the property being served with the city water, and the lessee of any such property to use all necessary precaution to keep the water meter from freezing and to protect the water meter from any damage from freezing or any damage caused by the negligence of any person, and if the meter shall be injured or damaged by freezing or by the negligence of any person, then such persons, above named, shall pay all necessary costs of repair or replacement and the failure to pay such costs of repair or replacement shall warrant and authorize the city in turning off the water to the property. 
(b)  Service pipes. It shall be the duty of the water consumer, the fee owner of the property being served with city water, and the lessee of any such property to maintain and to use all necessary precaution to keep the water service pipe which service pipe is defined as that pipe commencing at the water main and extending to the building or other appurtenance being served by water through which water is taken from freezing, and from damage caused by any injury to said service pipe. 
(c)  The maintenance and protection of privately-owned piping, including service pipe and fittings, pressure reducing valves, meter pits, fixtures and water-using appliances, except meters whether located in or upon public or private property, are the sole responsibility of the user, except as otherwise set forth below. The city is not responsible or liable for damage from any cause whatsoever to such piping, fixtures, appurtenances and water-using appliances, and no user is entitled to reimbursement for damages or payment of refunds by reason of pressure changes or stoppage of the flow of water through the system. The protection of water-using devices and systems which requires limited or sustained water pressure or a continual water supply is the responsibility of the user who will provide suitable protective devices, including pressure reducing valves for such apparatus at the owner's expense. The city will make available the following service to permitted premises: 
(1)  Repair of leaks on user service pipes which have curb stops will be performed by the city on that segment of the user's service pipe which lies between the water main and the outlet side of the curb stop. The user will repair all leaks that emanate from the threads on the outlet side of the curb stop and all other service pipe appurtenances on the outlet side of the curb stop. 
(2)  Repair of leaks on user service pipes that have outdoor meters and no curb stop will be performed by the city on that segment of the service pipe which lies between the water main through and including the valve at the inlet side of the meter and the meter-attaching coupling. The user will repair all leaks emanating from the service pipe or any of its appurtenances located on the outlet side of the meter yoke. The user will maintain the meter pit. 
(3)  Repair of leaks in service pipes that do not have curb stops or outdoor meters will be performed by the city only on that portion of the service pipe that is outside the user's property boundary or within a recorded easement for the service pipe. The user will repair all leaks emanating from the service pipe or any of its appurtenances located inside his property line. 
(4)  Repair of leaks on user service pipes which are connected to privately owned fire lines will be performed by the city as set forth above, as applicable, except that any repair will include repairs on that segment of the fire line between the main and the inlet side of the property line valve on the fire line but will exclude said property line valve. The city assumes no responsibility for maintenance or repair of fire lines which are free of domestic service pipes. However, if a user does not promptly repair a leak, the city may make any necessary repairs at the expense of the user or the owner. The city may recover the actual cost of the work or expense. 
(5)  The user is responsible for all damage to persons or property resulting from leaks from the service pipes or appurtenances thereto. 
(6)  Where a single connection but a common service pipe (irrespective of diameter) serves more than one (1) user independently metered and further where the common service may branch and cross from one (1) property to another, excluding: 
a.  any service pipe serving a multiunit dwelling, apartment or condominium as those terms are defined in section 120-36 of the Lafayette Code; and 
b.  any service pipe owned and maintained by the city and serving as a public main, such service pipe is hereby deemed a private water main. 
Where any private water main develops a leak between the meters and the city water main, whether the private water main is in an easement or private property, all of the users served through the private water main are jointly and severally responsible for all costs to repair the leaking service pipe. The city has the right to repair the leak after notification to the users and then to bill the repair costs and cost of unmetered water lost equally to all users and the failure to pay such costs shall warrant and authorize the city in turning off the water to the property or properties being served. 
(7)  Any maintenance provided by the city under this section will not include any responsibility for either the thawing of frozen service pipes or appurtenances, repairs to stub-in connections, or repairs of leaks caused by frozen service pipes if within any time in the previous seven (7) months the city has thawed or performed freeze-related repairs on the same service pipes. 
(8)  The repair service as hereinabove described will be provided without cost to the user only for those leaks that are attributed to normal wear and aging of the service pipe; except that such repair service will not be provided if the city determines that the service pipe is substandard, or that the service pipe is buried at too shallow a depth. Leaks caused by actions such as excavation, demolition, or landscaping upon the customer's property will not be repaired by the city and repair of such leaks is the responsibility of the user. Leaks caused by a customer or any third party through actions such as excavation, demolition or landscaping upon city-owned easement or right-of-way shall be repaired by the city; the city shall bill the person for whose benefit such action was conducted. The unmetered water lost due to the broken service pipe will be billed to the user at the appropriate rate as set forth in section 120-58 of this Code. The volume of lost water will be estimated based on service pipe size, break size, water pressure, and flow time. The failure to pay all costs billed by the city under this section shall warrant and authorize the city in turning off the water to the property or properties being served. 
(9)  Should the city perform any work or incur any expenses for the installation, removal, replacement, servicing, relocation, or maintenance of a water service pipe or appurtenances thereto, and any such work or expense is the responsibility of either the user or the owner, the city is authorized to recover the actual cost of such work or expense. The failure to pay such costs shall warrant and authorize the city in turning off the water to the property or properties being served. 
(10)  Nothing herein shall prevent any property owner from improving or replacing, at the property owner's sole expense, any service pipes owned by said property owner. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 10, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 1985-23, § 1, 7-16-85; Ord. No. 1993-11, § 1, 5-4-93) 
Sec. 120-8.1. - Access to property. 
    For the purpose of inspection, construction, or the performance of such maintenance as is available under this Code, authorized employees of the city will be allowed free access at reasonable hours to any building or premises where water is used. The city has the right of ingress and egress to utility easements at any time for the purpose of maintenance, construction, and repair of utilities. All such employees carry an identification card containing a picture of the employee. Unless such employee possesses such an identification card, the employee need not be admitted to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1993-11, § 2, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 1996-16, § 2, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 1997-6, § 6, 5-20-97) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1993-11, adopted May 4, 1993, added a new section to Ch. 120, but did not provide for specific designation of such section; such section has been designated as § 120-8.1 at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 120-9. - Tampering with meters, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any meter, or to install or use any by-pass or other device whereby water may be drawn from a service pipe without being registered by the meter. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 9, 4-24-74) 
State Law reference- Criminal tampering, C. R. S. §§ 18-4-505, 18-4-506. 
Sec. 120-10. - Pollution of water. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or cast any substance into any reservoir, well, trench, pipe or drain used in and necessary for the construction, maintenance or operation of the city waterworks system which may tend to fill up such reservoir or well or to obstruct the flow of water in such trench, pipe or drain or to pollute the water therein. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 13, 4-24-74) 
State Law reference- Criminal pollution of state waters, C. R. S. § 25-8-609. 
Sec. 120-11. - Using water from another connection. 
    Except to the extent that another consumer may be exempted from the independent meter requirement pursuant to section 120-7.1 or 120-7.3, it shall be unlawful for any consumer to permit water to be taken through his service pipe for the use of any person whose premises are not connected for the use of water through the city's mains. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 12, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 1996-16, § 2, 9-3-96) 
Sec. 120-12. - Hydrants. 
(a)  No water shall be used from the fire hydrants except for the extinguishment of fire, other municipal use or unless city approval has been obtained. Consumer use of hydrants shall require use of meters to measure water taken unless prior approval from the city is obtained. 
(b)  No person shall hitch any animal to or pile goods around or in any other way or manner obstruct the use of any of the public water hydrants. 
(c)  Any person violating subsection (a) or (b) of this section 120-12, upon first conviction shall be punished by a minimum fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00), which fine shall be imposed by the municipal court and shall not be suspended; upon second conviction shall be punished by a minimum fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), which fine shall be imposed by the municipal court and shall not be suspended; upon third conviction shall be punished by a minimum fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), which fine shall be imposed by the municipal court and shall not be suspended; and upon all subsequent convictions shall be punished by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); which fines shall be imposed by the municipal court and shall not be suspended. This offense is not punishable by imprisonment. 
(Code 1963, § 15-20; Ord. No. 621, § 14, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 1997, § 7, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 2001-4, § 1, 2-6-01) 
Sec. 120-13. - Irrigation-Restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any consumer or other person, or for the owner of any property to cause, permit, suffer, or allow any person to irrigate, sprinkle, or otherwise apply water from the municipal water utility system to any outdoor vegetation, including, but not limited to, lawns and gardens, between the hours of 10:00 a.m., and 6:00 p.m. 
(1)  The foregoing restriction shall not apply to: 
a.  Irrigation of land used for commercial agriculture; or 
b.  Watering by hand of any outdoor vegetation using a manually operated hose equipped with an automatic shut-off valve; or 
c.  Watering by hand of any community gardens using a manually operated hose equipped with an automatic shut-off valve; or 
d.  Irrigation of, short grass on city-owned or operated golf courses and city owned athletic fields. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any consumer or other person, or for the owner of any property to cause, permit, suffer or allow any person to irrigate, sprinkle, or otherwise apply water from the municipal water utility system to any lawn, garden, or other area of land in a manner that allows water to be cast upon a paved area or onto any other area not covered by vegetation. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any consumer or other person, or for the owner of any property to cause, permit, suffer, or allow any person to wash any paved area with a hose using water from the municipal water utility system. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all real property within the city, whether publicly or privately owned, and all land outside of the city that is served by the municipal water utility system. The provisions of this section may be enforced with respect to land located outside of the city by a suit for injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the testing of fire hydrants or fire sprinkler systems shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(e)  In addition to the restrictions set forth herein, city council may by resolution impose time restrictions on the use of municipal water for irrigation purposes. 
(f)  Water conservation enforcement personnel, as designated by the city's public works director, shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this section, including the issuance of municipal court summons and complaints. 
(g)  Prior to the issuance of a summons and complaint any consumer or person alleged to have violated any provision of this section shall first have received two (2) written warnings from water conservation, code or law enforcement personnel. Thereafter any consumer or other person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this section, shall upon first conviction be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), which fine shall not be suspended by the court; upon a second conviction of such consumer or other person there shall be imposed a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), which fine shall not be suspended by the court; upon a third and each subsequent conviction of such consumer or other person, there shall be imposed a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), which fine shall not be suspended by the court. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 2, 4-18-78; Ord. No. 1997, § 8, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 2013-27, § 1, 11-6-13) 
State Law reference- Water and irrigation, C. R. S. Title 37. 
Sec. 120-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 9 of Ord. No. 1997-6, adopted May 20, 1997, deleted in its entirety and reserved for future use § 120-14. Former § 120-14 pertained to special permits for irrigation and derived from Ord. No. 775, § 5, adopted April 18, 1978. 
Sec. 120-15. - Irrigation-Finding of noncompliance. 
    A finding by a duly authorized representative of the city of improper irrigation as provided in section 120-13 shall constitute presumptive evidence of a violation of sections 120-13-120-16 by the head of the household and/or any person occupying or owning the premises where such violation is found to occur. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 3, 4-18-78) 
Sec. 120-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 2017-22, adopted June 19, 2017, deleted § 120-16, which pertained to penalties for violation of irrigation provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 775, adopted Apr. 18, 1978; and Ord. No. 1994-6, adopted Apr. 19, 1994. 
Secs. 120-17-120-19. - Reserved. 
Sec. 120-20. - Connection of well to water system. 
    No person shall, under any circumstances or conditions, connect any water well whether registered with the state engineer or not, to any portion of the water transmission or distribution system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 639, § 1, 11-19-74) 
Sec. 120-21. - Shutting off water. 
    The council reserves the right to cause the water to be shut off in the mains when it deems necessary. The director of public works for the purpose of repairing or making connections for extensions to the waterworks or for the purpose of cleaning the same, may shut off the water at any time; provided that before the water shall be turned off from any school or public building, the director of public works shall notify the occupant or person in charge of such building. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 14, 4-24-74) 
Sec. 120-22. - Resale of water prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, except as authorized by resolution of council, for any person to resell water furnished or provided to such person by the city's water service system. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall prohibit landlords of multi-unit dwellings and multi-unit residential structures, exempt from the city's independent metering requirements, from charging tenants a monthly amount to reimburse such landlord the cost of supplying water for the term of the lease. 
(c)  The method of determining such amount and documentation supporting same shall be disclosed to the city upon its request and must, in the city's determination, be a reasonable estimate of the landlord's per capita or per dwelling unit cost to supply water based on previous usage rates and current water rates. 
(d)  The city has the authority to audit, upon reasonable notice, a landlord's records to ensure the landlord's water charges are in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-29, § 2, 12-7-10) 
Secs. 120-23-120-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 120-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 10 of Ord. No. 1997-6, adopted May 20, 1997, deleted in its entirety and reserved for future use § 120-36. Former § 120-36 pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 841, § 3, adopted June 15, 1979. The user is directed to the definitions in § 120-1. 
Sec. 120-37. - Permit. 
    No water service approval shall be granted, no water meter shall be installed and no water service shall be made on any water main or other portion of the waterworks of the city without first securing a permit or permits therefor. The application for a water meter or water service permit shall be made in writing upon a form furnished by the director of public works, and shall state clearly the water service and meter size, address and name of the person applying for the water service and any other information that the director of public works may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 2, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 120-38. - Fee required. 
    Any applicant desiring to take and use water from the water utility of the city shall pay to the city a water service fee pursuant to the schedule of water service fees prescribed in section 120-39.1. Applicants desiring to take and use water for a proposed structure within the city limits shall pay such fee at the time of issuance of a building permit or at a time pursuant to Article XIV of Chapter 30 of this Code. Applicants desiring to take and use water from the water utility of the city for an existing structure within the city limits, or any structure outside the city limits, whether existing or proposed, shall pay such fee prior to the issuance of a water utility connection permit. This fee shall be in addition to any other charges relating to water service elsewhere described in the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 2, 6-15-79; Ord. No. 1990-17, § 2, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03) 
Charter reference- Power of council to fix charges for public utility services, § 13.4. 
Sec. 120-39. - Responsibility for payment of fee. 
    The city shall look only to the owner and the owner's successors in interest of each property or building desiring water service for payment of the water service fee. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 3, 6-15-79; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 120-39.1. - Residential fee. 
    Residential tap fees shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 3, 6-15-79; Ord. No. 860, § 1, 12-18-79; Ord. No. 895, § 1, 11-4-80; Ord. No. 917, § 1, 7-21-81; Ord. No. 992, § 1, 9-20-83; Ord. No. 1985-28, § 1, 8-20-85; Ord. No. 1985-37, § 1, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 1993-12, § 1, 4-20-93; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 24, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 50, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 120-40. - Other than residential fee schedule. 
(a)  All utility customers, other than residential, shall pay a water tap fee set by resolution of city council. The size of the water meter, and therefore the amount of the water tap fee, shall be based on the total maximum demand of the proposed use exclusive of the demand for fire protection purposes. Maximum demand shall be determined on a fixture-unit basis as described in the International Plumbing Code, as adopted by the City in section 30-176 of the Code. The actual physical connection size and the location of the water main shall be determined by the public works department. 
(b)  Applicants shall provide all pertinent information necessary for determination of the water service fee as required by the director of public works. The applicant shall be required to provide the maximum design demand in gallons per minute for any landscape irrigation system. The fees shall be paid upon application for a building permit, or at any time prior to the purchase of the same, or at a time pursuant to Article XIV of Chapter 30 of this Code. No building permit or water utility connection permit shall be released until all public utility requirements have been satisfied, unless deferred as above stated. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 3, 6-15-79; Ord. No. 860, § 2, 12-18-79; Ord. No. 895, § 2, 11-4-80; Ord. No. 1986-37, § 2, 10-7-86; Ord. No. 1990-17, § 4, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 1993-12, § 2, 4-20-93; Ord. No. 2000-44, § 25, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 51, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 120-40.1. - Combined uses-fees. 
    Developments with combined uses shall be assessed a water service fee based on the individual uses within the structure. The "other than residential" portion shall be assessed in accordance with the "other than residential" fee schedule, and the residential portion shall be assessed in accordance with the residential fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1997-6, § 11, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 120-40.2. - Business and commercial condominiums. 
    Business, commercial and industrial developments designated to be sold and occupied in a manner similar to residential condominiums shall be assessed a water service fee pursuant to the "other than residential" schedule of fees. The industrial water service fee shall be based on the total demand of the building or structure. Any increase in total demand resulting from the installation of additional fixtures shall require an additional water service fee. 
(Ord. No. 1997-6, § 12, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 120-40.3. - Irrigation service. 
    The director of public works shall establish policies and procedures pursuant to section 120-2 to determine those utility customers who shall be required to obtain an irrigation service for landscape irrigation. All utility customers who are required to obtain an irrigation service pursuant to such policies and procedures, and all utility customers who desire to install an irrigation service or utilize a water service for irrigation purposes shall meet the requirements as specified by the director of public works pursuant to section 120-2, based on the schedule of fees for other than residential users. 
(Ord. No. 1997-6, § 13, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 1999-50, § 5, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 120-40.4. - Accessory buildings and dwelling units. 
    Separate water service, water meters and water rights fees are not required for secondary or accessory buildings on private lots or for accessory dwelling units on private lots zoned OTR (old town residential), on properties having a main or principal building or use, provided that ownership of such separate secondary, accessory buildings or accessory dwelling units and main or principal buildings is by a single person or entity. If ownership of a secondary, accessory building or accessory dwelling unit and a main or principal building is severed or is otherwise held by separate persons or entities, both of the buildings shall be required to obtain a separate water service and water meter, and to pay separate water rights fees. All costs for water service, water meters and water rights fees shall be the responsibility of the new owner. 
(Ord. No. 1997-6, § 14, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03; Ord. No. 2015-23, § 1, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 120-41. - Out of city fees. 
    Tap fees for connections outside the city limits shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 3, 6-15-79; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 52, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 120-42. - Installation costs. 
    Upon approval of the water service permit, the city shall install a water meter in a meter pit provided by the applicant. The applicant shall bear the cost of the meter and installation, yoke, corporation valve, pit and cap, and all costs of excavation and plumbing from the water service to the buildings or uses served. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 3, 6-15-79; Ord. No. 1997-6, § 15, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 1999-50, § 6, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 120-43. - Changes in use. 
    If a water utility system user applies for and obtains permission to make changes or additions to the property that would affect the demand on the water utility system, a new water utility system permit shall be required. The water utility service fee for such permit shall be computed on the basis of the new service as determined by the schedule of fees set forth in this article. Credit shall be given for the current amount of the water service fee required for the use of the water utility system prior to the changes or additions to the property. Credit shall also be allowed for approved decreases in the amount of the water utility system service. Under no circumstances shall the city be required to pay cash refunds for either decreases in the amount of water utility system service provided or for allowable credits in excess of the new water utility system service fee. Credits allowed herein shall apply to the property served by the existing water utility system service and shall be applied only to the water utility system service fees owed to the city and not to other utility fees or charges. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 3, 6-15-79; Ord. No. 1989-42, § 1, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 120-44. - Monthly charges. 
(a)  In the event that a water service is issued by the city but such water service is not put to use within one hundred eighty (180) days of issuance, the applicant shall be responsible for and liable for payment of minimum monthly water utility service charges as set forth in Article III of this chapter until such time as the water service is put to actual use. 
(b)  The city administrator shall have the authority to waive the requirements of paragraph (a) for up to one hundred eighty (180) additional days in the event that the water utility customer is able to show sufficient good cause for the waiver to be granted. 
(Ord. No. 841, § 3, 6-15-79; Ord. No. 1986-45, § 1, 12-2-86; Ord. No. 1999-1, § 1, 1-19-99; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 2, 7-15-03) 
Secs. 120-45-120-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 911, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 21, 1981, amended the Code in the following ways: § 1 provided for the repeal of Ord. No. 857 which had been codified as § 120-60 and pertained to water sold at bulk rates. Sec. 2 provided for the repeal of Ord. No. 852 which had been set forth as §§ 120-56, 120-57, 120-59, 120-62, 120-64-120-68 and pertained to definitions, rates and billing of water charges. Sec. 2 further enacted new provisions pertaining to similar subject matter which have been included as §§ 120-56-120-58 and 120-61. Inasmuch as former §§ 120-61 and 120-63 were not specifically repealed, they have been renumbered by the editor as §§ 120-59 and 120-60 for purposes of classification, and provisions of former, § 120-58 were deleted as being superseded by those set forth in "Exhibit A." 
Charter reference- Power of council to fix utility rates, § 13.4; collection of utility rates and charges, § 13-5. 

Sec. 120-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 16 of Ord. No. 1997-6, adopted May 20, 1997, deleted in its entirety and reserved for future use § 120-56. Formerly § 120-56 pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 911, § 2(c), adopted April 21, 1981. The user is directed to the definitions in § 120-1. 
Sec. 120-57. - Service charge components. 
(a)  Each user of the city's water utility system shall be assessed charges on a monthly basis for the use of the water utility system. Such charges shall be set by resolution of city council and consist of a basic monthly rate, a high volume surcharge and a monthly service charge per unit. 
(b)  Charges for service outside the city limits shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, a "unit" is defined as an independent dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 911, § 2, 4-21-81; Ord. No. 954, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 1989-57, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 2002-39, § 1, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 53, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 120-58. - Basic monthly charge. 
    In consideration of meter sizes and minimum monthly volumes, the basic monthly charge shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 911, § 2, 4-21-81; Ord. No. 1989-57, § 2, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 1995-12, § 1, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 1997-6, § 17, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 2001-37, §§ 3, 4, 10-2-01; Ord. No. 2002-39, § 2, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 3, 7-15-03; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 54, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 120-58.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 2003-10, adopted April 7, 2003, repealed § 120-58.1, which pertained to basic monthly charge during drought conditions, and derived from Ord. No. 2002-12, adopted May 21, 2002. 
Sec. 120-59. - Computation of rate. 
(a)  The schedule of water rates in this article shall be applied to water used or consumed as determined by the water meter readings which are made by the city. 
(b)  Water meters are to be read to the nearest one thousand (1,000) gallons; thus any meter containing a portion of one thousand (1,000) gallons shall be rounded off to the nearest one thousand (1,000) gallons. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 5, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 911, § 2, 4-21-81) 
Sec. 120-60. - Building occupied by more than one (1) tenant. 
    Owners or agents in charge of business blocks or other buildings occupied by more than one (1) tenant using water from the same service pipe shall be required to pay the water rate for the whole of such buildings, unless a separate meter is installed for each tenant. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 11, 4-24-74; Ord. No. 911, § 2, 4-21-81) 
Sec. 120-61. - Billing and payment. 
(a)  Bills for water and water reclamation service charges shall be mailed regularly as provided by policies and procedures established pursuant to section 120-2 of this chapter. Such bills shall state the amount of utility service charges attributable to the customer's use of the utility system. Except as otherwise provided in section 120-7.1, where the utility customer is not the owner of the property served, the bill shall state the owner or property management company name after the tenant name. All final utility bills shall be issued to the owner or property management company of any rental property. The city may seek payment from any responsible party, but the owner of the property is ultimately responsible for the payment of all charges. 
(b)  In the event that a utility bill is not paid by the fourteenth day following the date of mailing, the city treasurer may give the utility user a delinquent notice in writing that the bill must be paid within seven (7) days of the date of the notice. There shall be added to all utility bills that are thirty (30) or more days delinquent, an interest charge of one and one-half (1.5) percent per month on the delinquent portion of the bill, not to exceed a total of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount due. The owner or property management company of any rental property will be notified by a duplicate delinquent notice. This action shall constitute proper notification by the city to all parties responsible for payment of the utility bill applicable to the property. 
(c)  In case any person shall fail or refuse to pay all charges as prescribed herein, or fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the water and water reclamation utility ordinances of the City of Lafayette, the director of public works may shut off the water to said premises, building, house, lot or dwelling unit, and water shall not be turned on again until all charges are paid, together with a shut-off and turn-on fee as set by resolution of city council, interest accrued, and the cost of collecting said charges, or until compliance with the provisions of the water or water reclamation utility ordinances of the City of Lafayette have been obtained. The cost for out-of-city customers shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(d)  In cases where more than one (1) premises, lot, house, building or dwelling unit is lawfully served by a common meter, pursuant to the exemptions listed in sections 120-7.1 and 120-7.3, only one (1) statement or bill comprising all charges for water and water reclamation services furnished shall be issued. If that bill is not paid when due, or if anyone served through said common meter fails to comply with any of the water or water reclamation ordinances of the City of Lafayette, the city may discontinue all water service through said meter and to the premises receiving water through said meter, until such charges, together with costs and interest, if any, are paid or the ordinances have been complied with. No claim for damages because of such turnoff or discontinuance of water service may be made against the water utility of the city by anyone receiving water through a common meter, who has complied with the water or water reclamation utility ordinances, or who has paid a proportionate or other share of the charges outstanding and remaining unpaid. As a condition precedent to the furnishing of water through a common meter, any act or omission requiring the city to discontinue water service through said common meter and to be premises receiving water thereby shall be deemed to be a joint act of persons who are served through said meter. 
(e)  The city will transfer the unpaid balance of a final utility bill to the active water account on a given property after all other collection procedures have been attempted. The owner of any given property shall be ultimately responsible for all water and water reclamation services and charges applicable to their property. The city shall have for security of the collection of such utility rates, penalties and charges, a lien upon the real property served, which lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of water and water reclamation service and shall not be discharged until the payment is made of all the utility service bills, penalties and charges herein provided. 
(f)  If the lien as provided in this section is not discharged by payment, the city administrator shall report the delinquency to the council not less than three (3) months from the date thereof; and the council shall be authorized to collect the delinquent bill by causing such delinquent charges to be certified to the treasurer of Boulder County to be collected and paid over to the treasurer of the city in the same manner as taxes. 
(g)  Alternately, upon the election of council, such proceedings may be instituted for the enforcement and foreclosure of such lien in accordance with the provisions of the statutes of the State of Colorado relating to mechanic's and material liens in accordance with the authority contained in Sections 38-20-101 and 38-21-101 Colorado Revised Statutes, 2007. 
(h)  In the event of such suit, the city shall also be entitled to judgment against the owner or occupant of the premises served for the costs and expenses of such suit, including attorneys' fees in addition to the amount delinquent and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 911, § 2, 4-21-81; Ord. No. 1984-04, § 1, 3-6-84; Ord. No. 1996-16, § 3, 9-3-96; Ord. No. 1999-50, § 7, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 55, 3-1-05) 
Sec. 120-62. - Additional service charges. 
(a)  Turn on and restore service. There shall be charged and added to bills for water service a fee set by resolution of city council each time a municipal water user or his agent requests that the city turn on and restore municipal water service that has been turned off at the request of or by the water user or his agent. Said fee shall be charged at the time the water service is turned on and shall be added to the user's water bill as provided in section 120-61. During the period that a municipal water user's service is turned off, said municipal water user shall be responsible for the payment of the minimum basic monthly charge for water service pursuant to section 120-58 and the minimum basic monthly charge for sewer service pursuant to section 95-94 with the exception of water service provide by an irrigation service. 
(b)  Meter reset fee. There shall be charged a fee set by resolution of city council when any person requests an initial water meter setting for a new water connection, and the property is not prepared for such connection at the time the city attempts to set the meter. The fee shall be assessed to the person's utility bill. 
(c)  Shutoff notice. There shall be charged and added to bills for water service a fee set by resolution of city council for the physical placement of a final shutoff notice on the property for which water service is to be disconnected. 
(d)  Stretcher bars/meter jumpers. For the purposes of this section a "stretcher bar" or "meter jumper" is defined as an apparatus that allows a municipal water user to bypass the meter requirement and utilize water free of charge. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for any person to install, permit the installation of, use, or otherwise benefit from the use of a stretcher bar or meter jumper. In addition to any penalties that may be assessed by the municipal court for violation hereof, any person violating this section shall also pay to the city a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day that the stretcher bar or meter jumper remains in place. 
(Ord. No. 1988-21, § 1, 11-15-88; Ord. No. 1989-12, § 1, 3-21-89; Ord. No. 1989-39, § 1, 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1996-13, § 1, 8-6-96; Ord. No. 1997-6, § 18, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 1999-50, § 8, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 4, 7-15-03; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 56, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 4-20-10) 
Sec. 120-63. - Adjustment to utility bills. 
    Any adjustments to utility bills, including water, water reclamation, water service, service charges, fees, etc., shall only be permitted as provided by policies and procedures established pursuant to section 120-1.1 of this chapter. Adjustments may be made only for good cause shown. Only the director of finance or designee may make adjustments. The director of finance may consult with the director of public works in making an adjustment determination. No adjustment may reduce interest charges to less than one-half (1/2) percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 1999-50, § 9, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 4, 7-15-03) 
Secs. 120-64-120-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXTENSION OF SERVICE RE: ANNEXATION, SUBDIVISION OF LAND, ETC.[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 2003-7, adopted April 7, 2003, amended Art. IV, §§ 120-81-120-133, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 924, adopted Aug. 18, 1981; Ord. No. 941, adopted March 2, 1982; Ord. No. 981, adopted July 5, 1983; Ord. No. 1990-17, adopted Aug. 21, 1990; Ord. No. 1994-20, adopted July 19, 1994; Ord. No. 1995-1, adopted Jan. 17, 1995; Ord. No. 1997-6, adopted May 20, 1997; Ord. No. 1999-42, adopted Oct. 19, 1999; and Ord. No. 2000-44, adopted Nov. 21, 2000. 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, App. B. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 120-81. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Lafayette Water Rights Dedication Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-82. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to further the goals of sound water management by requiring the dedication of reliable water rights prior to any commitment by the city to extend or supply treated water service to new customers, and thereby to assure an adequate and stable supply of water for the City of Lafayette service area; to prevent the abandonment of water rights to the detriment of the city; to ensure the financial stability of the city water utility; and to promote the general welfare of the public. 
    This article, in part, provides a supplemental requirement for annexation pursuant to the Municipal Annexation Act of 1965, C.R.S. 1973, Section 31-12-101 et seq., and is not to be construed as altering, modifying, eliminating or replacing any requirements set forth in that act or any requirements set forth in other city ordinances or the City Charter. 
    It is not the intent of this article to extend water service outside the boundaries of the city when such extension would be inconsistent with the Lafayette Comprehensive Plan or the City Charter, or when the extension of such service would render the city incapable of meeting any of its present or future obligations within the city boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-83. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Annexation means the act of attaching, adding, joining or uniting a parcel of land to the legal entity known as the City of Lafayette. 
    Applicant means any person who submits an application to the city requesting annexation, replatting, subdivision or water service extension approval. 
    Appurtenant means belonging to, accessory or incident to, adjunct, appended, or annexed to. 
    Average net annual stream depletion yield means the net stream depletion yield that has occurred historically, over a representative time period, divided by the number of years within that time period. 
    CBT water means an allotment contract entitling the holder to a share of the water supply from the Colorado Big Thompson Project administered by the NCWCD. 
    City staff means any employee of the city, as well as any person or entity that the city council or employees of the city elect to consult. 
    Conveyance of legal title to water rights means the legal process by which legal title to the water rights to be dedicated is transferred to the city by appropriate deed and assignment of any applicable corporate stock, or, in the case of CBT water, approval of a transfer of one (1) or more units of CBT water by the Board of Directors of the NCWCD. 
    Dedication means the total divestiture of property, without consideration, for use by the public, and acceptance for such use by the city council. 
    Lease means any grant for permissive use that results in the creation of a landlord-tenant relationship on a contractual basis. 
    NCWCD means the Northern Colorado Water Conservancy District. 
    Net annual stream depletion yield means that quantity of water, associated with a decreed right other than CBT water offered for dedication, that is totally lost to the stream system in a given year, as a result of the application of the water involved to a beneficial use. The net annual stream depletion yield for a water right that has been decreed as being from a nontributary source, shall be one hundred (100) percent of the water available for diversion and beneficial use. 
    Nonresidential development means those areas of the city that are not or will not be zoned for residential occupancy, and shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, developments containing commercial, industrial, office and similar uses. 
    Plat is an accurately surveyed map or chart of a piece of land subdivided into one (1) or more lots with streets, alleys, roads and other such avenues of transportation delineated thereon and drawn to scale. 
    Relative standard deviation (also referred to as the coefficient of variation) means the standard deviation of yield divided by the average (mean) yield of a water right. 
    Replat means to make a change in the original plat, or, where there is no original plat, the act of creating a plat for previously unplatted property. 
    Residential multifamily development means those areas of the city where people reside or are intended to reside on a permanent basis in a building used by two (2) or more families living independently of each other in separate dwelling units. This definition does not include motels or hotels but does include townhouses, condominiums, apartments and mobile home courts. Each mobile home space shall be considered as one (1) dwelling unit. 
    Residential single-family development means those areas of the city where people reside or are intended to reside on a permanent basis in a detached principal building other than a mobile home and which principal building is designed for or used as a dwelling exclusively by one (1) family. 
    Safe net annual stream depletion yield means the minimum net annual stream depletion that is expected to occur. 
    Standard deviation means the square root of the quantity: The sum of the squares of the deviation of each year's yield from the average yield, divided by the number of years of the study period used in the determination less one (1). In equation form, the definition appears as follows: 
  
Formula 
  
Where: 
X;sub \sub; = the yield of the individual year 
X = the average yield for the period of study 
n = the number of years of a representative study period 
i = the number one, two, three, ..., n for each year of the study period. 
    Subdivide or subdivision shall have the same meaning as defined in Chapter 26 of this code. 
    Sufficient legal priority means that the water right(s) proposed for dedication shall have a sufficient probability of being physically and legally available for diversion from the stream system, in order to provide a dependable supply of water to the city. CBT water is hereby deemed to have sufficient legal priority. A direct flow water right shall qualify only if its priority is such that some water will be physically and legally available for diversion from the stream system into the city's municipal water system each and every year. Further, the water right shall have a relative standard deviation of net annual stream depletion yield of no more than forty (40) percent; or have a ratio of safe net annual stream depletion yield to average net annual stream depletion yield of at least fifty-hundredths (0.50). A storage right shall qualify only if there is a seventy (70) percent probability of the reservoir right yielding, each year, the amount of water for which credit is given. In making these determinations, factors to be considered shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the adjudication date and appropriation date of the water right, the decreed use(s), the historic usage of the water proposed for dedication, the physical flow available in the stream, and the administrative practices of the Office of the State Engineer. 
    Transferable net stream depletion yield means that amount of average net annual stream depletion yield that is capable of being transferred to the city's municipal water system in an appropriate water court proceeding. 
    Unit of CBT water means 1/310,000 of the water supply from the Colorado Big Thompson Project declared available, from year to year, to the NCWCD by its Board of Directors. 
    Water right means a decreed right to use, in accordance with its priority, a certain portion of the waters of the state by reason of the appropriation and beneficial use of the same, or one (1) or more units of CBT water. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-84. - Cash-in-lieu of water rights value for an acre foot of water and CBT unit yield. 
(a)  The cash-in-lieu of water rights value shall be set by resolution of city council, and shall be based upon defraying the city's actual or estimated expenses to locate and acquire new water rights, or to increase the effective yield of currently held water rights, all as may be needed to adequately serve the demands of the city's customers. 
(b)  The yield of CBT water for the purpose of calculating the water rights dedication to the city, as described in division 2 of this article, shall be set by resolution of city council. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 57, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, 11-3-14) 
Sec. 120-84.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 2014-18, adopted Nov. 3, 2014, repealed § 120-84.1, which pertained to the CBT unit yield and derived from Ord. No. 2005-10, adopted Mar. 1, 2005. 
Sec. 120-85. - Existing supply and distribution systems from entities other than the City of Lafayette. 
(a)  Because the city understands that some annexations may include areas with existing water supply service (including membership in water supply organizations or inclusion in water districts), the city may make a downward adjustment in the dedication requirement when the city council determines, in its sole and absolute discretion, that it is appropriate to do so to account for such existing water systems. 
(b)  In such cases, the city council, with assistance from the city staff, shall make a full analysis of the potential future water supply burden that may be placed upon the city by such annexation. The city council shall consider all factors affecting the water supply situation, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The probability that the applicant will continue to rely on the other system and not seek or demand water service from the city at some time in the future; 
(2)  The legal obligation of the city to supply water to the annexed area regardless of any existing system in the area; 
(3)  Evidence of water service commitments secured by the applicant from a water district or water supply organization with the capability of reliably meeting the demands represented by those commitments; 
(4)  The extent to which the district or other water supply organization has extended distribution lines into the area that are capable of providing reliable service to that area, or the extent to which the extension of such lines is assured; 
(5)  The age and condition of the existing water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 5, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 120-86. - Lease back provision. 
    If the water dedicated is not needed immediately for transfer and use in the city's system, the applicant shall have the first right to lease back the dedicated water rights at a lease rate per acre foot to be determined by the council at the first city council meeting in February of each year. The lessee shall be required to pay any applicable ditch assessments or related costs associated with the water rights leased. The duration of any lease shall be for one (1) year only, and any renewal shall be solely at the discretion of the city council. The city assumes no liability for nondelivery of leased water. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-87. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to the subdivision or replatting of any annexed lands where the applicant can demonstrate that the requirements set forth in previous city water rights dedication ordinances or in this ordinance have already been met. Also, this ordinance shall not apply to subdivision agreements into which the city has entered prior to May 1, 2003, unless the terms and conditions of said agreements are altered or amended, or the agreements have expired prior to the fulfillment of any water rights dedication, or cash-in-lieu of water rights obligations contained therein. 
(b)  Whenever an application pertains to the annexation, replatting, subdivision or water service extension to a parcel of property already serviced by city water, the applicant will not have to comply with the dedication requirements for the land area encompassed by the lot or lots containing those existing dwellings or structures that are presently so served; provided, however, that no additional construction takes place on the lot or lots so exempted. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-88. - Future obligations. 
    This article is intended to increase the water supply of the city in order to meet the increased water requirements attributable to annexations, subdivisions, replatting and extensions of water service. Under no circumstances should this article be interpreted to relieve the applicant, his successors, assigns, or future residents of the subject land, of any obligation to install water mains or other facilities, to pay water service fees or plant investment fees that may be imposed by the city for the expansion or improvement of its water treatment and water reclamation facilities, or to pay reasonable fees or charges to the city for the performance of services. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 6, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 120-89. - Safety clause. 
    If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the article that can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications, and to this end the provisions or applications of this article are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 120-91. - Approval of subdivision, etc., conditioned upon dedication of water rights. 
    The dedication and conveyance of CBT water, direct flow and/or storage water rights to the city shall be required as a condition precedent to the approval of the subdivision or replatting of any land zoned and/or used as residential property. The dedication and conveyance of CBT water, direct flow and/or storage water rights to the city for all property other than residential shall be required as a condition precedent to the approval of a water service application. Also, subject to section 120-87, said requirement shall apply to all extensions of municipal treated water service. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 2003-20, § 7, 7-15-03) 
Sec. 120-92. - Amounts of water to be dedicated. 
    For any land to be annexed, subdivided, replatted, or served by an extension of water service, (1) the party seeking approval for the annexation, subdivision, replatting, or water service extension within the city limits, or (2) any water district whose service area lies entirely within unincorporated Boulder County, shall dedicate to the city the following amounts of water: 
(a)  Residential developments. For each dwelling unit of each annexation, subdivision or replat, or for each dwelling to be served by an extension of water service, the party seeking approval for the subdivision, replatting or water extension shall dedicate to the city the following amounts of water: 
(1)  For residential single-family development five-tenths (0.5) of an acre foot, consisting of: 
a.  Direct-flow water rights of a "sufficient legal priority" to provide for each dwelling unit an annual average of five-tenths (0.5) of an acre foot of transferable net stream depletion yield, after having been properly discounted to take into account the appropriation date of the rights; 
b.  Storage water rights of a "sufficient legal priority" to provide an annual average of five-tenths (0.5) of an acre foot of water per dwelling unit; or 
c.  A combination thereof. 
(2)  For residential multifamily development thirty-five one hundredths (0.35) of an acre foot, consisting of: 
a.  Direct-flow water rights of a "sufficient legal priority" to provide for each dwelling unit an annual average of thirty-five one hundredths (0.35) of an acre foot of transferable net stream depletion yield, after having been properly discounted to take into account the appropriation date of the rights; 
b.  Storage water rights of a "sufficient legal priority" to provide an annual average of thirty-five one hundredths (0.35) of an acre foot of water per dwelling unit; or 
c.  A combination thereof. 
(3)  For each acre of nonresidential uses within residential developments (recreation centers, parks, greenbelts, etc.) two (2) acre feet, consisting of: 
a.  Direct-flow rights of a "sufficient legal priority" to provide for an annual average of two-acre feet of transferable net stream depletion yield after having been properly discounted to take into account the appropriation date of the rights; 
b.  Storage water rights of a "sufficient legal priority" to provide an average of two-acre foot of water; or 
c.  A combination thereof. 
(4)  For each residential multifamily development with no dwelling unit outdoor irrigation one-quarter (.25) acre foot, consisting of: 
a.  Direct-flow rights of a "sufficient legal priority" to provide for an annual average of one-quarter (0.25) acre foot of transferable net stream depletion yield after having been properly discounted to take into account the appropriation date of the rights; 
b.  Storage water rights of a "sufficient legal priority" to provide an average of one-quarter (0.25) acre foot of water; or 
c.  A combination thereof. 
(b)  Nonresidential developments. Subject to modification by the provisions contained in sections 120-95 and 120-96, below, for each acre of nonresidential development two (2) acre feet, consisting of: 
(1)  Direct-flow rights of a "sufficient legal priority" to provide an annual average of two (2) acre feet of transferable net stream depletion yield after having been properly discounted to take into account the appropriation date of the rights; 
(2)  Storage water rights of a "sufficient legal priority" to provide an annual average of two (2) acre feet of water; or 
(3)  A combination thereof. 
(c)  Out-of-city water service. Any party or entity seeking an out-of-city water service shall dedicate to the city double the amount of water otherwise required by this section. 
(d)  The quantity of water required for fractional acres shall be determined proportionately. Where the quantity of water required is expressed in fractional CBT units, the quantity shall be rounded up to the nearest full unit. 
(e)  CBT dedication calculation. All parties who dedicate units of CBT water to the city to meet the water dedication requirements of this article shall calculate the number of CBT units to dedicate to the city by the following formula: 
Total acre foot dedication divided by the CBT unit yield = Number of CBT units. 
The yield of CBT is set forth in section 120-84 and paragraph (d) of this section applies to the calculation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 2005-10, §§ 59, 60, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2005-23, § 1, 8-2-05; Ord. No. 2014-18, § 3, 11-3-14; Ord. No. 2016-17, § 1, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 120-92.1. - Expansion of use. 
    If a water utility system user expands the demand on the water utility system as provided in section 120-43, additional water rights shall be dedicated. The dedication requirement shall be determined by calculating the requirement as outlined in section 120-92 and crediting the previously dedicated amount of water rights. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-93. - Acceptance of water rights by city; determination of yield. 
(a)  Only those water rights that the city, in its sole and absolute discretion, deems capable of being transferred into the city's municipal water system will be accepted. The specific yield allocated to each water right proposed to be dedicated, shall be determined solely and exclusively by the city. 
(b)  At the sole and absolute discretion of the city, water rights not meeting the criteria for "sufficient legal priority," as defined above, may be accepted, if said water rights contain attractive transfer or other characteristics, and further, that the water rights have an eighty (80) percent probability of yielding, each year, the amount of transferable net stream depletion for which credit is given. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-94. - Cash (etc.)-in-lieu of water rights. 
(a)  In the event that a person seeking annexation, subdivision, replatting, or water service extension approval within the city limits, or any water district whose service area lies entirely within unincorporated Boulder County: 
(1)  Is required to dedicate less than ten (10) acre feet, at the sole and absolute discretion of the public works director, cash-in-lieu of water rights may be substituted; 
(2)  Is unable to dedicate sufficient water rights to meet the requirements described herein, at the sole and absolute discretion of the city council, cash (or other consideration)-in-lieu of water rights may be substituted. 
In order to defray the expense the city must incur in locating and purchasing water rights to totally or partially satisfy developments for which sufficient water rights are not dedicated, the cash equivalent price shall be determined by section 120-84. 
(b)  In the event that any person seeking an out-of-city water service is permitted to satisfy his water rights dedication obligation by cash (or other consideration)-in-lieu of water rights, any such person shall pay twice the cash-in-lieu of water rights value set forth in section 120-84. 
(c)  If the city council makes a specific determination that the health, safety and welfare of the users of the municipal water utility would be benefited by the receipt of cash payments instead of water rights dedications, the city council may decide that applicants subject to water rights dedication obligations should be encouraged to pay cash. Such a preference shall be established by passage of a resolution by the city council setting forth the specific reasons therefore and establishing a date certain, after which the cash preference will expire. The preference may be extended by subsequent resolutions of the city council. Total or partial compliance with the city's preference for cash-in-lieu of water rights shall be optional with each applicant. For those applicants who elect to provide cash during the period when the preference is in effect, the cash equivalent price shall be determined by the city council resolution, in which the preference determination was established. All the money received by the city shall be used solely for the purchase of water rights, for the purchase of raw water storage space, or for financing the construction of capital improvement projects designed to enhance the city's raw water storage capabilities. 
(d)  Any consideration other than cash shall be evaluated by the city council on a case-by-case basis. The amount of credit given, if any, shall be determined by the city council after considering the advice of the city staff. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 61, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 2016-17, § 2, 4-19-16) 
Sec. 120-95. - Requirements adjusted for high use developments. 
    For nonresidential uses within residential developments and nonresidential developments that contain high water users, the city council, with assistance from the city staff, shall make a determination of the amount of water projected to be required to serve the area described within any application for annexation, replatting, subdivision or water service extension approval. If the results of the study indicate that the nonresidential uses within residential developments and nonresidential development will require more water than the two-acre feet per acre minimum set forth in subsections 120-92(a)(3) and 120-92(b) above, then the dedication requirement shall be adjusted accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 2014-18, § 3, 11-3-14) 
Sec. 120-96. - Downward adjustment; owner's responsibility in event of projection shortfall. 
    The city recognizes that certain nonresidential uses within residential developments and nonresidential developments may, when built, require less than two-acre feet of water per acre each year. Therefore, should an applicant seeking subdivision, replatting or water service extension approval for a nonresidential subdivision believe that the two-acre feet of water per acre requirement exceeds the amount of water needed to serve each acre of the proposed development when completed, the applicant shall have the option of presenting data to the director of public works documenting the development's projected annual water needs. 
    The director of public works shall review the data so provided and may review any other pertinent data including, but not limited to, the actual water usage of other developments comparable to the proposed development. After reviewing the data, the director of public works shall determine whether the two-acre feet of water per acre requirement exceeds the amount of water that will be needed to serve each acre of the proposed development when completed. If the director of public works determines that the amount of water required to serve each acre of the nonresidential uses within residential developments, or the nonresidential development, is less than two-acre feet per year, an appropriate downward adjustment in the dedication requirement shall be made by the director of public works. 
    All charges incurred by the city in conjunction with the review process shall be assessed to the applicant. Payment of said charges shall be required as a condition precedent to application approval. A decision of whether the data provided by an applicant is sufficient for purposes of conducting a meaningful review shall be determined solely by the city. Adequate assurance that the lands described in the application will not develop in a manner such that the ultimate water usage exceeds the projected estimates (in the form of platting restrictions, covenants running with the land or similar legal mechanisms that will bind not only the applicant, but subsequent owners and lessees of both the land and all structures contained thereon), must be provided by the applicant. If, in the future, the annual water needs of the developed area exceed the projected level of usage, the then current owner shall be responsible for providing the city with the additional water rights to make up for any shortfall. Said water rights shall meet the criteria of the water rights dedication ordinance then in effect. Failure to comply with this requirement shall result in the automatic imposition of a moratorium on the issuance of new water taps for the development and/or the discontinuation of water service to the affected area. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 2014-18, § 5, 11-3-14) 
Secs. 120-97-120-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURE 

Sec. 120-101. - Application-Submission; contents. 
    All applications for annexation, subdivision, replatting or extension of municipal water service shall be submitted to the city planning department. Any such application shall comply with the requirements of the planning department then in effect. The application shall be accompanied with a summary of the water rights appurtenant to the property to be served by city services. At a minimum, the water rights summary must contain the information requested in division 5. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03; Ord. No. 2011-33, § 13, 9-20-11; Ord. No. 2019-06, § 2, 2-19-2019) 
Sec. 120-102. - Same-Number of acres; acre feet of water. 
    The city staff shall determine the number of gross acres that are described in the application and the number of acre feet of water required to be dedicated by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-103. - Same-Preliminary determination re water rights. 
    The city staff shall also make a preliminary determination concerning whether the water rights proposed for dedication can be transferred into the city's municipal water system, and are of a sufficient legal priority, have a satisfactory historic usage and yield enough water each year to satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-104. - Same-Submission to council. 
    The application, along with the city staff's determinations and recommendations, shall then be submitted to the city council for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-105. - Council action. 
    After evaluating the application and considering the determinations and recommendations provided by the city staff, the city council shall either, accept, accept in part, or reject the water rights offered for dedication. The council shall also have the option of requesting additional information from the applicant prior to a formal resolution of the matter. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-106. - Acceptance of water rights; required. 
    It is the intent of this article, that subject to the provisions set forth in division 4 herein, no annexation, subdivision, replatting or request for water service extension shall be approved until the city council has formally accepted water rights, or cash (or other consideration)-in-lieu of water rights, that fully comply with the water right dedication requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-107. - Dedication to be complete; fees and costs. 
(a)  The dedication and conveyance of all water rights shall be complete, without any conditions or contractual clauses, outstanding assessments, liens or encumbrances whatsoever, unless the express approval of the city council is obtained. In the case of direct-flow or storage water rights, the dedication and conveyance shall be considered complete upon transfer of title to the water rights to the city. In the case of CBT water, the dedication and conveyance shall be considered complete upon approval of the application for transfer by the NCWCD board of directors. 
(b)  The applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for all costs and fees, including transfer fees, associated with transferring into the city's municipal water system, any water rights either dedicated by the applicant or purchased by the city with cash-in-lieu of water rights provided by the applicant. In the case of direct-flow or storage water rights, such costs and fees shall include, but not be limited to, those associated with any necessary water court proceedings to change the water rights to municipal use. In the case of CBT water, such costs and fees shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of obtaining approval of the transfer to the city by the NCWCD board of directors. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-108. - Dedication of carriage rights. 
    The applicant shall dedicate any carriage rights that are associated with the dedicated water rights or that the city determines to be necessary to transport the water into the city's municipal system. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-109. - Transfer of consideration; time of valuation. 
    Whenever the city council permits the applicant to satisfy the dedication requirements by substituting cash (or other consideration) in lieu of water rights, instead of, or in combination with, water rights, city council approval of the application for annexation, subdivision, replatting or request for water service extension shall be contingent upon tender of the cash payment or conveyance of the substitute consideration. The cash in lieu of water rights valuation shall be made as of the date payment in full is tendered to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-110. - Dry-up covenant. 
    Whenever the city council determines that the transfer of an irrigation water right to municipal purposes will be contingent upon documenting, to the water court, that lands historically irrigated with the water right have been taken out of irrigation, approval of the application shall be contingent upon the current owner of the historically irrigated property entering into a binding dry-up covenant with the city, that encompasses and runs with the affected lands. The need for such a covenant, as well as the specific lands to be so covered, shall be determined solely by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-111. - Expenses; payment by applicant. 
    Applicants shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by the city in evaluating the contents of each application, specifically including the acceptability and yield of the water rights offered for dedication. This responsibility shall include fees charged by outside water consultants the city may employ in the legal and engineering fields. Payment of said expenses shall be a condition precedent to application approval. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-112. - Escrow of transfer charges. 
    The city council, after receiving input from the city staff, shall make a determination of the anticipated charges associated with each water rights transfer, and the applicant shall be required to escrow the amount so determined. As the city incurs charges attributable to the water transfer process, monies in an equivalent amount shall be withdrawn from the escrow account for the benefit of the city. Any unused funds shall be returned to the applicant. However, in the event that the charges incurred by the city exceed the amount placed in escrow, then the applicant shall be responsible for making up the difference. Failure to comply fully with this requirement shall result in the institution of a moratorium on the extension of city utility services to the property for which the water rights or cash (or other consideration) in lieu of water rights were earmarked. At such time as the city is fully reimbursed for the expenses incurred in the transfer process, the moratorium shall be lifted. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-113. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Sec. 7 of Ord. No. 2014-18, adopted Nov. 3, 2014, repealed § 120-113 which pertained to interim acquisition of CBT water, and derived from Ord. No. 2003-7, adopted Apr. 1, 2003. 
Secs. 120-114, 120-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEFERMENT OF WATER RIGHT DEDICATION OBLIGATION 

Sec. 120-116. - Request for deferment. 
(a)  Subject to the following constraints, an applicant may request that a portion of the total water right dedication requirement be deferred. 
(b)  Such deferral shall apply only to those applicants that request annexation, replatting or subdivision approval. 
(c)  Only those applications that encompass more than fifteen (15) acres of land shall qualify. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-117. - Amount of deferment. 
    The specific amount of the total water rights dedication obligation that can be deferred shall be dependent upon the gross acreage described within the application. However, formal approval by the city council of any annexation, replatting or subdivision request shall be contingent upon receipt by the city of at least some water rights or cash (or other consideration) in lieu of water rights. The minimum percentage of the total water rights dedication obligation that must be satisfied prior to city council approval of the application is as follows: 
Gross Acreage Described Within the Application Minimum Percentage of the Total Water Rights Obligation That Must be Dedicated Prior to 
Application Approval 15-30 acres 50 30-60 acres 33 60-100 acres 25 Greater than 100 acres Determined on a case-by-case basis  
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-118. - Extension of services when deferment exercised. 
    In the event that an applicant elects to defer a portion of the water rights dedication obligation, city utility services shall be extended only to that portion of the lands described within the application for which water rights or cash (or other consideration) in lieu of water rights have been received. Further extension of such services shall not be allowed until additional water rights, or cash (or other consideration) in lieu of water rights have been received by the city. The cash-in-lieu of water rights valuation shall be made as of the date payment is tendered to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-119. - Number of allowable phases; extension of services. 
(a)  An applicant shall be limited to a finite number of phases within which the water rights dedication obligation associated with the lands described within a particular application must be met. The allowable number of phases shall be dependent upon the number of gross acres involved as follows: 
Gross Acreage Described Within the Application Number of Phases Allowed, Subsequent to Satisfaction of the Initial Minimum Dedication 
Requirement 15-30 acres 1 30-60 2 60-100 3 Greater than 100 acres To be determined on a case-by-case basis  
(b)  Where more than one (1) subsequent phase is allowed, the specific percentage of the outstanding water dedication obligation that must be completed for each phase shall be discretionary with the applicant; provided, however, that sufficient water dedication applicable to each such phase occur; and further provided that in no event shall city services be extended to any lands described within the application for which water rights or cash (or other consideration) in lieu of water rights have not been received. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Secs. 120-120-120-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OPTION TO PURCHASE AND RIGHT OF FIRST REFUSAL 

Sec. 120-126. - Option to purchase. 
(a)  Time. Any person required to comply with the basic dedication requirement shall also grant to the city the option to purchase any and all water rights that are appurtenant to the land involved, but that are in excess of the basic dedication requirement or that are deemed not to be satisfactory. Said option may be exercised by the city at any time for a period of two (2) years following approval of the application for annexation, subdivision, replatting or water service extension. 
(b)  Price. The option price shall be that price agreed upon by the parties. If the parties do not agree upon an option price within thirty (30) days after notice of the city's intent to exercise its option is received by the owner, appraisal at the city's expense will establish the price that reflects the fair market value of the water right(s). 
(1)  The appraisal shall be conducted by one (1) appraiser appointed by the city, one (1) appraiser appointed by the owner of the water rights, and a third appraiser to be appointed by both parties' appraisers. The average of the three (3) appraisals shall be the option price. 
(2)  The terms and conditions of the payment and conveyance of said water rights shall be those that are mutually agreeable to both parties. Nonetheless, it is expected that payment and conveyance will be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days of the establishment of the option price. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-127. - Right of first refusal. 
(a)  Grant of right. In addition to the grant of said option to purchase by the applicant, there shall be a grant to the city by the applicant of a right of first refusal regarding the water rights subject to said option to purchase. If the city, for any reason, should choose not to exercise its option to purchase, the city shall retain said right of first refusal, in the event the water rights are sold independently of the land, for a period of ten (10) years following final approval of annexation, subdivision, replatting, or extension of water service. 
(b)  Notice of period. If the owner of the water rights subject to said right of first refusal wishes to sell said water rights to a third party, he shall give to the city at least ninety (90) days' notice of his intention to effect a sale of said water rights by delivering to the city a bona fide written offer to purchase made by a third party. 
(c)  Exercise of right. During the ninety-day notice period provided for above, the city shall enjoy its right of first refusal entitling it to purchase the water rights subject to its right and proposed for sale. If within ninety (90) days following notice by the owner of his intention to sell his water rights, the city chooses to exercise its right of purchase, then the city shall pay to the owner the amount tendered to the owner in the bona fide offer by the third party. In the event that the city determines not to exercise its right to purchase the water rights offered for sale, the owner shall be free to sell the water rights to the third party; provided, however, that any such sale to a third party shall be pursuant to the terms and conditions that were the same as those tendered to and refused by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-128. - Recording of option to purchase and right of first refusal. 
    The grant of any option to purchase and right of first refusal shall be by means of an agreement prepared by the city and signed by the applicant, and shall be structured so that all subsequent purchasers of the water rights are placed on notice of the city's prior claim. Such document shall be filed of record with the applicable county clerk and recorder's office and shall be presented to the secretary of any applicable ditch or reservoir company. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Secs. 120-129, 20-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - REQUIRED INFORMATION 

Sec. 120-131. - Water rights-Generally. 
    The following information shall be provided for all water rights that are proposed to be dedicated to the city: 
(1)  The name of the water right involved, the number of shares in a mutual ditch or reservoir company evidencing the right, if applicable, and/or the percentage of undivided interest of the water right proposed to be dedicated. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner(s) of the water right proposed for dedication. 
(3)  A copy of the documents through which the owner(s) received title to the water right proposed for dedication, including deeds, stock certificates, etc., and a copy of any decree or judgment that may affect the title of the water right since the owner(s) received title. 
(4)  If the water right is decreed for irrigation use, the legal description of the lands historically irrigated, the name and address of the present owner(s) of the lands so irrigated, the total number of years the subject water right was used on the irrigated acreage, the types and approximate acreages of crops historically raised on the irrigated acreage, and the names and addresses of all known previous owners or lessees of the land historically irrigated. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Sec. 120-132. - Same-Appurtenant to the subject land. 
    The following information shall be provided for all water rights that are appurtenant to the land that is the subject of the application: 
(1)  The name of the water right involved, the number of shares in a mutual ditch or reservoir company evidencing the right, if applicable, and/or the percentage of undivided interest of the water right(s) proposed to be dedicated. 
(2)  A copy of the documents by which the owner received title to the water right and a copy of any legal decree or judgment that affects the title of those water rights since the owner received title. 
(3)  The legal description and total number of acres of land historically irrigated with the appurtenant water right, the total number of years the subject water right was used on the irrigated acreage, the types and approximate acreages of crops historically raised on the irrigated acreage, the names and addresses of all known previous owners or lessees of the land historically irrigated. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
DIVISION 7. - CERTAIN FEES AND ACTIVITIES DEFERRED 

Sec. 120-133. - Additional deferral. 
    In addition to the deferral of the payment of any costs and fees permitted by this chapter, the payment of fees and/or costs imposed by this chapter may be deferred pursuant to Article XIV of Chapter 30 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-7, § 1, 4-1-03) 
Secs. 120-134-120-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL WATERSHED PRESERVATION 

Sec. 120-150. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to obtain and maintain safe drinking water supplies for the citizens of Lafayette. 
(Ord. No. 1986-19, § 1, 5-6-86) 
Sec. 120-151. - Establishment of extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    Pursuant to section 31-15-707(1)(b), Colorado Revised Statutes 1973, as amended, the jurisdiction of the City of Lafayette is hereby extended beyond the municipal boundaries to include the following stream segments: 
    South Boulder Creek from a point 6,800 feet south and 2,200 feet east of the southwest corner of Section 15, Township 1 South, Range 71 West, 6th P.M., to the point where South Boulder Creek intersects South Boulder Road in Section 3, Township 1 South, Range 70 West, 6th P.M. 
    Dry Creek a/k/a the New Dry Creek Carrier, from a point 1,500 feet north and 700 feet east of the southwest corner of Section 36, Township 1 North, Range 70 West, 6th P.M. to its confluence with Boulder Creek at a point 2,600 feet north and 2,100 feet east of the southwest corner of Section 17, Township 1 North, Range 69 West, 6th P.M. 
    Boulder Creek from a point 2,100 feet south and 1,000 feet east of the northwest corner of Section 23, Township 1 North, Range 70 West, 6th P.M., to the headgate of the Lower Boulder Ditch in the SW 1/4 SW 1/4, Section 16, Township 1 North, Range 69 West, 6th P.M. 
(Ord. No. 1986-19, § 1, 5-6-86) 
Sec. 120-152. - Regulation of stream segments. 
(a)  The city staff is directed to conduct a survey of all natural and man related activities within the stream segments above defined which are now or may in the future adversely affect the quality of the Lafayette municipal water supply. 
(b)  A summary of the adverse effects of each activity noted during the survey shall be prepared. 
(c)  To the extent that a natural activity having an adverse effect on water quality can be corrected without adverse effects to the property of others (such as the removal of beavers to eliminate giardia), the city staff is directed to control, remove or eliminate the natural activity. 
(d)  All other activities shall be evaluated on a case by case basis, once the specific effect on Lafayette's water supplies is noted. The city staff and city attorney are directed to coordinate with other local and state agencies having concurrent jurisdiction over the affected stream segments to promote the implementation of rules and regulations which will protect the municipal water supplies to the City of Lafayette and to enforce all rules and regulations once enacted. To the extent that any person or entity is conducting an activity that results in a deterioration of the quality of water flowing in the above defined stream segments below the minimum drinking water standards set by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the city attorney, at the direction of the city council, shall pursue whatever administrative and judicial remedies are available to the city to eliminate such activities. 
(Ord. No. 1986-19, § 1, 5-6-86) 
Secs. 120-153-120-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER FUND ENTERPRISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1993-53, adopted Jan. 4, 1994, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1-4 of said ordinance as §§ 120-161-120-164 herein was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 120-161. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the authority of section 16.13 of the Charter of the city, there is hereby created and established the water fund enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 1993-53, § 1, 1-4-94) 
Sec. 120-162. - Appointment of board. 
    The city council is hereby appointed as the board of the water fund enterprise. There shall not be appointed any persons other than the city council to serve on the board of the water fund enterprise nor shall city council delegate to any other person or entity the powers reserved to the board of the water fund enterprise hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1993-53, § 2, 1-4-94) 
Sec. 120-163. - Authority to issue revenue bonds. 
    The water fund enterprise, acting by and through the city council sitting as the board of the water fund enterprise, may issue its own revenue bonds or other obligations (including refunding securities) on behalf of the city, which revenue bonds or other obligations shall be payable solely from the net revenue (including special assessments) derived from the operation of the water fund enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations may be additionally secured by mortgages on or security interests in any real or personal property of the city used in the operation of the water fund enterprise. Such revenue bonds or other obligations shall be issued by ordinance of the board of the water fund enterprise, adopted in the same manner and subject to referendum to the same extent as ordinances of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1993-53, § 3, 1-4-94) 
Sec. 120-164. - Restrictions on board's authority. 
    The city council shall not authorize the board of the water fund enterprise to acquire, construct or install or hold title to or dispose of any city-owned property used in the operation of the water fund enterprise, to impose or adjust rates, fees, tolls or charges for the use of any such property or for any service or commodity furnished by the water fund enterprise, to levy special assessments or to exercise any power reserved to the council or other city officials by the City Charter or otherwise (other than the power to issue revenue bonds and other obligations). 
(Ord. No. 1993-53, § 4, 1-4-94) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1963 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1963 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1963 Code, which are not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Section Section this Code 8-1, 8-2 30-146 8-3 30-147 8-7 30-148 9A-1 35-2 9A-2 35-1 9A-3 35-5 9A-4 35-6 9A-7 35-10, 35-11 9A-8 35-12, 35-13 9A-9 35-4 9A-10 35-3 11B-2 30-161 11B-4 30-162 11B-5 30-163 11B-10 30-36 11B-11 30-60 11B-12 30-53 11B-13 30-52 11B-14 30-62 11B-15 30-51 11B-16 30-36, 30-40, 30-45 11B-18 30-56 11B-19 30-111 11C, 11C-3 45-46 11C-4 45-47 11C-7 45-49 11C-8 45-50 11C-9 45-48 15-1 45-16 15-2 45-19 15-3-15-5 45-20 15-6 45-31 15-7 45-20, 45-21 15-9 45-22 15-10 45-23 15-11 45-25 15-12 45-24 15-13 45-27 15-14 45-28 15-19 45-30 15-20 120-12 15-21 45-29 15-22 45-18 15-23 45-20 15-24 45-17 18-1 50-1 18-2 50-3 18-3 50-4, 50-5 18-4 50-6 18-5 50-8 18-6 50-7 18-7 50-9 18-8 50-2 20-5 75-30 20-8 105-3 20-31 75-32 20-36 105-2 20-47 105-4 21-1 65-1 21-2 65-2 21-3 65-5 21-4 65-9 21-5 65-10 21-6 65-6 21-8 65-4, 65-8 21-10 65-7 21-11 65-3 21-12 65-29, 65-30 21-13 65-28 21-14 65-26 21-15 65-27 21-16 65-54 21-17 65-53 21-18 65-58 21-19 65-56 21-20 65-57 21-21 65-59 21-22 65-61 21-23 65-60 21-24 65-52 21-25 65-55 21-26 65-62 21-27 65-64 21-28 65-63, 65-110 21-29 65-65 21-30 65-72 21-31-21-36 65-66-65-71 21-37 65-46 21-38 65-47 21-39 65-50 21-40 65-51 21-41 65-48 21-42 65-49 21-43 65-77 21-44-21-47 65-73-65-76 21-53 65-106 21-65 65-108 21-66 65-107 21-67 65-109 21-73 65-78 24-1 80-1 24-4 80-2 26-1, 26-2 30-176 26-4 30-177 26-5 30-178 26-10 30-36 26-11 30-60, 30-61 26-12 30-53 26-13 30-52 26-14 30-62 26-15 30-51 26-16 30-40, 30-45 26-18 30-56 26-19 30-81 31-1 105-31 31-2 105-5 31-3 105-86 31-4 105-6 31-5 105-27 31-6 105-28 31-7 105-30 31-8 105-29 31-9 105-46 31-10 105-50 31-11 105-51 31-12 105-53 31-13 105-52 31-14 105-48 31-15 105-47 31-16 105-54, 105-55 31-17 105-49 31-18 105-21 31-19 105-23 31-20 105-24 31-21 105-26 31-22 105-25 31-23 105-22 31-24 105-67 31-25 105-69 31-26 105-72 31-27 105-71 31-28 105-73 31-29 105-68 31-30 105-70 31-31 105-1 31-32 105-105 31-33 105-106 31-34 105-104 31-35 105-107  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1963 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1963 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1963 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1963 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code 384 6-2-64 1-16 55-31-55-46 385 6-2-64 3 30-85 388 9-15-64 2 65-111 394 6-1-65 1 95-1 397 7-20-65 1 35-7-35-9 398 7-20-65 1 45-26 404 4-19-66 1 30-161 3 30-163 410 5-2-67 1 5-37 2 5-39, 5-40, 5-44 3 5-38 4 5-41 6 5-43 7 5-42 414 11-15-66 1 105-86 2 105-88 3 105-87 4 105-89 5 105-91 6 105-90 7 105-92 415 11-15-66 1 75-52 2 75-55 3 75-56 4 75-54 5 75-57 6 75-50, 75-51, 75-53 7 75-58 419 3-7-67 1 75-9 4 25-3 420 3-7-67 1-4 30-206 5 30-208 422 4-18-67 1 110-36 2 110-116-110-120 2(2-1-2-14) 110-37 3 110-96, 110-97 4 110-98 5 110-99, 110-100 6-9 110-101-110-104 10 110-121 11 110-122 12 110-124, 110-125 13-19 110-127-110-133 20 110-146, 110-147 21 110-148, 110-149, 110-151 22 110-42 23 110-43-110-46 25-28 110-47-110-50 28 110-51, 110-52 29 110-105 30-42 110-53-110-65 43 110-66-110-68 44-57 110-69-110-82 58 110-41 59 110-38 60 110-39 61 110-83 63 110-40 426 6-6-67 1 5-1 433 10-17-67 1 75-116 3 75-118 4 75-120 5 75-117 434 12-5-67 55-21-55-26 435 11-7-67 25-2, 100-1-100-10 446 4-16-68 1 10-21 2 10-23-10-26 3 10-22 458 2-4-69 1 75-96 2 75-97 3 75-99-75-101 4 75-98 464 11-4-69 2 110-126 472 5-5-70 1 110-146 484 9-1-70 1 75-6, 75-8 485 9-1-70 1 75-28, 75-29 486 9-1-70 2 70-1 3 70-3 4 70-4 5 70-2 491 10-20-70 1 30-241 3 30-242, 30-244 4 30-245, 30-247 493 2-2-72 2 90-2 3 90-24-90-27 4 90-7 5 90-4-90-6, 90-12 6 90-8-90-11 8 90-13-90-18 9 90-19-90-21 10 90-22, 90-23 11 90-32 12 90-33-90-35 13 90-36-90-38 14 90-39 15 90-40-90-42 16 90-43-90-46 17 90-48 18 90-47 19 90-49-90-52 20 90-29 21 90-30 22 90-28, 90-31 23 90-1, 90-53 24 90-3 25 90-54, 90-55 498 3-16-71 5 30-149 530 3-7-72 1 30-161 2 30-163 537 8-15-72 2 115-77 3 115-76 4-7 115-78-115-81 540 8-15-72 1 90-56 548 11-21-72 1 5-3 552 2-6-73 1 110-167, 110-168 2 110-169 3 110-166 4 110-170 555 2-20-73 1 30-21-30-27, 30-39-30-50, 30-52, 30-56-30-61, 30-71-30-73, 30-82-30-84, 30-86, 30-96-30-98, 30-126-30-134 579 6-19-73 1 App. A, § 16A(B)(f), 16A(B)4.(a) 614 2-26-74 1 30-191, 30-192 2 30-193 618 3-19-74 2 95-49 620 3-5-74 1 30-1 2 30-2, 30-3 3 30-5 621 4-24-74 1(a-f) 120-1 2 120-37 5 120-63 6 120-64-120-66, 120-68 7 120-3 8 120-4 9 120-7, 120-9 10 120-8 11 120-61 12 120-11 13 120-10 14 120-12, 120-21 15, 16 120-6 17 120-5 622 4-24-74 1 95-23 2 95-25-95-27 4 95-52-95-54 5 95-2-95-6 636 10-15-74 1 App. A, § 4(E) 639 11-19-74 1 120-20 643 12-17-74 2 25-25 3 25-24 5 25-28 6 25-31 7 25-30 8 25-29, 25-37 9 25-32 11 25-36 12 25-26 13 25-35 14 25-33 15 25-22 16 25-23 17 25-38 18 25-39, 25-40 19 25-43 21 25-42 23 25-44 25 25-46 26 25-41 647 12-17-74 1-5 85-7, 85-21 1-6 85-87 1-7 85-88-85-92, 85-96 1-8 85-97 1-10 85-93-85-95 1-12 85-99 1-13 85-147-85-150 1-14 85-141, 85-143 1-15 85-28-85-31 1-16 85-69-85-71, 85-73, 85-74 1-17 85-22-85-25, 85-72 1-18 85-46-85-50, 85-52-85-57 1-19 85-112-85-128 1-22 85-6 649 2-18-75 1 25-44 2 25-45 3 25-21, 25-41, 25-44-25-46 656 7-15-75 1 Charter, § 3.4 657 6-17-75 3 5-1 663 1-20-76 2 30-36 3 30-37, 30-38 4 30-111-30-116 664 1-20-76 1 25-34 667 4-6-76 4 85-3 6 85-5 8 85-86 9 85-98 10 85-142 11-13 85-144-85-146 15 85-26 16 85-27 17 85-51 18 85-8 19 85-2 20 85-1, 85-4 674 6-15-76 1 110-123 675 7-6-76 2 75-119 685 9-7-76 1 10-3 686 9-7-76 1 10-1, 10-2 688 9-21-76 1 110-16 2-5 110-17-110-20 7 110-21 690 11-2-76 1-3 15-2-15-4 4 15-6 5 15-1 6 15-5 692 11-2-76 2 85-111 Art./Sec. 696 11-16-76 I, 1 75-71 2 75-74 3 75-72 4 75-73 5-10 75-75-75-80 II, 1-4 115-56-115-61 5 115-60, 115-61 710 2-1-77 1 25-27 2 25-21 712 2-1-77 1 30-53-30-55 719 2-14-77 55-40 725 5-17-77 1 80-18 2 80-19-80-21 3 89-22 726 5-17-77 1-3 75-9-75-11 727 6-7-77 1 75-12 2 75-13 728 6-7-77 1 10-5 2 10-4 3 10-7 4 10-6 729 6-7-77 1 75-18 730 6-7-77 1 75-33 731 6-7-77 1 75-7 732 6-7-77 1 75-50 2 75-51 3 75-49 4 75-52-75-54, 75-76 5 75-46-75-48 6 75-57 733 6-7-77 1 75-24 2 75-1 3 75-2 5 75-31 6 75-1 7 75-27 9 75-25 14 75-23 19 75-22 20 75-14-75-16 22 75-17 25 75-4, 75-5 27 75-28 28 75-3 35 75-6 36 75-26 736 7-5-77 1 5-16 2 5-18, 5-19 3 5-23 4 5-22 5 5-21 6 5-20 7 5-24 8 5-17 742 10-4-77 1 Charter, § 10.2 748 12-6-77 55-21-55-26 753 12-20-77 1-11 55-51-55-61 770 5-2-78 2 115-1 3 115-21-115-23 4 115-24, 115-26-115-40 5 115-2 6 115-3-115-7 9 115-8 771 5-16-78 1 45-61, 45-62 2 45-63 775 4-18-78 2 120-13 3 120-15 4 120-16 5 120-14 789 8-1-78 1 30-221 2 30-224, 30-225 3 30-222 4 30-223 797 8-15-78 2 115-25 798 10-3-78 1-3 30-146-30-148 799 10-3-78 1 45-46 3 45-47 4 45-48 800 10-3-78 1 30-191 3 30-192 4 30-193 801 10-3-78 1 30-176 3 30-177 4 30-178 802 10-3-78 1 110-150 805 11-7-78 1 120-2 818 1-16-79 1 30-241 2 30-242, 30-243, 30-244 4-7 30-248-30-252 3 30-245-30-247 826 2-6-79 1-3 30-206-30-208 828 2-20-79 1 75-19, 75-20 831 6-5-79 1-11 App. A, § 2 12 App. A, § 6 13 App. A, § 10, App. A, § 10(a), App. A, § 10(b)(D) 14 App. A, § 12(a) 15 App. A, § 14(B)6. 16 App. A, § 14(F) 17 App. A, § 16, App. A, § 16A(A)2. 19 App. A, § 17(A)2., App. A, § 17(A)4. 20 App. A, § 17(B)1.(e)(i) 21 App. A, § 17(B)1.(f)(ii) 22 App. A, § 18(A)2., 4 23 App. A, § 18(B)1.(e)(i)(b) 24 App. A, § 18(B)1.(f)(ii) 25 App. A, § 18.1(B)4.(a) 26 App. A, § 19(A)2. 27 App. A, § 19(B)1.(a) 28 App. A, § 19(B)1.(e)(b) 29 App. A, § 19(B)1.(f)(ii) 30 App. A, § 20(A)6. 31 App. A, § 20(B)1.(e)(i)(b) 32 App. A, § 20(B)1.(f)(ii) 33 App. A, § 21(B)1.(e)(i)(b) 34 App. A, § 20(B)5.(a) 35 App. A, § 21(B)1.(f)(ii) 36 App. A, § 21(B)5.(a) 37 App. A, § 22(A)1. 38 App. A, § 22.1(B)1. 39 App. A, § 22.1(C) 40 App. A, § 23(B)6.(a) 41 App. A, § 24(A)19. 42 App. A, § 25(A)15. 43 App. A, § 26(A)5. 44 App. A, § 26(C)4. 45 App. A, § 27(A)26. 46 App. A, § 27(B)4. 47 App. A, § 27.1(A)9. 48 App. A, § 28.1B.7.c. 49 App. A, § 30(E)2. 50 App. A, § 31(H) 51 App. A, § 33 52 App. A, § 37.1(A)1. 53 App. A, § 37.1(A)8. 54 App. A, § 39(C) 55 App. A, § 40(G) 56 App. A, § 40(I) 57 App. A, § 41(H) 57.1 App. A, § 43(B) 58 App. A, § 45 59 App. A, § 52 60 App. A, § 53(A)4. 61 App. A, § 53(B) 62 App. A, § 53(C) 63 App. A, § 53(E) 64 App. A, § 54(A) 65 App. A, § 54(C) 66 App. A, § 56(A) 67 App. A, § 56(G) 68 App. A, § 57f. 69 App. A, § 58(5) 70 App. A, § 59(2) 71 App. A, § 61 72 App. A, § 63(C) 833 5-15-79 2 80-36 3 80-37 835 6-6-79 1 95-21, 95-22, 95-24-95-30 836 6-5-79 1 30-6 2 30-7 837 5-15-79 1, 2 30-179 839 6-5-79 1(a-d) 30-1 2 30-2, 30-3 3 30-5 840 6-5-79 1 80-16 2 80-17 841 6-15-79 2 120-38 3 120-36, 120-39, 120-39.1-120-44 842 6-19-79 2 95-46 3 95-47 4 95-50 5 95-48, 95-49, 
95-51, 
95-55-95-60 6 95-52-95-54 7 95-61 852 8-7-79 2 120-57, 120-59, 120-62 2(i-v) 120-56 3 120-64-120-68 857 10-16-79 1 120-60 860 12-18-79 1 120-39.1 2 120-40 861 12-18-79 1 95-25 2 95-26 866 2-19-80 1-9 95-71-95-79 867 3-4-80 1-3 30-161-30-163 872 4-1-80 1, 2 App. A, § 2 3 App. A, § 10 4 App. A, § 28.2C.7. 5 App. A, § 28.3C.9. 873 4-1-80 1 App. A, § 2 2 App. A, § 4(F), (G) 3 App. A, § 18.1(B)4.(a) 4 App. A, § 18.1(B)1.(g)(i) 5 App. A, § 20(A)1. 6 App. A, § 21(B)5.(a) 7, 8 App. A, § 23(B)6.(a) 9 App. A, § 24(B)6. 10 App. A, § 28(A)10. 11 App. A, § 28.1(A)1.b. 12 App. A, § 28.1(B)4.a. 13, 14 App. A, § 38 15 App. A, § 58(6) 875 4-15-80 1 90-43-90-46 2 90-47 3 90-29 876 5-6-80 1 105-5 877 5-6-80 1 90-29 880 7-1-80 1 30-164 2 30-168 3 30-167 4 30-166 5 30-165 881 7-15-80 1 75-62 2 75-61 3 75-63 4 75-67 5 75-65 6 75-66 7 75-59 8 75-64 9 75-60 882 7-15-80 1-3 80-18 4 80-21 5 80-24 6 80-23 7 80-25 8 80-26 9 80-19 10 80-20 13 80-22 883 8-5-80 1-5 10-8-10-12 884 8-19-80 1 30-2, 30-3 885 8-19-80 1-3 30-8-30-10 887 9-16-80 1 55-33(h) 2 55-41 889 10-7-80 1-3 30-266-30-268 890 9-16-80 2 120-81 3 120-83 4(1-20) 120-82 5 120-101-120-106 6 120-121-120-131 7-9 120-86-120-88 10 120-146-120-150 11 120-84 12 120-85 App. A 120-166, 120-167 895 11-4-80 1 120-39.1 2 120-40 896 11-4-80 1 95-25 2 95-26 903 2-3-81 1 110-123 906 3-17-81 1 5-22 2 5-21 907 3-17-81 1 90-48 908 3-17-81 2 55-32(c) 909 4-21-81 1-57 32-1-32-57 910 4-21-81 1-3 30-161-30-163 911 4-21-81 1       Rpld 120-60 2       Rpld 120-56, 120-57-120-59, 120-62, 120-64-120-68       Added 120-56-120-58, 120-161       Rnbd 120-61       as 120-60       Rnbd 120-63       as 120-59 912 5-19-81 Ch. 30 (note) 913 5-19-81 1, 2 30-9, 30-10 914 6-2-81 1 25-35 2 25-33 915 7-7-81 1       Rpld 30-165 916 7-21-81 1 30-2(1), (2) 917 7-21-81 1 120-39 918 7-12-81 1 95-25 919 7-21-81 1, 2 95-24.1 923 7-21-81 1 App. A, § 2 2       Rpld App. A, § 4(E) 3 App. A, § 12(a) 4, 5 App. A, § 15(a), (b) 6-9 App. A, §§ 24-27 10 App. A, § 27.1 11 App. A, § 28 12 App. A, § 28.1 (B)(3)c 13 App. A, § 28.1 (B)(4)a 14 App. A, § 40(H) 15 App. A, § 42(A) 16 App. A, § 51 17 App. A, § 53(A) 18 App. A, § 53(C) 19 App. A, § 53(I) 20 App. A, § 53(E) 21 App. A, § 54(C) 22 App. A, § 58(6) 924 8-18-81 1       Rpld 120-81-120-88, 120-101-120-106, 120-121-120-131, 120-146-120-150, 120-166, 120-167 2-4 120-81-120-83 5 120-91-120-96 6 120-101-120-111 7 120-84 8 120-116-120-121 9, 10 120-85, 120-86 11 120-126-120-128 12-14 120-87-120-89 App. A 120-131, 120-132 927 9-1-81 1       Rpld 15-1-15-6       Added 15-1-15-9 929 9-15-81 1-4 30-80 931 10-6-81 1, 2 110-16, 110-17 935 11-17-81 2 30-5 936 12-1-81 1 110-170 937 1-5-82 1 30-242 939 2-2-82 1, 2 55-23, 55-24 941 3-2-82 120-94 949 7-20-82 115-38.1 954 9-21-82 120-57 955 9-21-82 95-48 956 10-5-82 1 95-24.1 2 95-25 957 10-5-82 1 30-2 960 10-19-82 115-77 961 10-19-82 115-76 962 10-19-82 1 25-41 963 11-1-82 1-8 32-19(c)(3)(4), (7), (8) 9       Rpld 32-400(b)(1)-(6) 10       Rpld 32-50 966 1-18-83 1 65-31 967 1-18-83 1 75-34 974 4-19-83 2 100-5 975 4-19-83 2 55-31 4 55-33(h) 6 55-36 977 4-19-83 1       Rpld 110-66-110-70 978 6-7-83 1 Ch. 30(note) 981 7-5-83 1, 2 120-83 3 120-92 988 8-16-83 1 75-35, 75-36 989 8-16-83 2 55-62-55-73 990 8-16-83 1 Ch. 30, Art. XI (note) 2 30-269-30-286 991 9-6-83 1 30-290, 30-291 992 9-20-83 1 120-39.1 993 9-20-83 1 95-24.1 994 9-20-83 1, 2 30-9, 30-10 995 10-4-83 1       Rpld 30-149 2 30-146-30-148 996 10-4-83 1       Rpld 45-49, 45-50 2 45-46-45-48 997 10-4-83 1 30-266-30-268 998 10-4-83 2 30-191-30-193 999 10-4-83 1       Rpld 30-179 2 30-176-30-178 1001 11-1-83 1       Rpld 45-61-45-63 45-61-45-68 1002 10-4-83 1 App. A, § 14(C) 1004 11-1-83 1 5-2 1005 11-15-83 1, 2 65-111 1008 11-15-83 1, 2 45-61 1010 1-3-84 1 30-11 1984-01 1-17-84 1 115-35.1 1984-04 3-6-84 1 120-61(b) 1984-05 3-6-84 1 95-53 1984-06 3-20-84 1 5-1 1984-10 5-1-84 1 90-3 2, 3 90-10, 90-11 4, 5 90-15, 90-16 6 90-18 7, 8 90-21, 90-22 9 90-24 10 90-26 11 90-29 12 90-31 13, 14 90-33, 90-34 15-17 90-36-90-38 18 90-40 19-21 90-43-90-45 22 90-57 23       Rpld 90-30, 90-46 1984-13 6-5-84 1       Rpld 85-1-85-8, 85-21-85-31, 85-46-85-57, 85-69-85-74, 85-86-85-99, 85-111-85-128, 85-141-85-150       Added 85-1-85-11 1984-14 6-5-84 1 30-285 1984-15 6-19-84 1 55-74-55-87 1984-20 7-17-84 1 5-45-5-47 1984-22 8-7-84 1, 2 25-50, 25-51 1984-24 9-4-84 1 25-25, 25-27, 25-28 1984-25 9-4-84 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 30-39 2 98-1-98-3, 98-11-98-27, 98-36, 98-37, 98-46-98-53, 98-61-68-64 3 98-65 1984-26 9-4-84 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 35-39.3 1984-30 9-18-84 1, 2 30-9, 30-10 1984-30 9-18-84 1 30-11 1984-32 9-18-84 1 9-24.1, 9-25 1984-33 9-18-84 1 10-1(1), (2) 2 10-2(1), (2) 3 10-2.5 1984-55 12-4-84 1 55-36 1985-11 5-7-85 1 75-96 1985-15 6-4-85 1       Rpld 80-18-80-26 2 80-50-80-74 1985-16 6-4-85 1 30-292-30-295 1985-19 7-2-85 1 75-3 1985-20 7-2-85 1 75-35 1985-23 7-16-85 1 120-8 1985-24 7-16-85 1 95-75(b) 1985-28 8-20-85 1 120-39.1 1985-31 10-1-85 1       Rpld 50-1-50-9 1985-32 11-5-85 1 25-1 1985-35 12-3-85 1 95-25 1985-36 12-3-85 1 75-37 1985-37 12-3-85 1 75-38 1985-38 12-17-85 1-3 110-36-110-38 4 110-44 5 110-54(d) 6, 7 110-55, 110-56 8 110-66 9, 10 110-74, 110-75 11 110-77(a) 12 110-78 13       Rpld 110-79, 110-80 14, 15 110-83, 110-84 16 110-104 17 110-105 18 110-116(a) 19 110-119 20, 21 110-121(1)-(3), (8)-(11) 22, 24 110-122(13), (15), (16) 25 110-133 26-28 110-47(10)-(12) 29 110-148 30 110-150 1986-01 2-4-86 1       Rpld 98-1-98-3, 98-11-98-27, 98-36, 98-37, 98-46-98-53, 98-61-98-65       Rpld App. A, §§ 1-63       Rpld App. C, §§ 1-6 2       Added 26-1-1, 26-2-1, 26-3-1, 26-4-1, 26-5-1, 26-6-1-26-6-4, 26-7-1, 26-8-1, 26-9-1-26-9-3, 26-10-1-26-10-4, 26-11-1-26-11-4, 26-12-1-26-12-5, 26-13-1-26-13-4, 26-14-1- 
26-14-13, 25-15-1-26-15-5, 26-16-1- 
26-16-14, 26-17-1-26-17-4, 26-18-1- 
26-18-14, 26-19-1- 
26-19-23, 26-20-1- 
26-20-18, 26-21-1- 
26-21-33, 26-22-1- 
26-22-13, 26-23-1- 
26-23-21, 26-24-1-26-24-8, 26-25-1, 26-25-2, 26-26-1, 26-26-2 26-27-1, 26-28-1-26-28-3, 26-29-1-26-29-3, 26-30-1-26-30-4, 26-31-1, 26-31-2 1986-02 2-4-86 1 30-146-30-148 1986-03 2-4-86 1 30-176-30-178 1986-04 2-4-86 1 30-266-30-268 1986-05 2-4-86 1 30-191-30-193 1986-06 2-4-86 1 45-46-45-48 1986-07 2-4-86 1 45-69-45-71 1986-09 2-18-86 1 40-2 1986-10 2-28-86 1 25-60-25-62 1986-11 3-4-86       Rpld 75-37(a)(4) 1986-12 3-4-86 1 5-1 1986-14 4-1-86 1 90-8 1986-15 5-6-86 1 26-14-14 1986-19 5-6-86 1 120-150-120-152 1986-20 6-3-86 1 115-91-115-95 1986-23 6-3-86 1 30-242 1986-24 6-17-86 1       Rpld 115-56-115-61       Added 115-50-115-58 1986-31 9-2-86 1 115-100-115-105 1986-35 10-7-86 1 30-2 1986-36 10-7-86 1 95-24.1 2 95-26(a) 1986-37 10-7-86 1 120-39.1 2 120-40(a) 1986-38 10-21-86 1 1-10(a) 1986-39 10-21-86 1 55-100-55-105 1986-40 11-4-86 1, 2 95-48, 95-49 3 95-56 4 95-60 1986-41 11-4-86 1 30-11 1986-42 11-4-86 1 95-24.1(a) 1986-44 12-2-86 1 95-29 1986-45 12-2-86 1 120-44 1987-01 1-20-87 1 110-147(13) 1987-02 2-17-87 1 26-8-1 2 26-14-3 3 26-14-12 4-6 26-14-2(b)-(d) 7 26-18-12 8, 9 26-20-2(f) 10, 11 26-21-2(a), (b) 12-14 26-21-3(a), (c), (d) 15 26-21-11(a) 16 26-21-16(b) 17 26-22-2(b)(iii) 18 26-23-21(c) 19-21 26-23-22- 
26-23-24 22 Table 26-D 1987-03 2-3-87 1 30-37 2 30-46 3, 4 30-52, 30-53 5, 6       Rpld 30-54, 30-55 7 30-60 8, 9 30-72, 30-73 10-12       Rpld 30-83-30-85 13       Rpld 30-97 14 30-98(a) 15, 16       Rpld 30-113, 30-114 17 30-115 18 30-127(b) 19 30-129(a)(1) 20 30-130 21 30-131(2), (3) 22 30-132 23 30-133(a) 24, 25 30-135, 30-136 26 30-166 27 30-225(3) 1987-04 3-17-87 1 26-21-9(d) 2 26-14-5 1987-10 7-7-87 1 115-35.1 1987-12 7-21-87 1 110-166 1987-13 7-21-87 1 115-35.2 1987-14 7-21-87 1 115-91 1987-15 8-4-87 1 110-122(17), (18) 1987-16 8-18-87 1 26-16-10.1 1987-17 8-18-87 1 26-19-5(f)(iv) 1987-24 1-5-88 1 55-52(g) 1988-01 2-2-88 1 26-16-15 1988-03 4-5-88 1 30-137 1988-04 4-19-88 1 55-120-55-126 1988-05 4-19-88 1 91-1, 91-2 1988-07 4-19-88 1 75-40 1988-09 5-17-88 1 80-71 1988-12 7-19-88 1 115-31.1 1988-13 7-19-88 1 30-53 1988-14 8-2-88 1 65-1 2, 3 65-3, 65-4 4       Rpld 65-8 5       Rpld 65-26 6, 7 65-28, 65-29 8       Rpld 65-30 9, 10       Rpld 65-50, 65-51 11       Rpld 65-54 12 65-55 13       Rpld 65-56 14, 15       Rpld 65-58, 65-59 16-18       Rpld 65-61-65-63 19 65-65 20-22       Rpld 65-67-65-69 23       Rpld 65-71 24 65-72 25       Rpld 65-74 26-30 65-77-65-81 31       Rpld 54-108 32-34 65-110-65-112 1988-15 8-16-88 1 55-38 1988-16 8-16-88 1 1-10(a)(1) 2 115-2(2) 3 30-253 4 75-13.1 5 25-62 1988-17 9-6-88 1-4 15-1-15-4 5, 6 15-9, 15-10 1988-18 9-20-88 1 26-14-15 2 26-19-5(d)(iii)(cc) 3 26-21-10(g) 4-6 26-21-16(a)(vii), (e)(i), (ii), (f) 7, 8 26-21-20(c), (d) 9 26-26-2 10 26-26-5 11 Table 26-A 1988-21 11-15-88 1 120-62 1988-24 11-15-88 1 30-300-30-304 1988-26 12-6-88 1 110-122(16) 2 110-123 3 110-126 4 110-133 5 110-146 6 110-147(11) 7 110-148(b), (e) 8 110-150(a) 1989-01 2-21-89 1 26-19-5(d)(iii) (aa) 2 26-20-11 3 26-21-11(a) 4 26-21-21(d)(ii) 1989-12 3-21-89 1 120-62 1989-13 3-7-89 1 55-175-55-179 1989-14 3-21-89 1 32-9(a) 2 32-29(c) 1989-15 4-4-89 1       Rpld 30-221-30-225       Added 30-221-30-224 1989-16 4-4-89 1 30-266-30-268 1989-17 4-4-89 1 45-46-45-48 1989-18 4-4-89 1 30-206-30-208 1989-19 4-4-89 1 30-191-30-193 1989-20 4-4-89 1 30-176-30-178 1989-21 4-4-89 1 30-161-30-163 1989-22 4-4-89 1 30-146-30-148 1989-34 6-20-89 1, 2 115-35.3 1989-35 6-20-89 1 26-14-15 2, 3 26-21-16(e)(ii), (iii) 4 26-21-30 5 26-21-30.1 6 26-30-1 7 26-30-2(b) 8 26-30-3 9 Table 26A 1989-36 6-20-89 1 30-300 2 30-302(a) 1989-39 8-1-89 1 120-60 1989-41 9-5-89 1 95-30 1989-42 9-5-89 1 120-43 1989-50 10-3-89 1 30-1 2 30-2 3 30-3 4 30-5(a), (c) 1989-51 11- 8-89 1 10-1(4) 1989-52 11- 8-89 1 75-41 1989-57 12-19-89 1, 2 120-57, 120-58 1989-58 12-19-89 1 95-49 2 95-60 1990-3  2- 6-90 1 115-36.1 1990-4  4-17-90 1 26-2-1 2 26-8-1 3 26-9-1 4 26-19-5 
(d)(ii)(bb)1 5 26-22-7 
(f)(IV) 6, 7 Tables 26-A, 26-B 8 Table 26-D 1990-5  4-17-90 1       Rpld 105-86-105-92 1990-6  7-10-90 1 5-50, 5-51 1990-11 10- 2-90 1 115-30 1990-17  8-21-90 1 30-400-30-403 2 120-38 3 95-24 4 120-40(b) 5 95-26(b) 6 30-272(e) 7, 8 30-280(a), (e) 9 30-282.1 10 30-2 11 30-9 12-15 30-149-30-152 16 30-167 17 30-11 18 120-133 19 26-12-6 20 110-151 21 26-19-22.1 22 110-150(c) 23 30-179 24 30-194 25 30-268.1 1990-20 11- 6-90 1, 2 110-37 3, 4 110-121(3), (12) 5 110-122(19)-(21) 1990-24 12- 4-90 1 115-35.1 1991-01  3-19-91 1 26-14-15 2 26-21-8(a)(xi) 3 26-21-8(a)(xii) 4 26-21-11(a) 5 26-21-21(d)(i)(bb) 6 26-21-33(e) 7 26-21-ee(e)(iv) 1991-07  5- 7-91 1 25-1 1991-12  6- 4-91 1 115-35.4 1991-17  7- 2-91 1 65-55 2 65-57 1991-21  9- 3-91 1, 2 10-1, 10-2 3 10-13 1991-22  9- 3-91 1 40-2 1991-25  9-17-91 1 30-242(a) 2 30-254 1991-31 11-19-91 1 26-14-6(b) 2 26-14-6(h)(iii) 3 26-14-7(f) 4 26-14-13 5 26-14-16 6 26-18-5 7 26-19-20(b) 8 26-20-16(d)(ii) 9-11 26-20-16(d)(iv)-(vi) 12 26-20-17 13 26-21-12 14 26-22-7(f)(ix) 1992-10  5-19-92 1-13 85-21-85-33 1992-13A  6-25-92 1-5 75-71-75-75 6       Rpld 75-71       Rpld 75-80 1992-17  6- 2-92 1       Rpld 75-32 1992-21  7- 7-92 1-10 75-151-75-160 1992-22  7- 7-92 1 75-3 2 75-35 3 75-4 4 75-5 1992-34  9- 1-92 1-17 75-126-75-142 1992-35  9- 1-92 1 65-111 1992-41 10-20-92 1 115-24.5 1992-43 11- 3-92 1       Added 110-34 2       Added 110-35 3 110-56 4 110-122(6) 5 110-123 6 110-133 7 110-147(11) 8 110-148(b)(e) 9 110-150(a) 10, 11       Added 110-39.1 12       Added 110-39.2 1992-48 12-15-92 1-7       Added 44-21-44-27 1992-51 12-15-92 1 65-81 1993-1  2- 2-93 1 45-46-45-48 1993-2  2- 2-93 1       Rpld 30-191-30-194         Added 30-191-30-193 1993-3  2- 2-93 1 30-176-30-178 1993-4  2- 2-93 1 30-161-30-163 1993-5  2- 2-93 1       Rpld 30-146-30-152         Added 30-146-30-148 1993-6  3- 2-93 1 26-2-1 2 26-5-1 3, 4 26-6-1, 26-6-1.1 5 26-6-2 6 26-8-1 7 26-9-1 8 26-14-5 9 26-16-26-16-11 10-16 26-17-3-26-17-9 17 26-18-26-18-12 18 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 19 Ch. 26, Table 26-B 1993-11  5- 4-93 1 120-8 2       Added 120-8.1 1993-12  4-20-93 1 120-39.1 2 120-40(a) 1993-21  7-20-93 1 26-22-7(f)(ix) 2       Added 26-22-7(f)(x) 1993-22  7-20-93 1 26-23-4 1993-23  7-20-93 1 10-14 1993-24  7-20-93 1 40-1 1993-25  8- 3-93 1 30-269-30-273 2       Rpld 30-290-30-295 1993-26  7-20-93 1 55-122(1)(k), (l) 2 55-123(tit.) 3       Added 55-123.1, 55-127-55-129 1993-41  9-21-93 1 50-2 1993-44 10-19-93 1 26-14-3 2 26-22-7(f)(v) 3(Exh. A) Ch. 26, Table 26-D 1993-53  1- 4-94 1-4       Added 120-161-120-164 1993-54  1- 4-94 1-4       Added 95-91-95-94 1993-55  1- 4-94 1-4       Added 80-81-80-84 1994-1  4- 5-94 1 26-21(b) 2       Added 26-9-1(b)(3), (4) 3(Exh. A) Ch. 26, Table 26-A 4(Exh. B) Ch. 26, Table 26-B 1994-2  4- 4-94 1       Added 85-29.1 1994-5  4-19-94 1 65-112(a), (b) 1994-6  4-19-94 1       Rpld 26-31-2, 55-25, 55-46, 55-179, 
75-36, 80-74 2 1-10 3 10-12, 10-22 4 25-1(c)       Rpld 25-1(d) 
25-3, 25-21, 25-51, 25-62 5 30-148(b), 30-163, 30-178, 30-193(b), 30-208, 30-223, 30-253, 30-268(b) 6 32-56 7 45-18, 45-68, 45-71 8 50-8 9 75-3, 75-11, 75-34       Rpld 75-37(d), 75-38(d), 75-40(c) 75-117 10 95-22, 95-79 11 115-2(2), 
115-35.4(d)(1), (2)       Rpld 115-35.4(d)(3) 
115-58, 115-95, 115-105 12 120-16 1994-7  6-21-94 1       Rpld 26-14-11 2       Added 26-22.1-1- 
26-22.1-14 3 26-15-1 4 26-15-4 5 26-16-6 6 26-17-1 7 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 8 Ch. 26, Table 26-B 9 75-142 1994-8  6- 7-94 1 45-61 2 45-67 3       Added 45-67.1 1994-9  6- 7-94 1 45-69, 45-70 1994-14  8-16-94 1 Ch. 30, Art. XIV(tit.)       Added 30-404 1994-15  6-21-94 1       Added 115-39.1 2       Added 115-58 3       Rnbd 115-58       as 115-59 1994-18  7- 5-94 1 110-126 2 110-146 1994-20  7-19-94 1 120-96 1994-21  8- 2-94 1 30-3 2 30-9 3 30-11 1994-22  9- 6-94 1       Added 26-17-3(i) 2       Added 26-17-6(b)(8) 3(Exh. A) Ch. 26, Table 26-B 1994-31 10-18-94 1       Added 10-3.1 1994-35 10-20-94 1       Added 10-5, 10-6       Rnbd 10-5-10-14       as 10-7-10-16 1994-36 12-20-94 1 105-5 1994-39  1- 3-95 1       Added 115-27.1 1995-1  1-17-95 1 120-118 1995-2  2-21-95 1 Ch. 55, Art. IV (tit.) 2 55-51 3 55-52(a), (d)       Added 55-52(h) 4 55-53 5 55-54(a) 6 55-55(a), (j) 7, 8 55-56, 55-57 9, 10 55-59, 55-60 1995-4  3-21-95 1 26-16-10.1 2 115-30 1995-08  5-16-95 1 26-23-4(a)       Rpld 26-23-4(b) 1995-11  6-20-95 1 65-60 2 65-81 3 65-110 4 65-111(a), (b) 5       Added 65-111.1 1995-12  6-20-95 1 120-58(Exh. A) 1995-20 11- 7-95 1       Added 75-36 1995-21 12- 5-95 1 26-8-1 2       Added 26-16-2(h) 3 26-16-7 4       Added 26-17-3(j) 5       Added 26-18-13 1995-26 11-27-95 1-4 30-269-30-272 5-7       Added 30-274-30-276 1995-27 12-19-95 1       Added 44-1 2       Added 110-39.3 1996-1  1-16-96 1 30-146-30-148 1996-2  1-16-96 1 30-191-30-193 1996-3  1-16-96 1 30-176-30-178 1996-4  2-20-96 1       Added 30-270(l) 2 30-272(e)(3) 3 30-274 4 30-275(a)(1) 1996-9  5-21-96 1       Rpld 15-1-15-10       Added 15-1-15-7 1996-10  4-16-96 1 26-23-4 1996-11  4-16-96 1-3 26-8-1 4-6 26-20-2(a), (b), (f) 7-9 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 1996-13  8- 6-96 1 120-62 1996-16  9- 3-96 1       Added 120-7.1-120-7.4 2 120-8.1, 120-11 3 120-61(d) 1996-24  1-7-97 1 50-2, 50-3, 50-5, 50-7, 50-8 1997-2  3-18-97 1       Added 75-68 1997-4  5- 6-97 1 30-274 1997-6  5-20-97 1 120-1 2       Rpld 120-2 3       Rpld 120-3(a) 4 120-4 5 120-7 6 120-8.1 7 120-12(a) 8 120-13 9, 10       Rpld 120-14, 120-36 11-14       Added 120-40.1- 
120-40.4 15 120-42 16 120-56 17 120-58 18 12-62(b) 19 Ch. 120, Art. IV(title) 20 120-84 21 120-87 22 120-91 23       Added 120-92(a)(3) 24       Added 120-92.1 25 120-94(a) 26 120-95 27 120-96 1997-16  8- 5-97 1 Ch. 26, Table 26-D 1997-17  8- 5-97 1 75-51 1997-22 10- 7-97 1 115-2 2 115-3 3 115-21-115-47 1997-34 12-16-97       Added 70-10-70-19       Rpld 75-12-75-13.1 1997-35 12-16-97 1 55-104 2       Added 55-112 3       Added 55-179 4       Added 55-180 1997-37  1- 6-98 1 75-72 1998-8  1-20-98 1 10-1, 10-2 2 10-3.1 3 10-4 4 10-5 5 10-11 6 10-12(a) 7 10-13 8 10-14 9       Added 10-17 1998-12  3- 3-98 1 30-274 1998-13  3- 3-98 1-14 116-11-116-24 1998-24  8-18-98 1 26-10-4 2 26-14-15 3 26-14-15.1 4       Added 26-19-5(d)(i)(qq), (rr) 5       Rpld 26-21-8(a)(xii) 6 26-21-16(e) 1998-25  8-18-98 1       Rpld 26-6-4 2-5 26-8-1 6 26-14-3 7 26-14-6(b) 8       Rpld 26-14-12 9-11       Added 26-14-17- 
26-14-19 12 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 13 Ch. 26, Table 26-B 1998-26  8-18-98 1 26-2-1 2-4 26-8-1 5 26-9-1 6 26-10-1(a) 7 26-11-1 8 26-11-4 9 26-12(title) 10 26-12-1 11 26-12-5 12 26-14-7(d) 13 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 1998-28  8-18-98 1-3 26-8-1 4 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 1998-29  8-18-98 1 26-3-1 2 26-4-1 3 26-5-1 4-16 26-8-1 17 26-14-4 18 26-14-16(Note) 19 26-16-2(a) 20       Added 26-16-6(b)(2)(v) 21 26-16-11(e), (h) 22 26-17-5(a)(5), (9), (12) 23 26-17-6(a)(3) 24       Rpld 26-17-6(d)-(k)       Added 26-17-6(d) 25       Added 26-17-10 26 26-18-7(c) 27 26-20-17 28 26-21-2(c)(i) 29 26-21-10(g) 30 26-23-24 31 26-24-4 32 26-25-6(a) 33 26-25-2(a) 34 26-28-1 35 26-28-3 36 26-29-2 37 26-29-3 38 26-30-1 39 26-30-2 40 Ch. 26, 
Table 26-A 1998-30  8-18-98 2 110-22 1998-39  1- 5-99 1       Added 80-38, 80-39 1999-1  1-19-99 1 120-44 1999-2  2- 2-99 1 30-146-30-148       Added 30-149 1999-3  2- 2-99 1       Rpld 30-176-30-179       Added 30-176-30-178, 30-181 1999-4  2- 2-99 1 30-191-30-194 1999-5  2- 2-99 1 30-161-30-163 1999-6  2- 2-99 1 30-221-30-224 1999-7  3- 2-99 1 75-128 2       Added 74-143 3 75-129 1999-10  4-20-99 1       Added 26-15.5-1- 
26-15.5-22 2 26-8-1 3 26-11-1 4 Ch. 26, 
Table 26-A 5       Rpld 26-15-5 6       Added 55-200-55-232 1999-15  4-20-99 1 Ch. 30, 
Art. XIV (title) 2, 3       Added 30-405, 
30-406 1999-17  5-18-99 1       Added 26-14-20 1999-25  6-15-99 1       Rpld Ch. 15 1999-34  9-21-99 1       Added 115-48 1999-35  8-17-99 1 110-34 2 110-35 3 110-56 4 110-122 5 110-123 6 110-133 7 110-147(11) 8 110-148(b), (e) 9 110-150(a) 10-12       Added 110-39.4 13       Added 110-39.5 1999-37  9-21-99 1       Added 47-1-47-22 1999-39 10- 5-99 1       Added 92-1-92-8 1999-40 10-19-99 1 26-19-18 1999-41 10-19-99 1, 2 26-21-2(a), (b) 3 26-21-4(a) 4 26-21-6(a) 5 26-21-7(a) 6 26-21-32 7 26-21-33(a) 1999-42 10-19-99 1 120-92 2 120-94 1999-48 11- 2-99 1 105-28 2 105-31 3-9       Added 105-32-105-38 1999-50  1- 4-00 1 120-1 2       Added 120-2 3 120-7 4 120-7.2(c) 5 120-40.3 6 120-42 7 120-61 8 120-63(c) 9       Added 120-63 2000-1  2-15-00 1 40-2 2000-6  4- 4-00 1       Added 26-21-9(p) 2000-12  6- 6-00 1 91-1 2 91-2(3) 2000-19  6-20-00 1       Added 115-34(f) 2000-24 11- 7-00 1 26-8-1 2       Added 26-14-11 3       Added 26-14-12 2000-25  9- 5-00 1       Added 26-22.5-1- 
26-22.5-9 2 26-8-1 3 26-15-2 4 26-18-2 5       Rpld 26-18-3 6 26-24-4(c)-(e) 7 26-29-1, 26-29-2 8 Ch. 26, 
Table 26-A 2000-26  8-15-00 1 26-14-8 2       Added 26-17-6(a)(16) 2000-27 10- 3-00 1       Rpld 105-46-105-55,       Added 105-46-105-65 2000-28  8-15-00 1 30-405 2 30-406(1) 2000-29 10- 3-00 1 26-8-1 2000-30  9-19-00 1       Added 105-86-105-88 2000-33 10- 3-00 1       Rpld 25-34 2       Added 25-65-25-69 2000-34 10- 3-00 1       Rpld 32-1-32-56,       Added 32-1-32-10 2000-38 10-17-00 1       Added 42-1-42-8 2000-40 11- 7-00 1       Added 115-49 2000-43 11-21-00 1 26-16-2(g) 2 26-16-8 3       Added 26-16-8.1 4       Added 26-16-8.2 5 26-17-3(d) 6       Added 26-17-11 7-9 26-30-1- 
26-30-3 2000-44 11-21-00 1 Ch. 95 (title) 2 95-2(b), 95-3-95-6, 95-21, 95-23, 95-24, 95-28, 95-30, 95-46-95-49, 95-58, 95-59, 95-61, 95-74(3), (4)(j), 
(5)(d), 95-75(b)(2), Art. V (title), 95-91-95-95 3 95-47, 95-48, 95-50, 95-51, 95-55, 95-56, 95-73 4 95-75, 95-76(d) 5 95-74(2)-(5) 6 95-74(4)a.-c., 95-76, 95-78(b) 7 95-74(5), 95-78(c) 8 95-1 9 95-2(a) 10 95-24.1 11 95-25 12 95-26 13 95-29 14 95-52 15, 16       Rpld 95-53, 95-54 17 95-71 18 95-72 19 95-73(b) 20 95-74(1), (3)b., 
(4), (7) 21 95-75(d), (e) 22 95-76(a) 23       Added 95-80 24 120-39.1 25 120-40 26 120-84 2000-45 11-21-00 1 75-27 2000-48 12- 5-00 1 26-18-2(a) 2 26-18-5 3 Ch. 26, 
Table 26-A 2000-51 12-16-00 1 95-49 2 95-60 2001-2  2- 6-01 1       Added 89-1-89-6 2001-3  2- 6-01 1       Added 75-42 2001-4  2- 6-01 1 120-12(c) 2001-5  2- 6-01 1 105-87(b) 2001-9  3-20-01 1       Added 26-6-1(c) 2 26-6-2 3 26-6-3 4 26-8-1 5 26-13-4 6 26-16-2(c) 7 26-16-7.1(e), (f), (s) 8 26-16-10(a) 9 26-17-4(j)-(l), (p)(5), (s) 10 26-17-8(h), (n)-(p) 11 26-18-1 12 26-18-5(b)(17) 13 26-18-9(a) 14 26-19-5(b)(i), (d)(i)(bb) 15 26-20-2 16 26-22-7(e) 17 26-22.1-4(3)(x) 2001-17  6- 5-01 1       Rpld 95-22 2 95-50 3 95-51 4 95-71 5 95-72 6 95-74(3), (4)b., c.       Rnbd (6), (7)       as (13), (15) 7       Added 95-74(4)k., (5)-(11), (14), (17)       Rnbd (5), (8)       as (12), (16) 8       Rpld 95-79 9       Added 95-100, 95-101 2001-24  8- 7-01 1 105-37 2       Added 105-39 2001-26  9- 4-01 1 26-6-1 2 26-31-1 2001-27  9- 4-01 1 25-24 2 25-28(b) 3 25-30 4 25-32(a) 2001-32  9-19-01 1 115-30(1) 2       Added 115-30.1 3       Added 115-34.1 4       Added 115-44.1 2001-33  9-19-01 1 75-3 2 75-35 2001-37 10- 2-01 1 120-7.1(a) 2 120-7.3(d) 2 120-7.3(d) 3 Ch. 120, Exh. A, Sch. E 4       Added Ch. 120, Exh. A, Sch. F 2001-40 10-16-01 1 105-87(a) 2 105-88(b) 2001-42 11-20-01 1       Rpld 26-26-1-26-26-7       Added 26-26-1-26-26-5 2       Rpld 26-14-5 2001-43 12- 4-01 1 26-16-1 2 26-16-2(d) 3 26-16-7 4 26-29-1 5 26-29-2 6       Added 26-29-4 7       Added 26-19-5.1 2001-46  1- 2-02 1 40-1(a) 2001-47  1-15-02 1 70-13 2002-3  2-19-02 1 Ch. 26, 
Table 26-A 2002-4  4- 2-02 1 47-3(b) 2002-5  4- 2-02 1 75-131(3) 2002-7  4-16-02 1 Ch. 26, 
Table 26-A 2002-8  4-16-02 1 5-37 2 5-40 3 26-25-1 2002-11  5-21-02 1 30-269 2 30-270 3, 4 30-271(b), (d) 5 30-272(d) 6 30-274 2002-12  5-21-02 1       Added 120-58.1 2       Added 120-165-120-170 2002-15  6-17-02 1, 2 120-165 2002-17  7-16-02 1-4 30-146-30-149 5, 6 30-161, 30-162 7 30-167 8-10 30-176-30-178 11 30-181 12-15 30-191-30-194 16-19 30-221-30-224 2002-21  7-16-02 1 120-165 2 120-166 2002-24  9- 3-02 1       Rpld 10-6 2002-25  9-17-02 1 26-23-4 2 26-23-8 3 26-23-10(h) 4 26-23-11(a)(vii) 5       Added 26-23-19.1, 26-23-19.2 2002-26  1- 7-03 1 26-17-3(e) 2 26-18-8 3 26-18-10(b) 4 16-18-11 2002-30 11- 5-02 1 5-38 2002-31 11- 5-02 2 26-2-1(b) 3 26-8-1 4 26-9-1(b) 5 26-14-4 6 26-14-6 7 26-14-19 8       Added 26-20-16(d)(vii) 9 Table 26-A 10 Table 26-B 2002-37 12- 3-02 1 120-165(a) 2002-39  1- 7-03 1 120-57 2 120-58 2003-05  4-15-03 1 26-14-19(b)1 2 Table 26-B 2003-7  4- 1-03 1 120-81-120-133 2003-10  4- 7-03 1       Rpld 120-165-120-170       Added 120-165, 120-166 2       Rpld 120-58.1 2003-13  5-20-03 1 89-1 2003-14  6- 3-03 1       Added 26-18.5 2       Added 26-17-4(t) 3       Added 26-17-5(b)(7) 4       Added 30-405.5 2003-19  7- 1-03 1       Rpld 120-165, 120-166 2003-20  7-15-03 1 120-1 2 120-37-120-44 3 120-58 4 120-62(a), (b), 120-63 5 120-85(b)(3) 6 120-88 7 120-91 2003-21  7-15-03 1 95-74(6) 2       Added 95-101(i)       Rltd 95-101(i) as (j) 2003-25  8- 5-03 1 110-22 2003-28  8- 5-03 1       Rpld 55-62-55-73 2003-32  9- 2-03 6 110-39.4 7 110-39.5 2003-34  9-16-03 1 30-166 2003-39 10-21-03 1       Added 26-25.1-1 2004-1  3- 2-04 1 26-19-5 2004-14  8- 3-04 1 26-16-9(a) 2004-20 10-19-04 1 26-16-6(b)(2)(ii) 2 26-17-3(e) 3       Rpld 26-17-8(l)       Rltd 26-17-8(m)-(p)       as 26-17-8(l)-(o) 4 26-17-9 5 26-22.5-8(b)(3) 6 47-4(c)(3)a. 2004-21 11-16-04 1       Added 65-113 2 26-24-8 3 55-210(e) 4 55-226(e) 5 55-231 6 70-15(d) 7 75-75(g) 8 110-77(a) 9, 10 110-78(a), (b) 11 110-103 12 110-166(c)(4) 2004-22 11- 3-04 1       Added 65-82 2004-23 11- 3-04 1 115-3 2       Rpld 115-21-115-49       Added 115-21-115-49.12 3       Rpld 115-91-115-95 4       Rpld 115-100-115-105 5       Added 115-49.13 2004-27 11-16-04 1 26-18.5-3 2 26-18.5-6(a)(1) 2005-1  2-15-05 1       Added Ch. 34 2005-2  2-15-05 1       Added Ch. 104 2005-8  3- 1-05 1 80-59 2       Rpld 55-175-55-180 3       Rpld 75-46-75-68       Added 75-46-75-56 2005-9  3- 1-05 1       Added 115-27(109)(13)(b)(V) 2005-10  3- 1-05 1       Added 5-4 2-4 10-1-10-2.5 5       Rpld 10-3 6 25-27 7 25-28(d) 8 25-29 9 25-44 10 26-10-20(d)(1) 11, 12 26-18.5-7(f), (j) 13 26-22.1-12 14 30-2 15       Rpld 30-5 16 30-6 17-19 30-9-30-11 20 30-53 21 30-149 22 30-166 23 30-181 24 30-194 25 30-274 26 32-5(d) 27       Added 45-72 28 55-23(a), (b) 29 55-41 30 55-61 31 55-101(1) 32 55-122(2) 33 55-202 34 65-78 35 65-79 36 65-81 37 65-111 38 75-135 39 80-37 40 95-24.1(a) 41 95-25 42 95-26(a) 43 95-27 44 95-48 45 95-49 46 95-51 47 95-60 48 105-26 49 105-36(a) 50 120-39.1 51 120-40(a) 52 120-41 53 120-57(a), (b) 54 120-58 55 120-61(c) 56 120-62(a), (c), (d) 57 120-84 58       Added 120-84.1 59 120-92(a)(1)a., (2)a., (3)a., (b)(1) 60       Added 120-92(e) 61 120-94(a)(1), (c) 2005-16  5- 3-05 1       Added 46-1-46-6 2005-18  6- 7-05 1       Added 26-19-24 2-4       Added 30-12-30-14 5 30-404 6 30-405.5(a) 7(89-7)       Added 50-36 2005-20  7- 5-05 1 115-49.6 2005-21  7- 5-05 1 110-123 2005-22  8- 2-05 1 26-8-1, 26-16-7.1(r), (s), 16-17-8(e)       Added 26-19-25 26-22-9(a) 2 26-14-16 3 26-14-20(d)(4), (5)       Rpld 26-14-20(d)(6), (7) 4 26-16-3 5 26-16-4(b)(3)       Added 26-16-4(b)(4)       Rnbd 26-16-4(b)(4) as (5) 6       Added 26-16-7(d) 7 26-21-16(e)(i) 8       Added 26-19-5(d)(4)(ii)       Rnbd 26-19-5 
(d)(4)(ii)-(v)       as 26-19-5 
(d)(4)(iii)-(vi) 26-19-5 
(d)(5)(ii), (6)(ii) 9 26-19-6(h)(ii) 10 26-21-33(a) 2005-23  8- 2-05 1       Added 120-92(a)(4) 2005-24  8-16-05 1-4 30-146-30-149 5, 6 30-161, 30-162 7 30-167 8-10 30-176-30-178 11 30-181 12-15 30-191-30-194 16-19 30-221-30-224 2005-27 10- 4-05 1       Added 115-41.5 2005-38 12-13-05 1 26-8-1 2       Added 26-21-16.1 3 26-21-9(i) 4 26-21-23(b) 2005-41  2- 7-05 1       Added 44-40-44-46 2006-01  3- 7-06 1 26-14-8 2       Rpld 26-17-6(a)(16) 3 26-20-2 2006-03  2-21-06 1 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 2006-08  3- 7-06 1       Added 5-60 2006-10  5- 2-06 1 26-15-4 2       Added 26-16-7.1(t) 3       Added 26-16-7.2 2006-12  5-16-06 1       Added 110-38(e)-(h) 2 110-40 3       Rpld 110-57 4       Rpld 110-58 5 110-75 2006-15  5- 2-06 1-3 47-20(a)-(c)       Rnbd 47-22       as 47-23       Added 47-22 2006-20  5-16-06 1 80-71 2006-21  5-16-06 1       Rpld 25-1(b), (c), 25-2, 25-3, 25-21-25-46, 25-51, 25-60-25-62, 25-65-25-69       Added 25-2, 25-21-25-26, 25-60-25-66, 25-85-25-92, 25-98, 25-105-25-110, 25-116-25-118 2006-22  6- 6-06 1       Added 6-1 2 26-8-1 3, 4 26-14-20(d)(1)c., (d)(3) 5       Added 28-1 6       Rnbd 26-18.5-1- 26-18.5-8       as 28-5-28-12 7       Rpld 45-16 8       Rpld 45-19 9       Added 50-9 10       Added 91-3-91-9 11       Added 5-52-5-59 12       Added 89-7-89-9 13 Ch. 50 Title       Rnbd 91-1-91-9       as 50-10-50-19       Rnbd 5-50-5-59       as 50-20-50-29       Rnbd 89-1-89-9       as 50-30-50-39 14       Rpld 50-1 15 50-2 16 50-3(3) 17 65-4 18 65-9 19 Ch. 80 Title, Art. II Title 20 80-2 21 80-69 22 80-72 23       Added 80-90-80-94 24 116-16 25       Rnbd 116-11-116-24       as 80-94.5-80-107 26       Added 81-2, 81-36 2006-23  6- 6-06 1       Added 5-70 2006-24  6- 6-06 1 26-16-6(b)(5) 2       Added 26-16-6(c) 3 26-20-16(i) 4 Ch. 26, Table 26-C 5 26-8-1 6       Added 26-6-1(d) 7 26-30-2(a) 8 26-30-2(b) 2006-26  6-19-06 1 26-23-4(a) 2 26-21-16.1 2006-27  6-19-06 1 10-15 2006-28  6-19-06 1 5-60 2006-30  7-18-06 1 25-2 2 25-1 3 25-50 4       Rpld 25-66 5       Rpld 80-51 6       Rpld 80-64 2006-35  8-15-06 1       Added 65-83 2006-39  9-19-06 1       Added 80-94.1 2006-40  9-19-06 1       Rpld Ch. 50       Added 50-1-50-3, 50-10, 50-20, 50-30-50-36 2006-41  9-19-06 1 26-23-4(a) 2006-49 10- 3-06 1       Added 115-35.1, 115-35.2, 115-37.1, 115-39.1, 115-39.2, 115-46.1, 115-49.2.1, 115-49.3.1 115-49.6(1)(a), (b)       Added 115-49.6.1 2006-57 11-21-06 1       Added 80-74 2007-03  1-16-07 1       Rpld 5-45-5-47 2007-04  1-16-07 1       Rpld 5-60 2007-05  2-20-07 1 65-80 2       Added 65-84 2007-10  3- 6-07 1 26-15-4(b)(1) 2 Ch. 26, Table 26-C 2007-11  3-20-08 1       Added 95-74(13)a. 2007-15  4- 3-07 1 26-17-5(a)(4) 2 26-17-5(b)(1)(i), (ii) 3 26-17-5(b)(5) 4 26-17-6(a)(9) 5 26-17-6(b)(8) 6 26-19-6(h) 7       Rpld 26-19-6(h)(i)-(iii)       Rnbd 26-19-6(h)(iv)-(ix)       as 26-19-6(h)(i)-(vi) 8 26-19-18(a) 9       Added Ch. 26, Table 26-E 2007-17  4-17-07 1       Rpld 100-1-100-10       Added 100-1-100-13 2007-18  4- 3-07 1       Added 104-1-104-5 2       Added 104-16-104-21 2007-19  4-17-07 1 30-274 2007-22  7- 3-07 1 85-21, 85-23, 85-26, 85-27(c), 85-28       Rpld 85-29.1 85-30 2007-23  7- 3-07 1 95-24.1(a) 2007-28  7-17-07 1 44-40       Added 44-41(c), (d)       Rltd 44-41(c)       as 44-41(e)       Added 44-42(b), (c)       Rltd 44-42(c)       as 44-42(d) 44-43 44-44(b), (d)-(g) 44-45(b) 44-46       Added 44-47 2007-32  8- 7-07 1 25-87 2 25-89(a)       Rpld 25-89(a)(11) 3       Added 25-89(b), (c) 2007-33  8-21-07 1 30-242 2007-37  9- 4-07 1       Rpld 75-126-75-143       Added 75-126-75-130 2007-38  9- 4-07 1 26-19-22(b) 2-4       Rpld 30-6, 30-7, 30-10 5 44-1(a)(1) 6 50-35(d)(6) 7-9       Rpld 80-16, 80-17, 
80-99(b) 2007-39  8- 4-07 1       Added 26-17-5(b)(8) 2       Added 26-17-6(a)(9) 3       Added 30-407-30-416 2007-40  9- 4-07 1, 2 75-3, 75-4 3       Rpld 75-5 4, 5 75-35, 75-36 6       Rpld 75-116-75-120       Added 75-116 7 75-157 2007-42  9-18-07 1-3       Rpld 55-76-55-78 4 55-79 5-7       Rpld 55-81, 55-84, 55-86 2007-49 11- 6-07 1-6       Added 43-21-43-26 2007-51 11-27-07 1 115-27       Added 115-49.6.2 2007-53 11-27-07 1 26-22 2 26-22-5(e) 3 26-22-7(f) 4 26-22-8(b), (d) 5 26-22-11(b)(i) 2007-58  1- 8-08 1 100-1 2 100-9(b) 2008-08  8-19-08 1-4 30-146-30-149 5-7 30-161-30-163 8-10 30-176-30-178 11 30-181 12-15 30-191-30-194 16-19 30-221-30-224 20 Ch. 30, Art. VII(title) 21-23 30-206-30-208 24 Ch. 30, Art. X(title) 25-27 30-266-30-268 28       Rpld 30-268.1 2008-09  3- 4-08 1 26-24-4 2       Added 47-3(c)(10) 2008-11  3-18-08 1       Added 10-18 2008-12  3-18-08 1 65-83 2008-17  5- 6-08 1 75-2 2008-18  5-20-08 1 44-46(d) 2008-19  5-20-08 1 42-1-42-8 2008-24  6- 3-08 1       Rpld 70-12       Added 75-5.5 2008-31 10- 7-08 1       Rpld 70-1-70-4, 70-10-70-19, 30-241-30-254       Added 70-1-70-20 2       Rpld 75-9, 75-10 3       Rpld 105-3 4       Rpld 105-5 5       Rpld 105-6 2009-01  1-20-09 1 26-16-3 2 26-16-9 2009-02  2-17-09 1       Added 70-2(j) 2 70-14 3 70-15 2009-09  3- 3-09 1, 2 26-8-1 3 26-14-8(c) 4 26-14-19(a)(3) 5 26-14-20(j) 6       Added 26-14-21 7       Added 26-16-7(e) 8 26-16-10(a) 9 26-17-3(d) 10       Added 26-17-6(a)(16) 11 26-17-6(b)(5) 12       Rpld 26-17-6(b)(6)       Rnbd 26-17-6(b)(7)-(9)       as 26-17-6(b)(6)-(8) 13 26-17-6(d)(8) 14 26-17-9 15 26-21-16(b) 16 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 2009-31  1- 5-10 1       Added 5-25 2009-33  1- 5-10 1       Rpld 55-31-55-45       Added 55-31, 55-32 2009-34  1- 5-10 1       Added 75-32 2009-35  1- 5-10 1       Rpld 55-51-55-61       Added 55-51-55-55 2010-04  2- 2-10 1       Added 110-200- 
100-214 2010-05  2- 2-10 1 28-5-28-12 2010-10  4-20-10 1       Added 80-40 2010-11  4-20-10 1       Rpld 120-62(b)       Rltd 120-62(c)-(e)       as 120-62(b)-(d) 2010-18  8-17-10 1       Rpld 115-2 2       Rpld 115-21- 
115-49.13       Added 115-21- 
115-49.17 8       Added 115-49.18 2010-22  9-21-10 1, 2 26-20-2(b), (f) 2010-25 10- 5-10 1 44-41 2 44-42(a) 3 44-45(b) 2010-29 12- 7-10 1       Added 95-62 2       Added 120-22 2010-32 12- 7-10 1       Added 44-10 2011-01  1-18-11 1       Added 10-15(6) 2011-02  2- 1-11 1 26-22-7(f)(i)10., 11. 2       Added 26-22-7(f)(i)16. 3 26-22-7(f)(ii)7. 4       Added 26-22-7(f)(ii)13. 2011-04  2- 1-11 1 5-70(b), (c) 2 26-24-2 3 43-21, 43-25, 43-26 4 47-3(b) 5 50-1(b), (c) 6 50-10(b), (c) 7 50-20(b), (c) 8 80-92-80-94 2011-05  2-15-11 1 25-2 2       Added 25-99 3 26-8-1 4 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 2011-10  4- 5-11 1       Added 56-233-56-246 2011-12  4-19-11 1       Rpld 75-71-75-75       Added 75-71-75-74 2011-13  4-19-11 1       Rpld 104-30-104-58       Added 104-30-104-45 2011-15  5- 3-11 1 26-8-1 2 26-14-17 3 26-15-4(b) 4 26-16-7.2(d), (f) 5 26-16-3(c) 6 26-16-9(a) 7 26-19-6(h)(iv) 8-12 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 2011-19  6- 7-11 1 30-146 2 30-148 3 30-149 4 30-176 5 30-178 6 30-181 7 30-191 8 30-193 9 30-194 10 30-206 11 30-208 12 30-221 13 30-223 14 30-224 15 30-266 16 30-268 2011-25  6-20-11 1       Rpld 56-235(d) 2       Added 56-236(o) 3 56-238(b) 4 56-239(a)(5) 5 56-239(b)(3), (4)       Added 56-239(b)(5) 2011-27  8- 2-11 1 26-8-1 2, 3 26-21-16(a), (e) 2011-28  8- 2-11       Rnbd 115-43       as 115-43.1       Added 115-43 2011-32  9- 6-11 2 10-15(1) 2011-33  9-20-11 1       Rpld 6-1(g)       Rltd 6-1(h)-(j)       as 6-1(g)-(i) 6-1(a), (b), (i) 3 28-1 4 Ch. 50(title), Ch. 50, Art. I(title) 5       Rnbd Ch. 50, Art. II       as Ch. 81, Art. III       Rnbd 50-10       as 81-50 6       Added 81-37-81-49 7       Rnbd Ch. 50, Art. III       as Ch. 28, Art. III       Rnbd 50-20-50-29       as 28-20-28-29 8       Added 28-13-28-19 9       Rnbd Ch. 50, Art. IV       as Ch. 28, Art. IV       Rnbd 50-30-50-36       as 28-30-28-36 10 26-19-24 11 30-13, 30-14 12 26-8-1 13 26-3-1, 26-8-1, 26-14-15.1, 26-16-4, 26-16-8.1, 26-16-8.2, 26-21-33, 26-22.1-2, 26-22.1-4, 26-22.5-5, 26-22.8-2, 26-24-4(a), 26-25.1-1(b), (g), 26-26-4(b), 26-29-3, 26-30-2(c), Table 26-A, 30-270, 30-272 30-274-30-276, 55-203, 55-205, 55-232 14 26-8-1, 26-14-9, 26-14-13, 26-14-15.1, 26-14-20, 26-15-2, 26-16-2-26-16-7, 26-16-8.1, 26-16-10, 26-16-10.1, 26-16-11, 26-17-3, 26-17-5-26-17-8, 26-17-11, 26-18-2, 26-19-5, 26-20-3, 26-20-4, 
26-20-11, 26-20-15, 26-20-18, 26-21-3, 26-21-4, 26-21-6, 26-21-9, 26-21-16, 26-21-16.1, 26-21-21, 26-21-23, 26-21-28- 26-21-30, 26-21-32, 26-21-33, 26-22.1-2- 26-22.1-4, 26-22.1-6- 26-22.1-10, 26-22.1-13, 26-22.5-4, 26-22.5-7, 26-22.5-8, 26-23-10, 26-23-11, 26-23-19, 30-275, 55-122, 55-123, 55-123.1, 120-101 2011-34  9-20-11 1       Added 115-32.5 2011-37 10-18-11 1 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 2011-38 10-18-11 1       Added 28-50-28-55 2011-41 11-15-11 1 30-161 2 30-163 2011-44 12- 6-11 1       Rpld> 45-16-45-31 2       Rpld 45-46-45-72       Added 45-46-45-48 2011-45 12- 6-11 1       Rpld 35-1-35-13 2011-47  1- 3-12 1       Rpld 28-5-28-12       Added 28-5-28-9 2012-06  2-21-12 1 30-405.5 2012-11  5-15-12 1 26-8-1 2 26-21-9(a) 3       Rpld 26-21-9(b), (c)       Rltd 26-21-9(d)-(p)       as 26-21-9(b)-(n) 4       Added 26-21-21(b)(vi) 2012-12  5-15-12 1 104-34(b)(5) 2 104-39 2012-13  6- 5-12 1 55-31 2012-16  7-25-12 6 110-39.4 7 110-39.5 2012-20  8-21-12 1 26-14-14 2       Rpld 26-17-6(a)(13)       Rnbd 26-17-6(a)(14)-(16)       as 26-17-6(a)(13)-(15) 3 26-17-6(d)(6) 2012-23  9- 4-12 1 104-34(b) 2 104-41 2012-27 10- 2-12 1 47-22(e) 2012-29 11- 5-12 1 26-21-16.1 2 26-19-5(c)(1) 2012-36 11-20-12 1-3 26-8-1 4       Rpld 26-23-1- 
26-23-24       Added 26-23-1- 
26-23-22 2012-38  1- 7-13 1 26-20-10 2013-8  5- 7-13 1 25-99 2 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 2013-09  5- 7-13 1 26-8-1 2 Ch. 26, Table 26-A 2013-11  5-21-13 1       Rpld 30-269-30-276       Added 30-269-30-272 2013-19  8- 6-13 1, 2 30-149(b), (c) 2013-26 10-15-13 1 28-51 2 28-53(e) 3 28-54(d) 4 28-55(a), (d) 2013-27 11- 6-13 1 120-13 2013-30 11-19-13 1 75-128 2013-32 12- 3-13 1 30-146 2 30-148 3 30-149 4 30-176 5 30-178 6 30-181 7 30-191 8 30-193 9 30-194 10 30-206 11 30-209 12 30-221 13 30-223 14 30-224 15 30-226 16 30-268 2013-34  1- 7-14       Rpld 30-180 2014-04  3- 4-14 1       Added 56-260-56-275 2014-05  3- 4-14 1 Ch. 56, tit. 2       Rpld 56-233-56-246       Added 56-233-56-247 2014-06  3- 4-14 1       Added 70-30-70-32 2014-12  4-15-14 1 95-74(6) 2014-13  5- 6-14 1       Rpld 75-1-75-42, 
75-46-75-56, 
75-96-75-101, 
75-116, 
75-126-75-130, 
75-151-75-160 75-100-       Added 
75-163 75-100, 75-120-75-124, 75-140-75-144, 75-160-75-167, 75-180-75-188, 75-200-75-209, 75-220-75-225, 75-240-75-248, 75-260-75-265, 75-280-75-284 2       Rnbd 75-71-75-74       as 76-1-76-4 3       Rpld 10-21-10-26 2014-14  5-20-14 1 26-14-20(d)(5) 2 26-15-4(a) 3 26-16-6(c) 4 26-19-5(c)(1)(iv)(ii) 5 Table 26-A 2014-15  6- 3-14 1 47-2 2014-18 11- 3-14 1 120-84 2       Rpld 120-84.1 3 120-92 4, 5 120-95, 120-96 7       Rpld 120-113 2014-22  1- 6-15 1 26-2-1 2       Added 26-11.5-1- 
26-11.5-4 3 Table 26-A 4 Table 26-B 5 Table 26-D 2014-24  1- 6-15 1       Added 75-282(a)(11) 2015-01  1-20-15 1 25-2 2       Added 25-100 3 Table 26-A 2015-03  1-20-15 1 110-37 2       Added 110-134-110-136 3       Added 110-160-110-163 2015-04  1-20-15 1       Added 43-30-43-35 2015-09  3- 3-15 1       Rpld 100-1-100-13       Added 100-1-100-12 2015-12  4- 7-15 1 30-161(a) 2 30-163 2015-13  4- 7-15 1-5 34-1-34-5 6 34-26 7 34-28 8, 9 34-30, 34-31 10 34-33 11 34-40 2015-16  4-21-15 1 56-235 2       Rpld 56-237       Rnbd 56-238-56-247       as 56-237-56-246 3 56-237(a), (b) 4       Rpld 56-237(b)(2)       Rnbd 56-237(b)(3)-(7)       as 56-237(b)(2)-(7) 5 56-239(b) 6 56-240 7 56-241(a)-(c), (h), (i), (p), (r)       Rpld 56-241(o)       Rltd 56-241(p)-(r)       as 56-241(o)-(q) 2015-17  4-21-15 1 56-262 2       Rpld 56-263       Rnbd 56-264-2-275       as 56-263-56-274 3 56-265(a), (b) 4       Rpld 56-262(b)(2)       Rnbd 56-265(b)(2) 5 56-267(b) 6 56-268 56-298(3)-(5), (h), (j), (p) 7 56-269(a)(4), (h), (j), (1))       Rpld 59-269(p)       Rltd 59-269(q)-(s)       as 59-269(p)-(r) 2015-20  7- 7-15 1 26-18-10(b) 2 Table 26B 2015-22  7-21-15 1       Added 10-14.5 2       Added 10-15(7) 3 10-16(a), (h) 4 10-18(b)(2) 2015-23  7-21-15 1 120-40.4 2015-37 10-20-15 1 34-5 2, 3 34-30, 34-31 2015-38 11- 2-15 1       Rpld 26-21-1(c), (d)(4) 2       Dtld 26-21-16(b) 2015-41 12- 1-15 2 28-7 3-5       Added 28-10-28-12 2015-45 12- 1-15 1 47-17 2016-02  2- 2-16 1 75-140 2       Added 
(75-112.5) 75-161.5 3 75-261 2016-05  3-15-16 1 26-20-1 2 26-20-2 3       Added 26-20-2.1 4       Added 26-20-2.2 5 26-20-11 6 26-18-11 2016-06  3-15-16 1 Table 26-A 2016-11  4- 5-16 1 56-241(j) 2 56-269(k) 2016-12  4-19-16 1       Added 86-1-86-16 2016-17  4-19-16 1 120-92(a)(1) 3 120-94(a) 2016-21  6-20-16 1 26-14-14 2 115-49.2 2016-25  8- 2-16 1 5-18 2016-28  9-20-16 1 26-20-16 2016-29  9-20-16 1 1-10(a) 2016-30  9-20-16 1 56-235(a) 2 56-237(b)(3) 3 56-238(c)(2) 4       Added 56-241(b)(7) 56-271(h) 5       Rpld 56-242 2016-31  9-20-16 1       Rpld 56-270 2016-34 12- 6-16 1 30-405 2016-37 12- 6-16 1 30-146 2 30-148 3 30-149 4 30-179 5 30-178 6 30-181 7 30-191 8 30-193 9 30-194 10 30-206 11 30-208 12 30-221 13 30-223 14 30-224 15 30-226 16 30-268 2016-38 11-16-16 1 Ch. 5, art. VII, title, 5-70 2016-39 12- 6-16 1 25-2 2       Added 25-101 3 Ch. 26, Table 26A 2017-1  1-17-17 1       Added 105-5 2017-02  3-21-17 1       Added 43-51 2017-4  3- 7-17 1 26-19-20 2 26-19-22 2017-10  3- 7-17 1       Added 33-1-33-5 2017-21  6- 6-17 1 104-30-104-45 2017-22  6-19-17 1       Dtld 120-16 2017-23  6-19-17 1 28-30 2017-27  7-18-17 1 56-241(b)(5) 2 56-269(b)(5) 2017-30  9- 5-17 1       Added 26-2-2 2       Added 26-3-2 3 26-8-1 4       Added 26-18.1-1- 
26-18.1-6 5       Added 26-18-8(g) 6 26-20-2(a) 2017-31  8-15-17 1 30-161 2 30-163 2017-34  8-15-17 1 47-22(e)(1) 2017-36  9-19-17 1       Rpld 26-18.2(c) 2 26-29-1 3 26-29-2 4       Rpld 26-22.5-1- 
26-22.5-9       Added 26-22.5-1- 
26-22.5-7 2017-37  9-19-17 1       Rpld 30-12-30-14 28-34 2 28-30 3 30-1-30-9 4 30-404 5 30-405(a) 6 30-405.5(a), (b) 2017-40 10-17-17 1       Added 55-175-55-177 2017-49 11- 6-17 1 26-14-9(b)(3) 2017-53 11-27-17 1       Added 115-29.1 2       Added 115-33.1 3       Added 115-33.2 4 115-41 5       Added 115-49.9.1 2017-54 11-27-17 1, 2 26-16-8.1(note), 26-30-2(note) 2017-55 11-27-17 1 30-224 2017-58 12- 5-17 1       Added 110-220-110-234 2018-01  1-16-18 1 30-137 2018-02  2- 6-18 1 45-46, 45-47 2018-03  2-20-18 1 75-260(a)(7) 2018-08  2-20-18 1 28-10(a) 2018-09  3-20-18 1 26-15-2, 26-15-3, 26-15-4(a) 2 26-16-2(e) 3 26-16-3(c) 4       Added 26-16-6.1 5       Rpld 26-16-10.1 2018-10  3-20-18 1 56-241(b)(6) 2 56-269(b)(6) 2018-13  5- 1-18 1 Table 26A 2018-17  7- 3-18 1 26-16-2(c), (f), (h) 2       Added 26-16-3(a)       Rnmd 26-16-3(a)-26-16-3(c)       as 26-16-3(b)-26-16-3(d) 3 26-16-4(b) 4 26-18-4 2018-25  8-21-18 1, 2 10-1, 10-2 3 10-2.5 4, 5 10-15(1), (5) 6 10-16(b) 7 10-18(b)(1), (3), (5) 8 43-30(2) 9 75-246(a) 10 75-247(g)(3) 11 115-49.9(1)(a) 2018-30 12- 4-18 1 26-22.5-2(a), (a)(1) 2 26-22.5-3 3 26-22.5-4(b) 4 26-22.5-4(f) 5 26-22.5-5 6 26-22.5-6 7 26-22.5-7(a)(3)       Added 26-22.5-(a)(4) 2019-01  1-15-19 1 5-18 2019-06  2-19-19 1 6-1(a)       Added 6-1(j) 2 22-99(2), 25-100(b)(1), 26-3-1, 26-14-15.1(a)(5), 
26-16-4(b)(4), (b)(6)-(b)(8), 
26-16-8.1(c), (f), 
26-16-8.2(b), 26-21-33(c), 26-22.1-2(45), 26-22.1-4(2)a.,26-22.5-6(a)(3), 28-1, 55-122(3), 55-123, 
55-123(11), (12), 
55-123.1, 56-237(a), 56-265(a), 120-101 3 26-8-1, 
26-14-9(4), (7), 
26-14-13, 
26-4-15.1(a)(8), (a)(10), (c), 
26-14-20(d)(1), (d)(3), (d)(5), 
26-15-2, 26-16-2(a), 26-16-3(b), 
26-16-4(b)(1), (b)(4), (b)(6), (e)(1), (e)(2), 
26-16-5(b)(1), 
26-16-6(b)(1)-(b)(4), (c), 
26-16-6.1(a), (a)(1), (a)(2), (d)(2), 
26-16-7(a), (d), 
26-16-8.1(b), (c), 
26-16-10(a)-(c), 
26-16-11(e), 
26-17-3(a), (d), (f), (g), (i), (j), 
26-17-5(a), (b)(1), (b)(6), 
26-17-6(d), 26-17-8(1), 26-17-11(i), 26-18-2(b), 26-19-5(c)(1)c., (c)(1)h., (c)(1)i., (7)b., 
26-20-3, 26-20-4, 26-20-15, 26-20-18, 
26-21-3(a)-(f), 
26-21-4(a)-(d), 
26-21-6(a)-(d), 
26-21-9(5), 
26-21-16(a)(3), (d), (e)(3), 
26-21-16.1(d), 
26-21-21(h), (k), (k)(1)-(k)(3), 
26-21-23(d), (k), 26-21-28(c), 26-21-29, 26-21-30(g), 26-21-32(a)-(g), 
26-21-33(a), (b)(1), (c), 
26-21-7(f)(1), (f)(2), 
26-22.1-2(11), (12), (33), 
26-22.1-3(b), 
26-22.1-4(1)(b), (3), (3)i., 
26-22.1-6(2)a., (2)b., (2)d., 
26-22.1-7(b), 26-22.1-8(11), 
26-22.1-9(b), (b)(2), (b)(9), 
26-22.1-10(a)(6), (a)(7), (b)(2), (c)(1), (g)(1), (g)(2), 
26-22.1-13(b), (c), 
26-22.5-3, 26-22.56(a)(3),26-23-11, 26-24-4(a), 26-25.1-1(b), (g), 26-26-4(b)26-29-3, 26-30-2(c), Table 26-A, 30-272(d)(1)-(d)(3), 55-203(b), 
55-205(a), (b), 
55-232(a),75-280, 75-282(a)(5) 4 28-1 2019-08  4-16-19 1 26-22.5-3 2 26-22.5-5(a)(6)e.  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
Constitution 
Article Disposition Art. IV, § 5 Charter, § 4.5 Art. VII Charter, § 3.1 Art. XI Charter, § 10.1 Art. XII, § 15 85-95 Art. XX, § 6 Charter, §§ 2.1, 11.1, 1-10, Ch. 40 (note), Ch. 65, (note), Ch. 10 (note) § 9 Charter, § 16.10  
C.R.S., 
Section Disposition Title 2, Art. 4 1-2 2-4-204 1-4 2-4-302 1-6 6-7-101 Ch. 30, Art. VIII (note) Title 9 30-24 9-1-101 30-71 12-12-101 Ch. 80; Art. III (note) 12-22-103 10-21 12-22-113 10-21 12-23-100.2 30-37, 30-38 12-46-101 Ch. 10 (note), 10-2 12-46-103 10-2, 80-23 12-23-105 30-112-30-114 12-46-112 10-23, 75-31 12-46-117 10-2 12-47-101 Ch. 10 (note), 10-1, 10-3 12-47-103 10-1, 10-26, 80-23 12-47-119 10-3 12-47-125 10-26 12-47-128 75-31 12-47-135 10-1 12-48-101 Ch. 10 (note) 12-51.5-101 Ch. 60 (note) 12-51.5-201 Ch. 60 (note) 12-57-101 Ch. 25 (note) 12-58-101 30-37, 30-38 12-58-105 30-82, 30-83, 30-84 12-58-110 30-86, 30-98 12-58-120 30-81 13-10-101 Charter, § 15.1, Ch. 65 (note) 13-10-102 65-1 13-10-103 Charter, § 15.1, Ch. 65 (note) 13-10-104 65-2, 65-3 13-10-105 65-5, 65-6, 65-9, 65-11 13-10-106 65-4 13-10-107 65-7 13-10-111 65-20, 65-3, 65-54, 65-55, 65-58, 65-61, 65-62 13-10-112 65-10 13-10-113 Charter, § 15.2, 65-3 13-10-114 Ch. 65, Art. IV (note) 13-10-115 65-28 13-33-102 65-78, 110-58 13-71-101 65-106 13-71-109 65-106 13-71-111 65-106 13-71-117 Ch. 65, Art. IV (note) 13-80-101 90-47 13-90-115 110-58 16-3-108 65-59 16-3-304 65-59 16-4-101 65-65 16-4-107 65-68 16-4-108 65-69 16-4-110 65-70 16-10-109 Ch. 65, Art. IV (note) 16-13-301 25-33, Ch. 30, Art. IX (note), Ch. 70 (note), 100-7, 100-9 16-13-307 70-4 Title 18 Ch. 75 (note) 18-2-101 75-1 18-2-201 75-1 18-3-201 75-2 18-4-401 75-3 18-4-501 75-4, 75-5 18-4-502 75-6, 75-7, 75-8 18-4-505, 
18-4-506 120-9 18-4-511 75-9 18-4-512 Ch. 115, Art. III (note) Title 18, Art. 5 30-23 18-5-113 30-23 18-7-210 75-14, 75-15 18-7-204 75-16 18-7-302 75-17 18-8-101 Ch. 65, Art. IV (note) 18-8-102 35-4, 75-18 18-8-103 75-20 18-8-104 Ch. 45 (note), 75-21 18-8-107 75-22 18-8-111 Ch. 45 (note) 18-8-112 75-23 18-8-113 35-4 18-8-201 75-24 18-8-208.1 75-24 18-9-101 75-25 18-9-102- 
18-9-104 75-26 18-9-106 10-5, 75-27 18-9-111 75-28 18-9-112 75-29 18-9-201 25-1 18-12-101 75-49 18-12-105 75-59 18-12-106 75-50 18-13-106 Ch. 115, Art. III (note) 19-3-114 75-120 19-8-101 75-120 24-32-603 75-19 24-32-701 Ch. 60 (note) 24-32-901 Ch. 60 (note) 24-70-102 110-37 Title 24, Art. 90 50-1 24-90-101 Ch. 50 (note) 24-90-110 50-1 24-90-114 50-3 24-90-115 50-4, 50-5 24-90-116 50-6 24-90-118 50-7 24-90-120 50-2 24-90-121 50-8 24-90-123 50-9 25-1-612 25-2 Title 25, Art. 3.5 Ch. 15 (note) 25-4-601 Ch. 25, Art. II (note) 25-4-603 25-41 25-4-607 25-24 25-8-609 120-10 28-2-101 Ch. 35 (note) 28-2-102 35-2 28-2-103 35-1 28-2-107 35-5-35-8, 35-12 28-2-108 35-6 28-2-113 35-2 28-2-302 35-3 29-2-101 Ch. 110, Art. III (note) 29-2-109 110-147 Title 31 Ch. 5 (note) 31-2-201 Charter, § 2.1 31-4-109 5-1 31-4-401 65-8, 35-11, 65-27 31-10-101 Charter, § 3.1, (Editor's Note) Ch. 40 (note) 31-10-203 Charter, § 3.16 31-10-502 Charter, § 3.3 31-10-703 Charter, § 3.10 31-10-803 Charter, § 3.10 31-10-806 Charter, § 3.10 31-10-901 Charter, § 3.10 31-10-1201 Charter, § 3.12 31-10-1540 Ch. 10, Art. V (note), App. A, § 30 (F) 31-12-101 Charter, § 1.1, 120-83 Title 31, Art. 15 Charter, § 16.8 31-15-101 Charter, Ch. 2 (note) 31-15-201 Ch. 15 (note) Ch. 45, Art. III, Div. 1 (note) 31-15-302 95-54 31-15-401 Ch. 25 (note), 25-1, 25-25, 25-34-25-36, 25-39, 25-42, 25-45, Ch. 30, Art. IX (note), 65-65, Ch. 70 (note), 75-16, Ch. 100 (note), 100-7, 100-9, 31-15-501 Ch. 10 (note), 10-26, 30-36, Ch. 55 (note), 75-13, 75-32 31-15-601 Ch. 30 (note), Ch. 30, Art. III (note), App. A, § 10(b) 31-15-702 100-7, Ch. 105 (note), Ch. 105, Art. II (note), Ch. 105, Art. III (note), Ch. 105, Art. IV (note), 105-1-105-6, 105-28-105-31, 105-48, 105-49 31-15-707 Ch. 90 (note), Ch. 120 (note) 31-15-708 Ch. 120 (note), 120-58 31-15-709 Ch. 95 (note) Title 31, Art. 16 Charter, § 7.3 Title 31, Art. 16, Part 2 30-161, 30-266, 45-61 31-16-101 Charter, § 7.5, 1-10, 115-21 31-16-201 Charter, § 7.6, 30-146, 30-161, 30-176, 30-191, 30-206, 30-221, Ch. 45, Art. III, Div. I (note), 45-46, 45-61, 115-1, 115-21 31-16-202 Ch. 30, Art. V (note) 30-161, 30-191, 30-206, 30-221 31-16-204 30-148, 30-163, 30-178, 30-193, 30-208, 30-223, 45-48, 45-63, 115-2 31-16-206 30-147, 30-162, 30-177, 30-192, 30-207, 30-222, 45-47, 45-62, 115-22 31-16-207 115-23, 115-24 Title 31, Art. 20 Ch. 110 (note) 31-20-106 30-252 Title 31, Art. 21 Ch. 110 (note) 31-23-201 Ch. 5, Art. III (note) 31-23-202 5-37 31-23-204 15-38 31-23-205 5-42 31-23-206 5-41 31-23-214 Ch. 5, Art. III (note), App B (note) 31-23-217 Ch. 105 (note), Ch. 105, Art. II (note) 31-23-301 App. A (note), App. C (note), App. C, § 1.3 31-23-302 App. A, § 10 31-23-303 5-41, App. C, § 1.3 31-23-305 App. A, § 52 31-23-307 App. A, § 55, App. A, § 57, App. A, § 58, App. A, § 60, App. A, § 62 Title 31, Art. 25 Charter, § 11.1, Ch. 105 (note), Ch. 105, Art. II (note) 31-25-201 Ch. 80 (note), Ch. 80, Art. II (note), 80-17 31-25-501 Ch. 90 (note), 90-1 31-25-502 90-2 31-25-503 90-3, 90-4 31-25-513 90-7 31-25-515 90-32 31-25-516 90-24, 90-25, 90-27 31-25-520 90-34 31-25-521 90-36 31-25-522 90-40, 90-41 31-25-523 90-39 31-25-528 90-43 31-25-529 90-44 31-25-530 90-45, 90-47 31-25-531 90-48 31-25-532 90-49, 90-50, 90-51, 90-52 31-25-534 90-29 31-25-536 90-30 31-25-538 90-54 31-25-539 90-42 31-25-540 90-53 31-25-601 Ch. 90 (note) 31-25-602 90-1 31-25-701 Ch. 80 (note), Title 31, Art. 30 Ch. 45 (note) 31-32-201 120-2 Title 31, Art. 35 Ch. 120 (note) 31-35-301 120-3, 120-4 31-35-303 Ch. 105 (note), Ch. 105, Art. II (note) 31-35-401 Ch. 95 (note), 120-1 31-35-402 Ch. 95, Art. II (note), Ch. 95, Art. III (note), 120-2 32-5-104, 32-5-105 Ch. 80, Art. III (note) 32-5-344, 32-5-345 75-33 Title 33 Ch. 80 (note) Title 35, Art. 41 Ch. 25 (note) Title 37 120-13 Title 37, Art. 1 App. C (note) 38-12-201 Ch. 60 (note) Ch. 80, Art. III (note) 39-4-101 Ch. 110, Art. II (note) 39-11-101 90-48, 90-49 Title 39, Art. 26 Ch. 110, Art. III (note) 39-26-102 110-37 39-26-103 110-96 39-26-104 110-121 39-26-105 110-123 39-26-106 110-126 39-26-107 110-128 39-26-108 110-129 39-26-110 110-131 39-26-111 110-132 39-26-112 110-133 39-26-114 110-122 39-26-116 110-105 39-26-117 110-61-110-64 39-26-118 110-65, 110-66 39-26-122 110-38 39-26-123 110-39 39-26-125 110-83 39-26-201 110-37 39-26-202 110-46 39-26-205 110-61 39-27-101 110-47 Title 42 Ch. 115 (note) 42-3-135 Ch. 105, Art. II (note) 42-4-109 Ch. 115 (note), 115-26-115-31, 115-34, 115-35 42-4-112 115-36 42-4-504 115-31 42-4-505 115-32, 115-33 42-4-507 105-89 42-4-906 115-28 42-4-1001 115-25 42-4-1002 115-26 42-4-1102 Ch. 115, Art. III (note) 42-4-1103 115-40 42-4-1504 115-37 42-4-1511 115-39 43-1-401 Ch. 105, Art. V (note) 43-1-413 105-86 43-2-101 Ch. 105 (note)  
